UNITEDNATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL

COUNCIL
“Ecc&$&$

I

th

MEETING: 12 AUGUST 1974

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 179 1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Paq

Tribute to the memory of nine Canadian members of the United Nations
Emergency Force . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda

......................................

1

Admission of new Members:
(al Application of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau for admission to membership in
the United Nations (S/l 1393);
(b) Report of the Committee on the Admission of New Members concerning the
application of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau to membership in the United
Nations (S/11437) . . . . . ,. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ._

1

S/PV.1791 :

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

n

.
I

,

SEVENTEEN HUNDRED AND NINETY-FIRST

MEETING

Held in New York on Monday, 12 August 1974, at 3 p.m.
President: Mr. Yakov MALIK
(Union of Soviet Sodalist Republics).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic,
China, Costa Rica, France, Indonesia, Iraq, Kenya, Mauritania, Peru, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Cameroon and United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l791)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Admission of new Members:
(a) Application of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau for
admission to membership in the United Nations
(S/l 1393);
lb) Report of the Committee on the Admission of New
Members concerning the application of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau to membership in the United
Nations (S/l 1437).
The meeting was called to order at 3.35 p.m.
Triiute to the memory of tie Canadian members
of the United Nations Emergency Force
1. The PRESIDENT (translation porn Russian): Before
the Security Council adopts the agenda for today’s meeting,
I should like on behalf of the members of the Council to
express our condolences on the tragic death of nine
Canadian nationals taking part in the United Nations
peace-keeping operation in the Middle East, resulting from
the air disaster of 9 August in the territory of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
2. In this connexion it should be noted that,according to
a letter from the Charge d’Affaires pi. of the Permanent
Mission of the Sy.rian Arab Republic to the United Nations
[S/11434], the air disaster coincided with a raid by the
Israeli Air Fprce in the southern sector of Lebanon when a
formation of Israeli fighter planes penetrated the air space
of the Syrian Arab Republic and wasbeing encountered by
the Syrian Air Defence system,
3. The Secretary-General, Mr. Waldheim, in a cable addressed to the Prime Minister of Canada, has expressed
condolences on the tragic death of the nine Canadians
serviug with the United Nations Emergency Force in the
Middle East and has asked that those expressions of
sympathy should be conveyed to the families of the

victims. I am sure tliat all members of the Council share the
feelings expressed by the Secretary-General and will associate themselves with his letter to the Prime Minister of
Canada.
Adoption of the Agenda
The agenda wasadopted.
Admission of new Members:
(0) Application of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau for
admission to membership in the United Nations (S/
11393);
04 Report of the Committee on the Admissiofi of New
Members concerning the application of the Republic of
Guinea-Bissau to membership in the United Nations
(S/l 1437)
4. The PRESIDENT (tmnslation from Russian): The next
question is the invitation to representatives of States wno
are not members of the Security Council. As President of
the Council I have received letters and also oral req!ests
from the Chair-me of the Special Committee on the
Situation with respect to the Implementation
of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples and from the representatives of
Portugal, ‘Algeria, Togo, Guinea, Yugoslavia and Somalia,
asking that their delegations should be invited to take part,
without the.right to vote, in the consideration of the item
which has been included in the agenda which we have just
adopted. The representatives of Algeria and Togo have
asked to be invited to take part in the discussion on behalf
of the non-aligned States Members of the United Nations
and of the African Group of States respectively.
5. In accordance with established practice and with the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, and if I hear no
objections, I propose that the representatives I have just
mentioned and the Chairman of the Special Committee
should be invited to participate without the right to vote in
the Council’s consideration of the question of the admission of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau to membership in the
,
United Nations.
-- ,It was so decided.
6. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): In view of
the limited number of seats at the Council table, I propose,
in accordance with the Council’s practice, to invite the
representatives I have mentioned and also Mr. Salim Ahmed
Salim, the Chairman of the Special Committee, to take the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber

on the understanding that they will be invited to take
places at the Council table when it is their turn to speak.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. S. A. Salim,
Chairman of the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Grant@
of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, Mr. J. Veiga SimrSo (Portugal), Mr. M. TalebBendiab (Algeria), Mr. D. Togbt (Togo), Mr. P. Maddy
(Guinea), Mr. C. Job (Yugoslavia) and Mr. A. H. Hussein
(Somalia) took the p&es reserved for them at the side of
the Council chamber.

I. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): The
Security Council will now proceed to the consideration of
item 2 of the agenda for today’s meeting. The Council has
before it for consideration the application of the Republic
of Guinea-Bissau for admission to membership in the
United Nations /S/11393/ and also the report of the
Committee on the Admission of New Members /S/11437]
containing the conclusions on this question reported in
accordance with rule 59 of the Security Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
8. I should also like to draw the attention of members of
the Council to the fact that the following official Council
documents are also of direct relevance to the question of
the admission of Guinea-Bissau to membership in the
United Nations, now under consideration:
(a) A letter from the Permanent Representative of
Swaziland to the United Nations, as Chairman of the
African Group, containing a letter from the members of the
African Group-numbering
more than 40 countriesexpressing support for the application of the Republic of
Guinea-Bissau for admission to membership in the United
Nations [S/11407/.
(b) A note by the Secretary-General, enclosing a memorandum from the Government of Portugal which was
handed to him at the end of his recent visit to Portugal
[S/11419].

(c) A letter from the representatives of the Arab delegations to the United Nations, supporting the admission of
the Republic of Guinea-Bissau to membership in the United
Nations /S/11426]. The letter is signed by representatives
from 20 Arab countries.
(d) A letter from the Permanent Representative of
Algeria to the United Nations, in his capacity as President
of the Group of Non-Aligned Countries, informing the
President of the Security Council of the support of the
entire Group oi Non-Aligned Countries for the application
of Guinea-Bissau for membership [S/l 14311.

-y(e) A letter from the acting Permanent Representative of
Yemen to the United Nations, in his capacity as Chairman
of the Asian Group, conveying the support of the Asian
Group for the application of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau
for membership /S/I 1432]:- .
.A...
(f) A letter dated 11 August 1974 from- t.he Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Portugal (S/11438/.
1.

9. In accordance with a previous understanding among
members of the Council and in the absence of any
objection at this meeting, I propose that a decision should
be taken first on the substance of the application under
‘discussion for the admission of the Republic of GuineaBissau to membership in the United Nations, and then
members of the Council and the representatives who have
been invited to take part in this meeting can make
statements.
10. As there is no objection, I take it that this procedure is
approved.
11. I should now like to draw the attention of members of
the Council to the draft resolution which is contained in
paragraph 3 of the report of the Committee on the
Admission of New Members and the adoption of which the
Committee recommends to the Security Council.
12. I now call on the Under-Secretary-General for Political
and Security Council Affairs to read out the draft resolution.
13. Mr. SHEVCHENKO
(Under-Secretary-General for
Political and Security Council Affairs) (tram&ion from
Russian): The draft resolution which has been approved by
the Committee on the Admission of New Members reads:
“The Security Council,
“Having examined the application of the Republic of
Guinea-Bissau for admission to the United Nations
[S/l 13931,
“Recommends
to the General Assembly that the
Republic of Guinea-Bissau be admitted to membership in
the United Nations.”

14. The PRESIDENT (tmnslation from Russian): I now
put to the vote the draft resolution which has just been
read out.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
The draft resolution was adopted unanimously. ’

15. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): I now
give the floor to members of the Council who have
expressed the wish to explain their vote after the vote.
16. Mr EL HASSEN (Mauritania) (interpretation from
The Security Council has just taken a historic
decision recommending to the General Assembly the
admission of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau as a Member of
the Organization. This is a decision for which my Govemment and my people have been ardently waiting for many
years. I trust, then, that you, Mr. President, and the other
members of the Council will not object if I do not conceal
my deep emotion at this solemn moment or if I stress the
unalloyed pleasure and great joy that the people and
Government of Mauritania feel today. These feelings stem:

French):

1 See resolution 356 (1974).

the world. Our decision here today constitutes the concrete
attainment of his aims.

from the common destiny of the Mauritanian and Guinean
peoples, from the active solidarity that has always existed
between our two countries and from our complete and
sincere support for the principles of the independence and
freedom of peoples.

22. We wished to avoid any tone of bitterness in our
remarks today. We wish to turn to ‘the future, to reaffirm
the will of Africa to hold out the hand of friendship and
brotherhood to all peoples and to the Portuguese people in
particular. In this regard I should like to quote from the
proclamation of the State of Guinea-Bissau dated 24
September 1973:

17. Impelled by these feelings, my delegation has spared
no effort for many months-m fact since 24 September
1973-to ensure that today’s decision should be taken as
early as possible. We should like to express our deep
gratitude to the delegations which have given us their
unstinting encouragement and support throughout the
course of these efforts, and on behalf of Africa we should
Iike to thank all those who have associated themselves with
the Councii’s decision.

“The State of Guinea-Bissau affirms the principle that it
is fighting against Portuguese colonialism and not against
the Portuguese people, with which our people wishes to
maintain a friendly and co-operative relationship”.2
23. We are thus looking to the future. We wish to pay a
tribute to the Portuguese people, to its courage and to its
spirit of justice. We look to that people-which is heir to an
ancient and brilliant civilization and which has given
distinguished men to the world-to carry through to a
successful and speedy conclusion the work of justice and
reason it has just begun. We ask that people to recognize
without further delay the independence and territorial
integrity of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau and to proceed
to transfer power to the authentic representatives of the
peoples of Mozambique and Angola. We are persuaded that
if it does so its real interests will be better served and its
international prestige will be more rapidly restored and
enhanced.

18. The recommendation we have just adopted is no mere
act of charity. It is no more than a recognition of the right
won by the valiant people of Guinea-Bissau to join the
concert of sovereign nations assembled in the United
Nations. Our decision was preceded by that of more than
90 nations which have already-either recently or longer
ago-recognized the Republic of Guinea-Bissau. The fact is
that the people of Guinea-Bissau and Cape Verde have been
carrying on their heroic struggle for almost two decades
now to recover their freedom and independence. This long
struggle has taken a grievous toll in the suffering and trials
which that African people has endured with admirable
tenacity and courage. The struggle has necessitated a spirit
of self-sacrifice. It has caused much tragedy and struck deep
wounds which only time can heal. This lengthy struggle for
freedom and independence has cost this brother people tens
of thousands of its sons and daughters.

24. Our hope is that the example of Portugal may inspire
the minorities of South Africa and Zimbabwe to cease
clinging to the outmoded and criminal values and to try,
while there is yet time, to rejoin honourably the great
family of man. We trust that this hope is not in vain, and
we remind those who need reminding that “return to
reason is always reasonable” and that “recognizing one’s
faults is an act of generosity and courage”.

19. Among these martyrs to the sacred cause, and at the
head of the list, is a great son of Africa, an outstanding
figure in the world struggle for the freedom of peoples. I
refer to Amilcar Cabral. An incomparable strategist, an
inspired tactician, a profound theoretician, and a far-sighted
statesman-Amilcar Cabral wasall these.

25. I think I shall not be digressing if I say that Portugal’s
immediate neighbour, Spain, will be the first to give
practical application to the resolutions of our Organization
in regard to the Territory of the Sahara, a Territory in
regard to which my country, for very many good reasons
sufficiently reiterated here at the United Nations, attaches
the greatest importance.

20. A tireless fighter for the national cause, Am&car
CabraI began from his earliest youth a passionate quest for
the forms of action and organization which would be most
likely to speed the liberation of his people from the age-old
colonial yoke. AS a student at the Higher Institute of
Agronomy in Lisbon in 1945, he already showed a great
interest in the political and cultural trends which were
shaking the whole world. His tireless activities subsequently
took many forms but were always aimed at the same
objective: restoration of the dignity, the freedom and the
independence of all African peoples and of the whole
world. His activities took a decisive turn when, on 19
September 1956, Amflcar Cabral, together with five comrades, founded the African Party for the Independence of
Guinea and Cape Verde (PAIGC). A tireless pilgrim for
peace, Amilcar Cabral took part, after 1960, in all the
international meetings devoted to the problems of Africa
and oppressed peoples.

26. Mauritania is a country that keeps its word. It has
already accepted the resolutions of the United Nations.
Despite the fact that its rights over the Sahara are
well-founded and solidly based, Mauritania asks that Spain,
the administering Power, take as soon as possible the
measures necessary to put Into effect the United Nations
resolutions on that Territory.
27. In concluding this statement, I should like once again
to congratulate the delegation of the Republic of GuineaBissau and Cape Verde on the decision just taken by the
Security Council recommending the admission of that

21. And on 22 January 1973 Amflcar Cabral fell on the
field of honour. But he will be remembered in the hearts of
all Africans and all other peace-loving persons throughout

2 See Official Records of.the General Assembly, Twenty-eighth
Session, Annexes, agenda item 107, document A/9196. annexI.

3

brother country to the United Nations and to reiterate our
determination to continue with that country the close and
fraternal co-operation that our peoples, our parties and our
Governments have always maintained.

on the occasion of Kenya’s independence and has repeated
on many occasions, Kenya will not feel free as long as one
inch of Africa remains under colonial oppression. The
struggle Is not over, but the beginning of the end is in sight.

28. Mr. MAINA (Kenya): Mr. President, allow me first of
all to thank you for taking speedy steps to bring before this
Council the application of Guinea-Bissau for full membership of the United Nations.

32. We have noted the recent changes of attitude by the
new Government of Portugal, and more particularly the
recent statement declarmg the intentions of that Govemment. We welcome those changes. We, like many others,
believe nothing should be done to slow down the changes
that the Government of Portugal is proposing. However, we
deeply regret to note the slow speed and the apparent
timidity with which that Government is proclaiming what it
knows to be right and proper, Good actions taken too late
are no good at .all. That Government should know quite
clearly that it has the support of all men and women of
goodwill in the world In its effort to jam them by freeing
itself from the crimes of its history. The sooner it joins the
rest of the human stream in the twentieth century the
better. Courage is needed at this time, and any temptation
to go slow should be resisted.

29. It is now about one year since the United Nations
took the historic decision to recognize the independence of
Guinea-Bissau. During that period the Republic of GuineaBissau has had observer status in the United Nations. The
events of the past year have shown that the United Nations
was indeed wise to take that stand. As we speak today,
more than 90 countries have recognized the Republic of
Guinea-Bissau. The Kenya Government was among the
many that welcomed the independence of our sister
Republic of Guinea-Bissau at an early stage. As my Foreign
Minister stated at the Twentyeighth session of the General
Assembly, on 10 October 1973,J

33, The remaining colonial Territories of Mozambique and
Angola should be set free now. The evils of colonialism are
such that after more than 400 years of Portuguese rule we
are still being told that Guinea-Bissau will need support in
establishing its own administration. It needs medical services, schools, roads and many other services that have not
been developed by its colonial master, Colonialism has one
known and irrefutable principle: the exploitation of one
people by another. That is why we must appeal to all
nations to give the new Republic of Guinea-Bissau all
possible support in the months ahead.

. . . I should like to hail the Declaration of Independence by the valiant freedom fighters of Guinea-Bissau.
After decades of the slaughter of innocent men, women
and children; after incalculable loss of property; after
indescribable sufferings and deprivation, the gallant
‘people of Guinea-Bissau have ‘finally achieved their
independence by armed struggle.”
“

My Foreign Minister further stated:
“‘Kenya pledges unreserved support to the people of
Guinea-Bissau for consolidating their independence.
Recognizing the new State is not sufficient in itself; we
must ensure that it receives every form of moral and
material support, particularly from the African and
nonaligned countries that consistently supported the
liberation struggle in Guinea-Bissau. Kenya not only
recognizes the new State of Guinea-Bissau, but is ready to
offer any help that the new State may need.”

34. The Republic of Guinea-Bissau has a tremendous
challenge ahead of it. After many years of struggle for its
freedom, it has to start almost from nothing to build a new
nation. It is here that the United Nations and all its agencies
can do a great deal on behalf of the whole world to help the
young Republic to set off properly on the mad to
reconstruction and nation-building. We believe ,md hope
that when Portugal is free from its regrettable history it will
find the free and independent people of Guinea-Bissau to
be friends. If it takes the apportumty in the remaining
Territories where people are still shedding blood to regain
their freedom, Portugal now has the chance to find that the
people may forgive the past even if they cannot forget it.

Kenya indeed gave its support to Guinea-Bissau and was
happy also to welcome it into the Organization of African
Unity as a full member.
30. My delegation is pleased now to support unreservedly
the admission of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau as a full
Member of the United Nations, as we have already shown
by our positive vote on the draft resolution. The heroic
peoples of Guinea-Bissau deserve this honour, and it is the
hope of my delegation that all Member States of the United
Nations will do whatever is possible in the months that lie
ahead to give that brave people the support it needs in
order toconsolidate its Independence and freedom.

35. I have dealt at length on the remaining Portuguese

colonies because I know that it is the wish of many people
that Portugal should be helped to disengage itself quickly
from its colonial stigma. Today we are discussing the
admission of Guinea-Bissau .to the United Nations, and this
is not the right time to discuss the remaining parts of Africa
still under colonial rule. But what we are saying applies
equally to all the other parts under other Governments
which practise this colonialism.

31. When we are iubilantly supporting the admission of
the Republic of Guinea-Bissau to the United Nations, we
cannot forget that other parts of Africa are still under
Portuguese colonial oppression. As my President declared

36. Finally, we look forward to co-operating with GuineaBissau in all the activities of the United Nations in the years
to come.
37. Mr. NJINE (United Republic of Cameroon) (inferpretation from French): My delegation would like first of

3 Ibid., Twenty-eighth Session, Plenary Meetings, 2147th meeting.

4

all to pay a tribute to the memory of those who have fallen
on the field of honour for the independenceof Africa and
for the dignity of all the peoples of the entire world. We
also wish to pay a tribute to the courage of the valiant
people of Guinea-Bissau guided by their intrepid leaders of
the national party,,the African Party for the Independence
of Guinea and Cape Verde.
38. In supporting the draft resolution in document S/
11437, which is now Security Council resolution
356 (1974), my delegation has only confirmed the constant
support of the Government of the United Republic of
Cameroon for the efforts to liberate African Territories
from foreign domination. It has been our pleasant duty to
make a contribution to this further step toward the
universality of the United Nations.
39. My delegation notes with interest the declared intention of the present Portuguese leaders to support the
admission of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau to the United
Nations and to apply all the Organization’s decisions in the
sphere of the decolonization of Territories administered by
Portugal. May the winds of decolonization which have just
swept over Guinea-Bissau soon reach the other Territories
still under colonial domination. The Cameroon Govemment, consistent with past policy, is prepared to encourage
all efforts to that end.
40. There can be no doubt that the Republic of GuineaBissau, which will soon become a Member of this Organizp
tion, will make an effective contribution in the search for
solutions to the problems confronting the United Nations.
41, Mr. LECOMPT (France) (interpretation from French):
Over the past 14 months the Security Council has on a
number of occasions met to recommend the admission of
new States to our Organizatlon. During that period of time
we have approved the applications of five countries of
Europe, America and Asia whose admission to the international community has contributed or will contribute to
extend the universality and authority of the United
Nations.
42. We have just voted unanimously in favour of the
admission of a new State, an African State this time, the
Republic of Guinea-Bissau. Allow me, Mr. President, to
make some remarks here on a decision of whose extreme
importance my country is fully aware and one by which we
are most gratified.
43. In being born, so to speak, before our very eyes, the
Republic of Guinea-Bissau invites us to reflect once again
on the course of the great evolution marked by the colonial
phenomenon. On the basis of the most usual interpretation
of the term, and not without wondering, however, whether
it is indeed somewhat narrow, I would describe that
phenomenon as an undertaking of expansion and civilization which led certain countries of Europe, themselves
profoundly shaped by the Greco-Roman conquest, to
establish themselves overseas. A people of seafarers and
traders, Portugal was one of the very first to embark upon
the discovery of the world in the middle of the fifteenth
century, the era in which its ships reached the coasts of
Guinea-Bissau, among other lands. France and other States

did the same somewhat later. A superabundance of energy
and of faith made my country a colonial Power up until the
time when, as was natural, the process of decolonization
prevailed.
44. I say that this was natural. Here I am repeating the
very familiar formula of General de Gaulle when he was
speaking of the great subject under discussion here today.
In his view, it was in the very nature of things that the
unilateral will of civilization and the influx of new ideas
and the new needs that accompanied it should culminate in
a dialogue. It was to be expected, it waseven to be desired,
that the colonized should question the colonizer and that
they should together work out the procedures for the
.accession of the colonized to independence. It was historically necessary for the peoples of the world to awaken and
to organize themselves within the conceptual and juridical
framework of the nation-state. We here in this chamber
know better than anyone that it is the nation-state which
for better or for worse determines the essence of presentday international relations.
45. While at the beginning of the 1960s the exercise of
self-determination was being completed more or less every
where in Africa, making it possible for that continent to
enrich the United Nations with new Members that were
cordially welcomed by France, it had to be admitted that
Portugal seemed to be lacking in the boldness and farsightedness that would have brought it to recognize the
necessities of the time. It was slow in joining the movement
which other States had already joined. Our Organization
was properly concerned over this situation. In March and in
October of 1972, and again at the twenty-eighth session of
the General Assembly, France joined in the appeals by the
friends of Africa and of the Portuguese nation, addressed to
the Lisbon regime, in terms that became ever more pressing
as the armed confrontations grew in Guinea-Bissau.
46. I need hardly stress that my country followed very
favourably the events which led, last April, to the formation of a new Portuguese Government and to the more
recent constitutional changes. It became possible to believe
firmly that a political solution would be found to the
conflict being played out in Guinea-Bissau and elsewhere, a
solution based on the principle to which the United Nations
is most dedicated, namely the right of peoples to selfdetermination and independent life. It was for this reason that
on 9 June, in BOM, France and its eight partners in the
European Economic Community issued a communique
welcoming the “democratic development in Portugal” and
“the policy aimed at putting an end to the long-standing
armed conflicts in Africa.” The nine countries of the
Community declared their “confidence in the outcome of
the negotiations between the parties concerned aiming at
the exercise of self-determination, with jts consequences”,
and stated their “readiness to support that action”.
47. Since that time, other developments have occurred to
strengthen our faith in an early settlement of the problems
involved in the decolonization of the Portuguese Territories
in Africa. As everyone knows, one of the most important
was the communique issued at the end of the recent visit to
Lisbon of the SecretaryGeneral [see S/11419], in which
the Portuguese Government expressed very clear intentions.

’”
-

It is encouraging to learn that Portugal and Guinea-Bissau I
are now fmalizing such arrangements as are still necessary.
The letter [S/21438] that the Portuguese Forelgn Minister
delivered to you, Mr. President, this morning, in which it
was announced that Portugal will accord de fire recognition
to the Republic of Guinea-Bissau as soon as the agreements
concerning the progressive transfer of the administration
have been concluded with the PAR%, satisfies countries
which, like mine, were concerned to see our proceedings go
forward in the most harmonious fashion possible. I express
here the hope that the current negotiations may soon be
brought to a happy conclusion, thanks to the spirit of
goodwill which assuredly inspires both parties, on the basis
of independence, mutual respect, equality, and reciprocity.
of interests of the two Republics.

find the way of freeing itself by freeing others. It will
discover everywhere in the world the living trace of its
language and of its work.
50. Having itself marked ,hlstory and geography with its
influence, France showed the way. With good reason
France speaks here today and expresses how inspired it is
by this demonstration of courage. I would not wish to end
without addressing to Africa, an attentive mother with
cares that are still too numerous, our most friendly wishes.
I am convinced that the nation of Guinea-Bissau, the
Portuguese nation, Africa and Europe will henceforth be
able to devote themselves fully to the work of peace and
co-operation for which they were made.
5 1. Mr. AL-SHAIKHLY (Iraq): Mr. President, allow me at
the outset to extend to you on behalf of the delegation of
Iraq our warm congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
August. Your rich experience in diplomacy and the political
affairs of nations, your outstanding record in this Organization and your unequalled achievements in the service of
your great country are all qualities enhancing your presidency. Welcoming you to the presidency of the Council is a
very happy occasion for me in view of the excellent
relations between our two countries, relations based on
strong friendship, mutual respect, co-operation and benefit.

48. May I now, Mr. President, addressing the representatives of Guinea-Bissau, offer them our warmest congratulations. I said a moment ago that the State whose admission
we now unanimously recommend to the United Nations
was, so to speak, born before our very eyes. I wasreferring
to the many meetings during the course of which the
Security Council and the General Assembly took cognizance, directly or indirectly, over the past three years of the
grave situation prevailing in Guinea-Bissau. I was thinking
also, of course, of the strong personalities that that
situation produced, among them Amilcar Cabral, whose
tragic death appalled the United Nations, a man whom the
Secretary-General described as “a great African patriot,
known and respected by all,” a man of whom the
representative of Mauritania just now gave us an eloquent
and moving portrait. The French Government was not
unaware of the political endowments of Amilcar Cabral;it
is likewise not unaware of those of his successors.A few
hours ago my Government legally recognized the Republic
of Guinea-Bissau and announced that it would support its
application for membership in the United Nations and the
various international institutions. My Government-and
here I refer to the terms of an official text issued this
morning-“addresses to the young independent State and to
its people its best wishes for happy development.” My
Government-and here I am quoting-hopes that “. . . its
relations with the Government of Guinea-Bissau will be
guided by the same spirit that already governs those that it
maintains, in friendship, trust and co-operation, with the
other countries of Africa.” To that I would add that the
: other eight members of the European Economic Community have done as France has done, and at the same
time, and that this is no mere coincidence, in the light of
the spirit that had already imbued the positions that they
had taken last June. A joint communique today reports the
common action undertaken by the nine members and its
positive results.

52. I should like to pay a particular tribute to Ambassador
Perez de Cuellar, the Permanent Representative of Peru, for
the outstanding manner in which he presided over our
deliberations last month. Ambassador de Cuellar, I am sure,
has earned the admiration of all of us during the very
difficult days of his presidency. His excellent services to
this Council in the quest for peace in Cyprus deserve our
deep appreciation.
53. Once again we welcome unanimously the recommendation for the admission to this Organization of a new
Member, whose independence my Government recognized
shortly after it was declared on 24 September 1973, in
accordance with our firm policy of supporting the liberation movements in Africa. This is, indeed, a very happy
occasion, and it should be particularly so in the case of
Guinea-Bissau. This is because the emergence of GirineaBissau as an independent State was truly achieved through a
heroic war of liberation in which no sacrifice wasspared.
54. The struggle of the people of Guinea-Bissau for
self-determination and independence under the leadership
of PAIGC represents, in our view, a rich experience for all
liberation movements struggling against imperialism, colonialism and neocolonialism.
The significance of that
struggle has already taken its shape and 1 need hardly say
that it left its definite imprint in the political and legal
spheres of international relations.

49. In conclusion may I say that no one can underestimate
the fact that Guinea-Bissau is the first African country to
which Portugal is going to restore its destiny and it will
continue to retain this first place. This honour will be its
due. History will perhaps say that action in one quarter will
have assisted others to free themselves from an immobility
which could not continue. Without surprise it will admire
the fact that the combatants were thus the ‘first to
understand the need to engage in decisive dialogue. It will
note, I believe, that Portugal looked to its deep roots to
’

55. Politically, classical colonialism can no longer be
sustained. The freedom-loving peoples of the world should
not today be expected to sit back and submit to the
tyrannical will of the colonialists, whose logic is that of the
dead past. Legally, the international community, as represented in this world Organization, is committed to and
bound by the process of decoionization. Indeed, if proof is
6

still needed, the successful struggle of the people of
Guinea-Bissau is an example in point.

mankind and against oppression of alI hinds in the interest
of a better life in a world of peace, security and progress.“s

56, Iraq has had a long and active part in the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples, being a member of the
Committee on Decolonization since its establishment in
1961. With the independence of each colony, Iraq feels a
particular pleasure and satisfaction at seeing justice done,
self-respect restored and legality enhanced.

61. Portugal has recognized the right of the peoples of its
colonial Territories to selfdetermination and independence.
My delegation wishes to express its satisfaction with this
decision on the part of the Portuguese Government and to
emphasize the contribution which that decision has made
to the process that has led to the emergence of a sovereign
State. An important step has been taken to put an end to
colonialism on the African continent. The United Nations
,
as a whole therefore celebrates today the implementation
of the purposes and principles which are the very essence of
its existence.

57. As for Guinea-Bissau, we long ago expressed our deep
conviction that a struggle of the hind that the PAIGC was
waging was bound to be crowned with success. At this
moment one cannot but recall the memory of that giant
among freedom fighters, the late Amflcar Cab&, who was
the Secretary-General of the PAIGC. In his last statement
before an organ of this Organization, namely, the Fourth
Committee, he said the following:

62. In warmly supporting the application of the Republic
of Guinea-Bissau for admission to the United Nations, my
Government wishes to reaffirm its policy of support .for
newly independent nations and its warm sympathy for the
cause they are fighting for. The Austrian Government and
people wish Guinea-Bissau happiness and prosperity in its
new life as an independent and free nation. We are
convinced, as the Foreign Minister of Austria stated in a
communication to the Commissioner of Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of Guinea-Bissau, that the bonds of friendship
between our two countries will be strengthened by cooperation within the United Nations.

‘The Africans, having rejected the idea of begging for
freedom, which was contrary to their dignity and their
sacred right to freedom and independence, have reaffirmed their steadfast decision to end colonial domination
of their country, no matter what the sacrlflces involved,
and to conquer for themselves the opportunity to achieve
in peace their own progress and happiness.“‘r
Although the assassin’sbullet prevented Cabral from seeing
the successin his country of that determination he can now
truly rest in peace, for his mission has been accomplished.

63. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (tmnshztion from cihinese):
The people of Guinea-Bissau, led by the PAIGC, proclaimed
independence and founded the Republic of Guinea-Bissau
in September 1973 after protracted armed struggle which
dealt heavy blows at the colonial rule of Portugal. The
experience of the struggle of the people of Guinea-Bissau
has shown that the hberation and independence of GuineaBissau were neither a “favour” bestowed by the Portuguese
colonialist authorities nor the outcome of “peaceful transition”. The birth of Guinea-Bissau and the fall of the fascist
regime in Portugal were.hnportant victories of the unremitting struggles waged, by the people in the Portuguese
colonies and the African countries.

58. The iraqi Government wishes to express its congratulations to the valiant people of the Republic of GulneaBissau, not only on their independence which was recognized very shortly after the emergence of their republic, but
also on the occasion of the recommendation of their
membership in our Organlzation. We look forward to
co-operating with the delegation of Guinea-Bissau in the
United Nations, and we are sure that it will make significant
contributions to our endeavours for peace, progress and
justice.

64. In less than one year since its founding, the Republic
of Guinea-Bissau has been recognized by some 90 countries.
The victory of the people of Guinea-Bissau has written a
new chapter in the annals of the African people’s struggle
against imperialism and colonialism, and it will certainly
exert far-reaching influence on the struggle of the people in
southern Africa and other non-independent regions, encouraging them to carry on more valiant struggles against
imperialism, colonialism and neocoloniaIism.

$9. Mr. WOLTE (Austria) (interpretation from French):
This is a happy day in the history of the Security Council.
The Council has just unanimously recommended to the
General .Assembly the admission of the Republic of
Guinea-Bissau to the United Nations. Austria, with special
pleasure, has joined with all the members of the Council in
support of that decision,
60. It was a long, difficult and discouraging path that
Guinea-Bissau had to follow towards independence. But the
suffering and the sacrifices of the people for freedom were
not to be in vain. The objectives of that struggle could not
have been better described than they were by Arnflcar
Cabral, when, speaking before the Fourth Committee of the
General Assembly on 16 October 1972, he said that his
country was fighting “for the liberation of peoples and
4 Ibid.. * Twenty-seventh
meeting, para. 20.

Session, Fourth

Committee,

65. The Chinese Government and People have always ’
deeply sympathized with and rendered firm support and
active assistance to the people of Guinea-Bissau in their
protracted and heroic struggle for liberation. Upon the
proclamation of independence of the Republic of GuineaBissau, the leaders of the Chinese Government sent messages of warm congratulations and recognition to the
leaders of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau. Last March, China
established formal diplomatic relations with the Republic

1986th
5 Ibid., para. 2.

7

of Guinea-Bissau at the ambassadorial level. The Chinese
Government and people firmly support the Government
and people of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau in their just
struggle for the liberation of the entire territory and the
complete independence of their motherland. On 5 August
1974, China’s Foreign Minister sent a message of reply to
the Commissioner of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Guinea-Bissau, expressing firm support for the application
of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau for membership in the
United Nations. Please allow me to read this message:

be no other way but pursuit and intensification
struggle for national liberation”.

of the

67. This solemn decision and just position have pointed
out to the African people in their struggle for liberation the
direction in which to pursue and intensify their struggle and
expressed their unswerving determination to achieve the
liberation of the whole of Africa. The Chinese delegation
expresses its firm support for this. We .maintain that the
Portuguese authorities must respect the independence and
sovereignty of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau, immediately
and unconditionally withdraw all their colonial troops and
cease all acts of interference in its internal affairs. We are
deeply convinced that the just struggle of the people in the
Portuguese colonies will continue to obtain strong support
and assistance from the people of African countries and the
rest of the world. So long as they strengthen their unity,
persist in the struggle against Portuguese colonialism and
guard against the meddling and sabotage of all outside
forces of aggression, they will certainly achieve complete
national independence and liberation. .

“I wish to acknowledge the receipt of your letter
concerning your country’s application for membership in
the United Nations and have the honour to inform you of
the following.
“The Government of the People’s Republic of China
holds that the Republic of Guinea-Bissau has fully met
the requirements for membership in the United Nations
as laid down in the Charter of the United Nations and
that the United Nations should admit the Republic of
Guinea-Bissau into the Organization at an early date, The
Chinese Government firmly supports the application of
the Republic of Guinea-Bissau for membership in the
’ United Nations.

68. Following the consistent teachings of Chairman Mao
Tse-tung, the Chinese Government and people will unswervingly give firm support to the people of the Portuguese colonies and all the African countries and peoples
in ‘their just struggle for the complete liberation of the
African continent.

“Both China and Guinea-Bissau belong to the third
world. The Chinese Government and people will, as
always, firmly support the Government and people of the
Republic of Guinea-Bissau in their just struggle for the
liberation of the entire territory and the complete
independence of their motherland. Our two peoples will
encourage and support each other in the common struggle
against colonialism, neocolonialism and imperialism. I am
convinced that the militant friendship and friendly
co-operation between China and Guinea-Bissau will grow
daily.”

69. Mr. MARPAUNG (Indonesia): It is with particular
pleasure that my delegation has joined other members of
the Council in voting in support of the draft resolution
contained in document S/11437 recommending the admission ,of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau as a full-fledged
Member of the United Nations. Being one of the initiators
of the first Asian-African Conference in Bandung in 1955,
which had sounded the clarion call for the struggle for
national independence of peoples all over the world,
Indonesia warmly welcomes the entry of Guinea-Bissau as a
new Member of the United Nations, as we welcomed with
equal joy its birth as an independent nation on 24
September 1973..
,

66. The great African continent is an important part of
the third world. The African countries and peoples have
grown ever stronger and are winning continuous new
victories in their struggle against imperialism, colonialism,
racism, Zionism and big-Power hegemonism. An excellent
situation prevails in the armed struggle of the people in the
Portuguese colonies. The armed struggles and mass movements for national liberation waged by the peoples of
Mozambique, Angola and other parts of southern Africa are
developing vigorously. The eleventh Summit Conference of
the OAU held not long ago in Mogadiscio has given an
impetus to the just struggle of the African people to
strengthen their unity for the liberation of the entire
African continent. It has voiced strong support for the
sacred struggle of the peoples of Guinea-Bissau, Mozambique and Angola for national liberation.

70. The process leading to the independence of GuineaBissau was a long and thorny road through almost two
decades of political struggle and 10 years ‘of determined
armed struggle. Its entry now as a full-fledged partner in the
work of our Organization for global peace and progress
cannot but be greeted with joy by all members of the
international community. Our joy is, however, not completely unmarred, as’all of us most surely share the pain felt
by the people of Guinea-Bissau caused by the absence of
Amflcar Cabral, the beloved leader and founder of their
independence movement. AmfIcar Cab&s untimely death
deprived him of seeing the crown of the long struggle to
which he gave all his energies and even his life. His name,
however, will long be remembered as a leader of great
stature and a fighter for national independence, progress
and dignity.

It solemnly declared:
“Africa fully supports the national liberation movements and their determination to fight till their peoples
’ and countries of which they are the sole and genuine
representatives achieve independence and total freedom.”

71. My delegation would have wished that Guinea-Bissau’s
entry to membership in our Organization could coincide
with the satisfactory conclusion of the arrangements
between Guinea-Bissau and Portugal concerning the transfer

It further pointed out that should the colonialist authorities
ignore the just demands of the African people, “there will
8

indeed very promising and augurs well for a radical political
change leading to the emancipation of the entire African
continent.

of administration. My delegation certainly regrets that
those hopes have fqed to mater&&e. On the other hand,
we are happy that failure to reach such arrangements did
not preclude Portugal from supporting the admission of
Guinea-Bissau to our Organization.

80. We believe that at this truly historic moment when
Guinea-Bissau is now gaining universal recognition for its
independence our thoughts should be extended fraternally
to the African peoples of Namibia and Zimbabwe, and that
we should pledge to redouble our efforts and renew our
vigilance until they achieve their independence.

72. We hope that the developments in Guinea-Bissau may
speed up the process of decolonization in Africa, not only
of the Territories under Portuguese administration, but also
of Zimbabwe and Namibia.

81. Mr. TCHERNOUCHTCHENKO
(Byelorussian Soviet
Socialist Republic) (tmndation from Russian): The delegation of the Byelorussian SSR has taken great satisfaction in
voting for the draft resolution recommending to the
General Assembly that the Republic of Guinea-Bissau be
admitted to membership in the United Nations.

73. The admission of Guinea-Bissau should be welcomed
with added satisfaction as it will bring us appreciably closer
to the goal of universal membership of the United Nations.
The attainment of that goal, which Indonesia has consistently supported throughout its membership in the Organization, will surely assist in the strengthening of the fabric of
international peace and security, which the Charter is
designed to promote.

82. The Byelorussian SSR has always been on the side of
the peoples who are fighting for their freedom and national
independence. And now it is with the deepest satisfaction
that, on behalf of the Byelorussian SSR, we express our
sincere congratulations to the people of Guinea-Bissau on
this important event and wish it every successin building a
new life under conditions of freedom and independence, in
implementing
socio-economic changes and in bringing
progress and prosperity.

74. My delegation believes that the United Nations involvement in the decolonization process of Guinea-Bissau,
which had its beginnings in the early 196Os, should be
continued and expanded in the form of all possible
assistance in the field of economic development, education,
health and nutrition, which will enable its people to
establish a politically and economically viable nationhood.
75. As a member of the non-aligned group, Indonesia
views with particular pleasure the imminent entry of
Guinea-Bissau into our Organization. We are looking forward to the participation of the Guinea-Bissau delegation in
the activities of the non-aligned group of nations within the
United Nations and to the contributions of its ideas and
initiatives to the efforts of the non-aligned countries to
achieve more stable conditions of world peace and prosperity.

83. In welcoming the sovereign and independent State of
the Republic of Guinea-Bissau to&y, we cannot but recall
the severe ordeals that fell to the lot ofits people during
the many decades of colonial domination. As in the case of
many other peoples, Guinea-Bissau’s road from political
slavery to self-determination and independence .was long
and difftcult. It was the road of the heroic people’s selfless
struggle under the leadership of PAIGC, a struggle which
was crowned with a splendid victory-the proclamation of
the Republic of Guinea-Bissau.

76. In conclusion, my delegation would like to take this
opportunity to assure the delegation of Guinea-Bissau of its
close co-operation in the common efforts of our Organization.

84. In speaking of the birth of the newly independent
sovereign State of Guinea-Bissau, the Byelorussian delegation wishes to point out that the emergence of this State is
inseparably bound up with the anti-colonial struggle which
has been and is being consistently waged by the countries
of the socialist community and by all progressive and
anti-imperialist forces. Assistance and support-moral, political and material-from
these forces played a role of no
small importance in the struggle of the people of GuineaBissau. This consistent phenomenon-the alliance of the
countries of the socialist community with the world which
has been engendered by the national liberation move-.
ment-is an outstanding historic factor of our time which is
playing a colossal role in the life of today’s society, and
particularly in international relations.

77. Mr. PEREZ DE CUELLAR Peru) (interpretation
from Spanish): Peru supported with great pleasure the
resolution just adopted by the Security Council recommending to the General Assembly that the Republic of
Guinea-Bissau be admitted to membership in the United
Nations. My country has already recognized that country.
78. My Government believes that this resolution and the
resolution that will doubtless be adopted by the General
Assembly in the autumn form the well-deserved result of
the long and courageous struggle of the people of GuineaBissau for their independence. Amilcar Cabral will always
be the symbol of that struggle. He was the heroic leader
who deserved to hold in his hands today the fruits of that
victory which, in large measure, were truly his.

85. In his statement of 27 November 1973 durin-g a visit to
India, the General Secretary of the Central Committee of
the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Leonid Ilyich
Brezhnev, said:

79. My delegation is pleased not only by the unanimity of
the Council’s vote but also by the fact that Portugal, thanks
to the clear-sightedness of its new Government, has been
linked in a positive manner with the independence of
Guinea-Bissau. We believe that this position of Portugal is

‘The Communist Party of the Soviet Union and the
Soviet State have always-stood and continue to stand on
the side of the fighters for national freedom and
independence. This political course is dictated by our
9

entire world outlook, which rejectsboth the exploitation through the Organization of African Unity to provide
‘of man by man and the oppressionof one nation by
material assistance
to the civilian population of the liberanother. This political courseis rooted in the very nature ated areasof Africa and to the victims of the policiesof
of our socialistsociety,in which over 100 nations and apartheid.
nationalities live together as a harmonious family; It is
enshrinedin the Programmeof our party which states: 88. Whenwe considerthe birth of the newly independent
‘The Communist Party of the Soviet Union regards a. Republic of Guinea-Bissau,
it is clearto everyonethat this
is the result of the 6trugg)eof that country’6 people snd
fraternal alliance with the peoplesthat have thrown off
the colonial and quasicolonial yoke as one of the representsthe success
of its armed6trugglefor freedom and
independenceagainstthe policy of colonialismand represcornerstonesof its international policy’.”
sion which was pursuedby the former fascistGovernment
86., The Byeiorussiandelegationwould also like to under- of Portugal. At the 6ametune, we must bear in mind a
line the .importanceof the strugglewhich has beenand is number of factorswhfch play an important role andfavour
the rapid attainment of successby the national liberation
being wagedhere in the United Nations to securethe final
liquidation of colonialism as soon as possible and the 6truggleof the peoples.One such factor is the joining of
complete emancipation of all colonial countries and forces between the working massesof the metropolitan
countriesandthe peoplesof the colonial Territories in their
peoples.The whole world is well awareof the struggleof
the Soviet Union and other countries of the socialist joint struggleaimed at putting an end to colonialismand
community and of other peace-lovingStatesin the United racism.
Nations to put an end to colonialism. It was, in fact, the
initiative of the Soviet Union that brought, in 1960, the 89. It was preciselythe collapseof the fascistrdgimein
adoption of the Declaration on the Granting of Indepen- Portugal, resulting from the complete bankruptcy of that
denceto Colonial CountriesandPeoples[General Assembly
rdgime’scolonial war in Africa, that creatednew conditions
resalurion 1514 (XV)]. the strugglefor the implementation for a political settlementof the fate of Guinea43issau
and
of which has representeda major chapter in the history of
other former Portuguesecolonies.The endof the war in the
the United Nations. Since then, more than 40 Statesof African colonies was both a victory for the Portuguese
Asia,Africa and Latin Americathat were formerly colonial people and an indication of the political foresight of
territories have gained independenceand have become Portugal’6new leadership.Therefore one cannot but web
full-fledged Membersof the United Nations.In one of his come the decisionof the PortugueseGovernment,which
statementsat the United Nations, Amflcar Cabral, the has recognizedthe Republic of Guinea-Bissauas an inoutstanding figure of the national liberation struggleand dependentState and also recogntzedthe right to self-deterthe founder and leader of the State of the Republic of mination and independenceof the peoplesof Mozambique
Guinea-Bissau,saidthe following concerningthe Organiza- and Angola and other Territories and has expressedits
tion’s activities in support of the peoplesfghting for their readinessto implementthe relevant United Nationsresolue
freedomagainstcolonialism:
tions in this respect.
“The United Nations resolution on decolonization
creates a new situation for our struggle. The colonial
system, whose immediate and complete eradication is
demanded by this resolution, has now become an
international crime. Thus we now have a legal basisfor
eliminating colonial oppressionin our country and for
using all necessarymeansto eliminate that oppression.”

90. Following the adoption of theseimportant political
decisionsby the Government of Portugal, an even more
crucial period begins-that of their practicalrealizationand
implementation.

91. The proclamationof the independenceof the Repube
lit of Guinea-Bissauand the adoption of the Security
Council resolution recommendingthe admissionof that
87. The Soviet people’ssympathyfor and solidarity with young African State to membershipin the United Nations
the just struggleof the peoplesagainstcolonialismto gain constitutea major event, for they testify to anew triumph
their freedom and independencehavebeenand continue to of the peoplesin the struggleagainstcoloniahsm.That is
be shownin the mostvaried ways.Theseinclude,first of all, why this event has met with a very wide responseamsng
broad support for the Leninist foreign policy which inter
peace-lovingcountriesand peoples.The great international
a& provides for full and unconditional support for the
prestigeof the Republic of Guinea-BissauIs shownby the
struggle of the colonial peoples for their independence. fact that, having comeinto existenceonly last autumn,the
They also include the activities of countlessSoviet public Republic has already been recognizedby more than 90
organizationswhoseattention is focusedon the samenoble States.This African country is already a highly regarded
aimsand objectives.It is well known that last year, on the memberof the Organizationof African Unity andhasbeen
basis of a United Nations decision /General Assembly
admitted to membershipin a number of the apedahzed
resolution 2911 (XXVIIj],
the whole world instituted the agenciesof the United Nations.
practice of celebrating a Week of Solidarity with the
Colonial Peoplesof Southern Africa and Guinea (Bissau) 92. The anticolonial struggle of the. peoples is closely
andCapeVerde.The Byeiorussianworking people,together linked with the deepeningprocessof international detente
with all Soviet people, actively participated in its observ- and the elimination of “hot spots” from the planet and
ance. They have unswervingly expressedand continue to with the struggle to ensure stable peace throughout the
express their solidarity with the freedom fighters of world, for the coIonial and racist r&imes arepoisoningthe
southern Africa and participate in the collection of money international atmosphereby their existenceand constitute
for the Soviet PeaceFund, part of which is channelled hotbeds of military danger on these continents. Signifi10

cantly, it is precisely under the conditions of the process of
detente that the united front of the African countries is
growing stronger, as is the solidarity of all the non-aligned
countries in the struggle to strengthen international peace
and security.

100. In this connexion, I should like to inform the
Council that the following statement by President Ford was
issued at the White House today:
“The Government and the people of the United States
welcome the agreement in principle reached on August 9
between the Portuguese Government and representatives
of Guinea-Bissau. We extend our congratulations to the
leaders of both Governments.

93. In welcoming the decision just approved by the
Council, we cannot but express our satisfaction at the
foreign-policy objectives set forth in the programme of
PAIGC, the ruling party of the independent and sovereign
State of Guinea-Bissau. The PAIGC programme includes:

‘We look forward to a productive and friendly relationship with Guinea-Bissau. I have instructed our representatives at the United Nations to support the application of
Guinea-Bissau for membership in the United Nations.”

“Peaceful co-operation with all the nations of the world
on the basis of the principles of mutual respect, national
sovereignty, territorial integrity, non-interference in
domestic affairs, equal and mutual advantage and peaceful co-existence; the development of economic and
cultural links with all peoples whose Governments approve and respect those principles; respect for the
principles of the United Nations Charter; and non-alliance
with military blocs.”

101. The United States has fully supported the legitimate
aspiration of the people of Guinea-Bissau to selfdetermination. We are pleased to have Guinea-Bissau take its rightful
place among the sovereign and independent nations of the
world community and assume full membership in the
United Nations.

94. The decision adopted today by the Security Council is
unquestionably a new and important event in the life of the
people of Guinea-Bissau and a major step forward in the
great historical process of the national liberation of peoples
from the fetters of colonialism and the realization of their
deeply justified aspiration to decide their own destiny.

lo?. In the months and years ahead, the United States will
do its utmost to strengthen and multiply the bonds of
friendship, co-operation and goodwill between the Govemments and peoples of our two countries. We look forward
also to the constructive contributions that Guinea-Bissau
will make to the important work of the United Nations.

95. The sun of freedom and independence has risen over
Guinea-Bissau. The day is not far off when it will shine over
Angola, Mozambique and the other Territories which have
suffered so much and their peoples will be able to settle
their own destiny without hindrance. At the same time, our
delegation considers it necessary to stress that the elimination of all the remaining colonial and racist rdgimes in
Africa and in other parts of the world remains one of the
most important tasks of the United Nations.

103. My Government also wishes’ to congratulate the
leaders of Guinea-Bissau and of Portugal for the statesmanship, fortitude and clear vision that they have demonstrated
in achieving this momentous agreement. We have particularly noted that the mutual goodwill and shared aims which
have characterized their negotiations have led not only to
independence but also to the promise of a smooth and
orderly transition beneficial to all peoples of the area. The
new and constructive phase in the evolution of Portugal’s
relationship to the continent of Africa has already borne its
first fruit.

96. In supporting the admission of a new sovereign
State-the Republic of Guinea-Bissau-the delegation of the
Byelorussian SSR takes the opportunity to express its firm
conviction that the time is not far off when other African
peoples and their Territories which are still in a state of
colonial and Imperialist dependency will become completely free.
97. The admission of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau to
membership in the United Nations at the forthcoming
session of the General Assembly will help to bring the
United Nations even nearer to universality.

104. Since the establishment of the United Nations nearly
a generation ago, the founding Members have been joined
by some 85 new-nations. Embracing more than half the
population of the globe, these new States have achieved full
status in the society of nations, as symbolized by United
Nations membership. The United ‘States is proud of the
contribution it has made to the continuing process of
self-determination
that has produced this impressive
achievement in less than 30 years. Perhaps nothing we, the
United Nations, have achieved in carrying out the principles
of our Charter has had greater meaning than the fulfilment
of the principle of selfdetermination.

98. The delegation of the Byelorussian SSR expresses its
confidence that the young sovereign African State of
Guinea-Bissau will make a useful contribution to solving the
tasks before the United Nations-the tasks of strengthening
international peace and security and developing fruitful
co-operation among all countries and peoples.

105. In keeping with its long-standing support for selfdetermination, the United States strongly hopes that the
evolution marked by the Security Council’s action today in
respect of Guinea-Bissau will continue, and that it will soon
be reflected in additional achievements in the other African
Territories. The decision to recommend the admission of
Guinea-Bissau to the United Nations and the process by
which this gratifying moment in history has been reached
give us great encouragement for the future,

99. Mr. SCHAUFELE (United States of America): This is
a moment of profound satisfaction for the United States.
My Government warmly welcomes the agreement for the
independence of Guinea-Bissau and strongly supports the
admission of Guinea-Bissau to the United Nations.
11

106. Mr. RICHARD (United Kingdom): My delegation
was happy to support today the recommendation by the
Security Council to the General Assembly that the Republic of Guinea-Bissau be admitted to membership in the
United Nations. This act is a symbolic one; it symbolizes
the end of a long and a bitter struggle in the Territory of
Guinea-Bissau, and for that reason is surely all the more
gratifying to members of this Council, whose prime concern
is the cause of international peace.

the extent to which there has been a change. We accept
totally the sincerity of the Portuguese Government in its
declared intentions. The new policy in Portugal will have an
effect in areas outside those Territories most immediately
concerned, particularly in the rest of southern Africa.
Today is therefore for us, and I think for the United
Nations as a whole, a good omen for the future.
111. Finally, let me say that although my country has not
had a long or a close association with Guinea-Bissau, this in
no way diminishes our good wishes for its future Prosperity. We look forward confidently to cordial relations in
the years to come.

107. The British Government today issued the following
statement, which, with your permission, Mr. President, I
would read:

112. Mr. SAL.AZAR (Costa Rica) (fnterpretution from
Spanish): In explanation of our vote, my delegation would
like to refer to the resolution just adopted containing the
Security Council’s recommendation to the General Assembly that the Republic of Guinea-Bissau be admitted to
membership in this Organization. My delegation wishes to
place on record that it took great satisfaction in voting in
favour of the decision taken by the Council.

“It is with great pleasure that we have learnt that the
Portuguese Government are ready to recognize GuineaBissau as an independent State and to arrange for the
immediate transfer of administration in the Territory.
“Her Majesty’s Government recognize the independence
of Guinea-Bissau forthwith and are ready to establish
diplomatic relations with the new Government in due
course. We unreservedly welcome this important step
forward, about which we have been in close consultation
with our colleagues in the European Community. There
will be a warm welcome in Britain for the’.Republic of
Guinea-Bissau, and we look forward to close and friendly
relations with this new West African. State. We shall
support Guinea-Bissau’s application for full membership
of the United Nations.”

113. In general, my delegation shares the pleasure that it
expressed here whenever a recommendation is passed on to
the General Assembly for the admission of a new Member
to the United Nations, inasmuch as we’ have on repeated
occasions maintained that every time a new State joins our
Organization the principle of universality of the United
Nations reaches further to its final fulfilment.
114. There are in fact a number of reasons why my
delegation is pleased that Guinea-Bissau has been the
beneficiary today of this recommendation by the Security
Council. It is our firm hope that the next session of the
General Assembly will complete the procedures necessary
for its admission and that it will receive the approval of the
entire international community.

108. I would today like to pay a tribute to the statesmanship of all parties which has led to the ending of the
conflict in Guinea-Bissau and to the removal of uncertainty
about its future. We hope that, with independence fmally
achieved, the memories of conflict may soon disappear. We
hope also that the new State may grow in strength and in
unity, in friendship with its African neighbours, with
Portugal, and indeed with the whole world community.

115. One of the reasons that have encouraged my delegation, has to do with the admirable tenacity with which the
people of Guinea-Bissau, throughout a long struggle, has
succeeded in winning its lawful right to exist as an
independent and sovereign nation. There is in fact no *
reason why there should continue to exist anywhere in the
world any form of colonial domination to the detriment of
nations aspiring to selfdetermination. But it is also true
that if a subjugated nation does not give expression to its
yearning for independence, colonialism in that area may
continue to exist for a long time.

109. This is not the first Security Council meeting this
year at which it has been our task to recommend the
admission to the United Nations of a State born out of
conflict. Early in June the Council unanimously recommended the admission of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh. The forthcoming admission to the United Nations of
both Bangladesh and Guinea-Bissau represents the achievement of statehood by a hard and violent road. This
experience may; however, enable those States to play their
role in international affairs with a maturity in excess of
what might otherwise be expected of newly-created
nations.

116. With its admission to membership in the United
Nations, the Republic of Guinea-Bissau will become one
more small country forming part of our Organization, and
this is an additional reason for the sympathy felt by my
delegation.
f:

110. This vote is important not only for what it achieves
today, but also for what it might lead to in the future. I
should like to take this opportunity to say that my
delegation looks forward to an early and a satisfactory
resolution of the status of the other Portuguese Territories
in Africa on the- basis of the recent statements by the
Portuguese Government that it recognizes the rights of the
peoples of those Territories to selfdetermination
and
independence. Indeed, the fact that Guinea-Bissau has
today the support and approval of the Government of
Portugal in making this application is itself an indication of

117. It is worth while pondering somewhat the natural
community of interests that the small countries share in
protecting and supporting each other in a world in which
the great and developed countries hold the greater power.
Indeed, the domination of these latter are so great that
when the United Nations was founded, special rights and
prerogatives were granted to the five socalled great Powers.
12

It was firmly held at the time that a certain balance had to
be established in order to maintain international peace and
security, and that that balance had to be sought within a
mechanism, and particularly in this Security Council, which
made possible the taking of great decisions only through
the agreement of the five great Powers.
118. Now without tampering with the balance of economic and military power which has been established, we
. must emphasize that peace and international security
require assistance to another major area of the world: the
poor and underdeveloped nations, which are overwhelmingly small countries. They are, in a sense, broad expanses of
poverty tid they are unstable-for there can be no stability
in poverty-and they are potential sources of danger to
international peace and security.
119. Today’s world has shown us that to that assumption
that came into existence with the United Nations-that
only thanks to a certain understandmg and harmony among
the major Powers could world peace be preserved-we must
add the proposition, which has been borne out by recent
history, that peace can never truly be achieved without the
determined participation of the small nations of the world.
It is important for them all to be represented here in the
United Nations, for they must be given a forum wherein
they may set forth their problems and contribute to the
maintenance of peace in the world, of which they form a
part.
120. Costa Rica welcomes the-emergence of the Republic
of Guinea-Bissau to independent life. We wish its people
and its leaders much successin the future, and indeed we
look forward with pIeasure to their forthcoming admission
to the United Nations.
121. Sir Laurence MCINTYRE (Australia): My delegation
has been very glad to support the recommendation of the
Committee on the Admission of New Members that the
Council should recommend to the General Assembly that
the Republic of Guinea-Bissau be admitted to membership
of the United Nations. The Committee has carefully
examined the application for membership that was submitted by the Chief Commissioner of the CounciI of State
Commissioners of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau, Mr. Francisco
Mendes, and has agreed unanimously that GuineaBissau is well qualified to become a Member of the United
Nations. In this connexion we have taken note of the Chief
Commissioner’s solemn undertaking to accept the obligations set forth in the Charter and to carry them out.
122. The Australian Government has followed with deep
interest and good wffl, both through its membership of the
Special Committee on, Decolonization and during the
twentyeighth session of the General Assembly, the progress
of Guinea-Bissau to independence, which it has now
attained in spite of its tragic loss along the way of its fit
great leader, Amflcar Cabral. It was in order that the claims
of Guinea-Bissau could be given the fullest hearing by the
United Nations that my delegation supported the inscription of item 107 on the agenda of the last session of the
General Assembly.6 On that occasion my delegation ex-

pressed Australia’s support for the aims and objectives of
the national liberation movements striving to free the
African peoples from colonialism, and looked forward to
continuing contact between Australia and the PAIGC in
Guinea-Bissau. This continuing contact was fully substantiated with the establishment of the Guinea-Bissau Observer
Mission in New York and with the extension by the
Australian Government of de facto recognition to GuineaBissau in June of this year.
123. The fact that Guinea-Bissau is today being recommended unanimously by this Council for membership in
the United Nations results to a large extent, as we all
recognize, from the dramatic transformation by Portugal of
its policies towards the African Territories, a transformation that we had long sought. My Government has followed
with close interest and understanding the rapid and
constructive progress made in this direction since April of
this year, and it took particular note of the communique
issued in Lisbon on 3 August during the visit of the
Secretary-General, in which Portugal’s future intentions
regarding its overseas Territories were elaborated. We have
now learned, with approval, of the statement issued by the
Portuguese Minister of Foreign Affairs on 11 August
expressing the intention of Portugal to formalize the act of
de fire recognition of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau in the
near future, as soon as agreements between the Government
of Portugal and the PAIGC for the progressive transfer of
administration are concluded.
124. At 12.00 noon yesterday in Canberra, the Australian
Foreign Minister, Senator Don Willesee, announced the
decision of the Australian Government to grant full de @e
recognition to the Republic of Guinea-Bissau. Recalling
that Australia had already expressed its support of the
aspirations of the people of Guinea-Bissau by extending de
facto recognition to the Republic, Senator Willesee welcomed the decision of the Portuguese Government to
recognize the new State in the near future. He said that
Australia would support unreservedly Guinea-Bissau’s admission to the United Nations and he expressed confidence
that the cordial relations already established would be
strengthened and amplified as Guinea-Bissau took its
rightful place among the nations of the world.
125, Senator Willesee also looked forward with confidence
to increasing momentum in the process of decolonization
and the struggle against racism in southern Africa, and he
appealed to all concerned to encourage an early and
peaceful resolution of all the problems stemming from
colonial occupation and racial abuse in that region. He
added, in this connexion, that the declared intentions of
the Portuguese Government in regard to the independence
of its African Territories were particularly welcomed.
126. My delegation now looks forward to the early
transformation of the Observer Mission of Guinea-Bissau
into a Permanent Mission of a Member of the United
Nations and we shall expect to continue and reinforce the
cordial and fruitful contacts already established with its
representatives.
!
127. The PRESIDENT (translation f?oi Russian): Spbking in my capacity as representative of the Union of Skviet

6 Illegal occupation by Portuguese military forces of certain
sectors of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau and acts of aggression
committed by them against the people of the Republic.

13

Socialist Republics, I should like to express deep satisfaction at the Security Council’s adoption of the decision to
recommend to the twenty-ninth session of the General
Assembly that the new and youngest African State-the
Republic of Guinea-Bissau-be admitted to membership in
the United Nations.
128. By this act yet another major step has been taken
towards the complete emancipation of the African continent from colonial domination and its transformation into
a continent of peoples free from colonial oppression, a
continent of independent and sovereign States whose
powerful voice is now heard clearly not only in the United
Nations but also throughout the world.
129. Following the Leninist policy of the equality, freedom and independence of all peoples, the Soviet Union has
consistently waged and continues to wage a struggle for the
full, unconditional and final liquidation of colonialism,
racism and apartheid and for full equality of rights for all
peoples, and that fact is well known to everybody. It is
appropriate to recall in this connexion that more than 50
years ago the founder of the Soviet State, the great Lenin,
gave the following instructions to the Soviet delegation to
the international conference held at Genoa in 1922, in
which the young Soviet Republic was participating for the
first time. He wrote: “Our international programme should
bring all oppressed colonial peoples into the international
framework.‘*
130. That is precisely why colonial peoples fighting for
their freedom and independence and States that have
embarked on the road of political independence and
sovereignty have always found, continue to fmd and will
always find that the Soviet Union is an ally and friend
prepared to give the necessary assistance and support. Both
bilaterally and in the United Nations, the Soviet Union has
rendered and is constantly rendering consistent support to
the developing States of Africa, Asia and Latin America. It
is well known that in its practical activity the USSR has
always’ resolutely defended the oppressed peoples and has
done everything possible to support their struggle for
national liberation and independence. In confirmation of
this I recall a statement made by L. I. Brezhnev, General
Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist
Party of the Soviet Union, when he was awarded the
International Lenin Prize “For strengthening peace among
peoples”; He stated:

proclamation of Guinea-Bissau’s independence the Soviet
Union immediately recognized that country as a new
sovereign State and established diplomatic relations with it.
Taking into account the relations of friendship and comprehensive co-operation which are developing between the
Soviet Union and the Republic of Guinea-Bissau, the USSR
also actively supported the application of the Government
of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau for membership in the
United Nations. The delegation of the USSR notes with
satisfaction that the letter dated 16 July 1974 from the
Chief Commissioner of the Council of State Commissioners
of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau addressed to the Secretary-General stresses that “the Republic of Guinea-Bissau
accepts the obligations contained in the Charter of the
United Nations and solemnly undertakes to carry out those
obligations” [see S/l 1393J.
132. Those who have sympathetically followed the fate of
this country and have assisted the heroic struggle of the
people of Guinea-Bissau are well aware that the young and
independent African State which we are today welcoming
to membership in the United Nations was born in the fire
of the national liberation struggle of the peoples of Africa
for the total liquidation of colonial domination in that
continent. The people of that country have won their
freedom as a result of their active and heroic armed struggle
against colonial domination. In the struggle for the freedom
of Guinea-Bissau a grear son of that country’s people,
hilcar
Cabral, laid down his life; his name has already
been mentioned here in the statements of a number of
Security Council members. Many of us, including myself,
met him and talked to him here in the United Nations and
in Africa. We shall always remember that courageous
revolutionary, that outstanding fighter against colonialism
and for the freedom and independence of Guinea-Bissau
and the freedom of all African peoples.
133. In September 1973, at its first session, the People’s
National Assembly, expressing the sovereign will of the
people of Guinea-Bissau, solemnly proclaimed the independence of the State of Guinea-Bissau and approved its
Constitution. The Constitution proclaims that GuineaBissau is a sovereign, democratic and anticoloniahst republic.’

134. The act proclaiming the independence of the State of
Guinea-Bissau states that this country is building its
relations with other States ‘on the principles of peaceful
coexistence, mutual respect for national sovereignty, nonaggression and non-interference in internal affairs”.*

‘We have always believed, and believe today, that it is
our inviolable duty, deriving from our communist convictions and our socialist morality, to give the broadest
support to the peoples who are fighting for the just cause
of freedom. This has always been so and always will be.”

135. It should be noted that the trend towards detente
and the establishment of normal relations of co-operation
among States with different social systems, which has
become apparent in recent years as a result of the active
joint efforts of the countries of the socialist community, is
creating a more favourable situation for the national
liberation movement and helping the peoples who are still

This is the Soviet Union’s unchanging policy with regard to
the colonial peoples! struggle for freedom and independence.
131. True to its policy of principle, the Soviet Union
supported the heroic struggle of the people of the Republic
of Guinea-Bissau for complete liieration, freedom and
national independence and gave it moral and political
support and material assistance in its struggle. After the

I SeeOfficial Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-cCphth
Session. Annexes,agenda item 107, document Al9196 and Add.2.

annex II, article 1.

8 Ibid., document A)9196 and Add.2, annex I.

14

--

under colonial oppression to throw off their colonial fetters
and to gain independence and freedom.
136. All the progressive forces of the world have greeted
the news of the birth of the new State with great
satisfaction, quite rightly assessing its establishment as a
new and important victory in the struggle of the African
peoples for the complete liquidation of colonialism in
Africa. At the twentyeighth session, the General Assembly,
in its resolution 3061 (KKVIII), welcomed the accession to
independence of the people of Guinea-Bissau, thereby
creating the sovereign State of the Republic of GuineaBissau.
13’7. The importance of the winning of national freedom
and independence by the people .of Guinea-Bissau can
hardly be overstated. In a cable of congratulations to
Adstldes Pereim, General Secretary of PAIGC, on the
occasion of the proclamation of the Republic of GuineaBissau, the General Secretary of the Central Committee of
the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, L. I. Brezhnev,
stressed:
“The successes of the national liberation movement,
inspired by your Party, constitute an important contribution to the struggle of the African peoples and of all
anti-imperialist forces for the national liberation of
oppressed peoples and for peace and social progress”.
138. In their message of July of this year to the Chairman
of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
Organlzation of African Unity at its eleventh session, the
Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the
USSR, N. V. Podgomy, and the Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of the USSR, A. N. Kosygin, noted that the year
since the preceding session of OAU had been marked by
major achievements of the African peoples in the struggle
to consolidate their national sovereignty, to strengthen
their political independence and economic self-sufficiency
and to eliminate the last hotbeds of coloniaIism, racism and
up@#zeid. The message stated, among other things:
“The establishment of an independent African State,
the Republic of Guinea-Bissau, which has been recognized
by the overwhehnlng majority of States Members of the
United Nations, was an important achievement of the
national llberatian forces. The overthrow of the fascist
r&lme in Portugal-and its collapse had, in large measure,
been made inevitable by the successes of the national
hberation movements of Guinea-Bissau, Angola and
Mozambique-creates new and favourable conditions for
the immediate exercise of the inalienable right of the
peoples of these countries to sovereign and independent
development.”

wide international recoznition. Almost 90 States of the
world have established diplomatic relations with it. The
wide international prestige of the Republic of GuineaBissau is also indicated by the fact that ofiicial statements
of support for the admission of that State to membership in
the, United Nations have been received by the Security
Council from 41 African States, the entire group of Asian
countries in the United Nations, 20 Arab States and the
entire group of nonaligned countries, whose Chairman,
Ambassador Rahal, Permanent Representative of Algeria to
the United Nations, has, as I have already reported,
officially so notified the President of the Security Council
on behalf of that group. In my capacity as Chairman of the
group of socialist countries of Eastern Europe for August, I
wish to announce officially that this group of countries also
fully supports the admission of Guinea-Bissau to membership in the United Nations.
141. The young Republic has now securely entered the
family of independent African States and has become a
member of that important international body, the Organization of African Unity. The achievements and successesof
the Government of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau in the
social and economic development of the country are well
known to the world.
142. The question of the membership of the Republic of
Guinea-Bissau in the United Nations was, of course, raised
long ago by its broad participation in international life. This
question was blocked until recently by the colonialist
policy of the former fascist regime of Portugal and by a
number of its allies and supporters in military and political
blocs. The accession to power of the new Government in
Portugal opens real possibilities for the liquidation of the
hotbeds of tension and bastions of colonialism in southern
Africa and creates new conditions for the realization of the
right of the peoples who were formerly under Portugal’s
colonial domination to a sovereign and independent existence .
143. In this connexion the Soviet delegation welcomes the
statement by the Government of Portugal concerning its
, readiness to co-operate with the United Nations in implementing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples and also the recently
published statement by the Government of Portugal concerning its readiness to recognize the Republic of Gulnep
Bissau as an independent State and to support its
application for admission to membership in the United
Nations.

139. In noting this connexlon between the national
liberation movement in Guinea-Bissau, Mozambique and
Angola and the progressive changes in Portugal itself, one
cannot help recalling the wise words of Karl Marx: “No
people can be free if it oppresses other peoples”.

144. In its foreign policy the Soviet Union unswervingly
follows the teachings of the great Lenin: to strengthen its
solidarity with the peoples struggling for national and social
liberation and to give them the necessary assistance and
support. This course has not been changed. It was again
confirmed not very long ago by the twenty-fourth Congress
of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union and was
reflected in the Programme of Peace and Friendship among
Peoples which was confirmed by the Congress.

140. In the short time since its creation, the Republic of
Guinea-Bissau has strengthened its international relations in
every possible way. As has already been noted, it has gained

145. The recommendation of the Security Council that
the General Assembly should admit the Republic of
Guinea-Bissau to membership in the United Nations is an
15

Important step which reflects the widespread recognition of
this young independent State in Africa. We are convinced
that in the very first days of the work of the twenty-ninth
session of the General Assembly the Republic of GuineaBissau will enter the ranks of full-fledged Members of the
United Nations. We shall joyfully welcome its representatives to the General Assembly and its organs and also to
other United Nations organs and shall co-operate with them
in the interests of strengthening peace and international
security and liquidating the last hotbeds of colonialism and
racism.

also been received from the Permanent Representative of
Brazil, Ambassador FrazIo; this letter has direct relevance
to the item, now under discussion by the Council,
concerning the admission of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau
to membership in the United Nations. Since the letter was
received in the course of the meeting and has not yet been
issued as an official document, I shall ask the UnderSecretary-General for Political and Security Council Affairs
to read it out for the information of the Members of the
coullcii.
15 1. Mr. SHEVCHENKO
(Under-Secretary-General for
Political and Security Council Affairs): The letter reads:

146. The USSR delegation expresses its conviction that in
the near future the Security Council will also consider
applications for the admission of other sovereign States
which will be created in the territory of Portugal’s former
colonial possessionsof Angola and Mozambique.

[The speaker read the document which wassubsequently
distributed under the Qmbol S/l 1440.1
152. The PRESIDENT (translation porn Russian): The
next speaker on my list for today’s meeting is the Chairman
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, also
known as the Committee of 24. I invite the Chairman of
that Committee, Ambassador Salim, to take the place
reserved for him at the Council table and to make his
statement.

147. In conclusion, the Soviet delegation would like to
express its satisfaction at the attainment of agreement
between the Soviet Union and the Republic of GuineaBissau on the establishment and development of relations
of friendship and co-operation. This was reflected in a
communique on the visit to the USSR of a State and Party
delegation from the Republic of Guinea-Bissau in November 1973, in which the two parties made the following
statement:

153. Mr. SALIM (Chairman of the Special Committee on
the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples): On behalf of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples, I wish to express my
sincere appreciation for the opportunity to address the
Security Council on this historic occasion on which we have
just witnessed the unanimous acceptance by the Council of
the application by the Republic of Guinea-Bissau for
admission to membership of the United Nations.

“After noting with satisfaction that the friendly relations between the Soviet Union and the Republic of
Guinea-Bissau are successfully developing and growing
stronger, the parties declared that they will continue to
promote the expansion and co-operation between the two
countries and to establish relations between their State
and public organ&rations.”
148. Before calling on the next speakers, I would like, in
my capacity as PRESIDENT, to inform the members of the
Security Council of the following. A lptter from the
representative of Morocco addressed to the President of the
Security Council has been received; it contains a request
that the Moroccan delegation should be Invited to participate without the right to vote in the discussion of the item
on the agenda for this meeting of the Council. In
accordance with established practice and the provisional
rules of procedure, I propose to invite the representative of
Morocco to take part in the Council’s consideration of the
item under discussion without the right to vote.

154. Allow me also to say, Mr. President, how happy and
gratified I am to see you presiding over the deliberations of
the Security Council on the occasion when the Council has
adopted such an important decision. Your country’s consistent and firm support for the struggle of the people of
Guinea-Bissau and Cape Verde for self-determination and
independence is too well known to need elaboration. Your
own personal commitment as a capable and effective
representative of the Soviet Union espousing the cause of
the colonial peoples in regard to self-determination and
independence also needs no further elaboration.

It wasso decided.
i49. The PRESIDENT (tnznslation porn Russian): I accordingly invite the distinguished representative of Morocco to
take the place reserved for him at the side of the Council
Chamber, on the understanding that he will be invited to
take a place at the Council table when his turn comes to
speak.

155. The occasion is indeed a historic one, particularly for
those of us in the Special Committee who have, since the
inception of the Committee, followed closely the heroic
struggle of the people of Guinea-Bissau under the dynamic
leadership of PAIGC towards the attainment of their
complete liberation from the oppressive colonial rule and
the ultimate proclamation in September last year of their
full independence and national unity. That dramatic
achievement followed more than a decade of suffering and
bloodshed on the part of the people of the country through
one of the most inhuman and brutal forms of repression
ever perpetrated against a dependent people by a colonialist

At the invitation of the President, Mr. R Lahlou (Moroc
co) took a place at the side of the Security Council
aamber.
150. The PRESIDENT (translation Porn Russian): A
letter addressed to the President of the Security Council has
16

regime. That momentous achievement demonstrated once
and for all that colonial and alien domination of African
peoples was doomed to irrevocable failure.

mass mobilization of the people in the islands under the
leadership of PAIGC.
159. Therefore it is my fervent hope that the Government
of Portugal will take the necessary measures to decolonize
the islands of Cape Verde and create conditions leading to
the unification of the islands with the State whose
membership in our Organization has today been recommended by the Security Council. Aware as I am of the firm
determination of PAIGC to struggle by every available
means against all attempts to create obstacles in the path of
the freedom and unity of the people of Guinea-Bissau and
Cape Verde, I wish to launch an earnest appeal to the
Government of Portugal, whose goodwill we all welcome,
to follow the road of decolonization to its logical conclusion and not to waver or succumb to temptations which
can only create obstacles and cause unnecessary suffering.

156. It is perhaps fitting for us today to pay a solemn
tribute to those many gallant fighters of the colonial
Territories who have sacrificed their lives for the cause of
the freedom and liberty of their countries. Our particular
thoughts go to our brother Amilcar Cabral, the former
Secretary-General of PAIGC, a proud son of Africa, a great
statesman of far-reaching views, for his outstanding contribution to the struggle for the emancipation of the
colonial peoples. That we witness here today the initiation
of action leading to the admission of Guinea-Bissau to
membership of this Organization is itself a clear demonstration of the fact that the ideals to which Amflcar Cabral
dedicated his life neither dissipated nor disappeared with
him; on the contrary, these ideals continue to inspire many
millions in Angola, Mozambique, Cape Verde, Namibia,
Zimbabwe and elsewhere who are still suffering under
colonial domination and yearning for their freedom and
independence. It is such ideals and those of other heroes of
African freedom like Eduardo Mondlane, the first President
of FRELIhIO, that ultimately brought Portuguese fascism
to its graveyard on 25 April last. For who can deny the fact
that it is the determination and dedication of the courageous peoples of the Portuguese-dominated Territories
that have at last brought about the long-desired changes in
the policies of Portugal, underscoring once again the fact
that no repression, no violence, no murder could arrest the
irreversible tide of the liberation struggle?

160. It is no exaggeration to state that the evolving
situation in Portugal and the categorical statements made
by the Government of that country in recent days give
great hope for optimism. In this connexion, I should like to
note with particular satisfaction the recent communication
received by the Secretary-General from the Government of
Portugal setting out specific policies with respect to the
Territories concerned. I believe this is a very positive
communication. We pay a tribute to the people of Portugal
for making such a communication possible. It is my sincere
hope that the contents of that communication will be put
Into concrete action with the minimum possible delay. As
with my appeal on the question of Cape Verde, I should
like now to state in most emphatic terms that the time is
now right for that Government to proceed forthwith, as it
has undertaken so to do, to the speedy conclusion of the
talks with the national liberation movements, the authentic
representatives of the people, with a view to the expeditious transfer of power to the peoples of Angola and
Mozambique.

157. The victory achieved by the people of Guinea-Bissau
is a great inspiration to all those engaged in the struggle for
the liberation of the continent of Africa, particularly in
those parts of Africa which are still under colonial
domination. It gives the people of Africa fresh hope that
their goal of the total liberation of the continent will soon
be realized. The victory we are celebrating will help to
strengthen and intensify the liberation struggle in the
remaining colonial Territories. Above all, this is a victory
for the people of Africa and the people elsewhere in the
world who are fighting for justice. It is no less a victory for
the Portuguese people.

161. Experience has taught us that the liberation movements are more than ready to assume their responsibilities.
Needless to say, they have demonstrated the same resilience
and determination in favour of genuine negotiations as they
have shown when they have been compelled to engage in an
armed struggle. But we are passing through a very delicate
time when trust and good faith are equally important in an
effort to bring to an end the 300‘ years of Portuguese
colonial rule in Africa. In that respect, nothing should be
done to create doubts among the people of the Territories
concerned as to the true intentions of the colonial Power.
Much has been said of the possibility of holding a
referendum. We take note of the fact that that issue is now
almost dead. It cannot and could not be otherwise. For
how can one seriously ask the people of Mozambique, the
people of Angola and the peoples of the Islands of Cape
Verde-after so much suffering and after making so many
sacrifices for their freedom-whether or not they want that
freedom? To paraphrase an eloquent statement made
recently by our brother Samora Machel, the distinguished
President of FRELIMO, how can you ask a slave who has
already revolted whether or not he wants his freedom?
Indeed, if I may refer to an analogy nearer home, I could
say that asking the colonial people whether or not they

158. Yet it is important to underscore the fact that the
Security Council’s recommendation today favouring the
admission of Guinea-Bissau to the United Nations constitutes only part of the triumph of the. people. Total
triumph can come only with the final liquidation of
Portuguese colonialism in the islands of Cape Verde and the
attainment of unity between the people of Guinea-Bissau
and those of Cape Verde. The objective of an independent
and united State of Guinea-Bissau and Cape Verde has been
the goal of PAIGC from its very inception. For the past 18
years PAIGC, under the able leadership first of Amflcar
Cabral and now of its other distinguished leaders, has been
pursuing this objective without equivocation. For more
than 12 years an armed struggle has been waged in
Guinea-Bissau. While there has been no armed struggle in
the islands of Cape Verde, the degree of commitment to
independence and unity has been no less emphatic, as
reflected in the underground political organization and
17

want their freedom is like asking the people of Portugal
whether or not they want fascism in the aftermath of the
events of 25 April, The Armed Forces Movement and the
people of Portugal in general have categorically rejected
fascism. That, indeed, was a referendum. Similarly, by
organlzlng resistance, by taking up arms, the people of the
Portuguesedominated
Territories have in no uncertain
terms conveyed the message to Portugal, and indeed to the
world, that they want liberation and not continued
servitude. There should therefore be no equivocation on
that point.

elsewhere towards the elimination of the remaining vestiges
of colonialism in all its forms and manifestations.
166, The PRESIDENT (translufionporn Russian): I thank
the Chairman of the Special Committee for his statement
and for the kind words which he addressed to me.
167. I now give the floor to the representatives of States
which are not members of the Security Council wishing to
speak at today’s meeting. The first speaker on my list is the
representative of Portugal. I invite him to take the place
reserved for him at the Council table and to make his
statement.

162. History is in the making. Those of us in the Special
Committee rejoice at the changes that are taking place
while being vigilant c.onceming any manoeuvres directed at
thwarting the irreversible tide of liberation. We welcome
the impending admission of Guinea-Bissau to the Organization as a common victory for the forces of freedom -and
humanity. We welcome the decision of the Government of
Portugal to co-operate with the United Nations and in
particular with the Special Committee in the implementation of General Assembly resolution 15 14 (XV).

168. Mr. VEIGA SIMAO (Portugal): Mr. President,cI
should like first of all to congratulate you on your assuming
the office of President of the Security Council for the
month of August. I believe this is the tenth time you have
been in this position, which shows how much of your life
has been dedicated to the United Nations. By a fortunate
coincidence, it was during this month that, following the
reestablishment of diplomatic relations between our two
countries after 50 years of separation, the President of the
Republic of Portugal received the credentials of the new
Soviet Ambassador to Lisbon.

163. Our expectations and our hopes are that very soon
we shall see the creation of the conditions in free Cape
Verde defining the process of union between the people of
Guinea-Bissau and Cape Verde in accordance with their
legitimate aspirations and in conformity with the position
adopted by the PAIGC from the beginning of the resistance. We are also confident that in the very near future
your august Council will be considering the admission of
Mozambique, under FRELIMO’s undisputed leadership,
and Angola, under the able leadership of their national
liberation movements. Then we can all bear witness to a
new chapter, a more positive chapter, a more dynamic
chapter, in Africa’s history and, indeed, in the history of
Portugal-an era of friendship and co-operation between
sovereign peoples.

169. I wish also to express to all the other members of the
Security Council our deepest appreciation for being given
the opportunity to address this meeting and also for the
kind words many of the speakers have said about Portugal,
its history and people.
170. The item on the Council’s agenda-the application of
the new Republic of Guinea-Bissau for admission to
membership in the United Nations-is of historic importance to my country. Portugal sits before the highest organ
of the Organization for the first time since the action taken
by the Armed Forces Movement which restored democracy
and freedom to 25 million people. Since 25 April, the
Portuguese have been opening large and creative ways of
modern democracy with faith and enthusiasm. It is the
second Republic, under the leadership of President Spin&a.

164.. I cannot conclude this statement without referring to
the continued struggle and suffering of the oppressed
peoples of Namibia and Zimbabwe. We at the United
Nations should take this opportunity once again to pledge
our continued support for and solidarity with the determined peoples of those Territories for the restoration of
their fundamental human rights and the attainment of their
inalienable rights to selfdetermination and independence.
The international community should continue to bring
pressure to bear on the Government of South Africa and
the illegal racist minority regime in Southern Rhodesia until
such time as the total emancipation of the African peoples
of the Territories has been achieved. Indeed, let the victory.
of the people of Guinea-Bissau serve as a warning to all
those engaged in activities which are intended to frustrate
the liberation struggle.

171. The programme of the Armed Forces Movement can
be completely identified with the deep roots of democratic
belief that have lived and never died in the heart of every
Portuguese citizen, from the humble peasant in the most
remote village to the intellectuals in academic societies.
172. As an obvious and logical consequence of that
programme, our Head of State has proclaimed to the
nation, in his historic message of 27 July, following the
publication of a Constitutional Law by the Council of
State, the right of the Portuguese Territories to selfdetermination and independence. This means that the
Portuguese Government has started the decolonization
process with the immediate acceptance of the right to
political independence of the Territories under Portuguese
administration on terms and dates to be decided by mutual
consent.

165. In expressing my appreciation to you, Mr. President,
and to the members of the Council, for having invited me
to take part in this discussion, I should like on behalf of the
Special Committee to extend the Committee’s warmest
congratulations and best wishes to the new Republic on this
occasion. We look forward to close collaboration with
Guinea-Bissau *in the work of the United Nations and

173. As a token of democratic authenticity, Portugal will
welcome the presence of United Nations observers in any
electoral process to be carried out in those Territories.
18

174. The peoples shall be the masters of their own

destinies,in freedom,peaceandsocialjustice.
175. Due to the fact that the conditionsprevailingin each
Territory are of different natures, it is only obvious that the
ways for canying out the processof decolonizationwill not
be the same for all of them but will depend on specific
drcumstances,
176. The Portuguese Revolution of Flowers is a source of
life, not a source of war or death. As in the past, when the
Portuguese revealed new worlds to the old world, new
nations are about to be born of Portugal,andwe hope that
those nations wffl stand for democracy and will be
examples of non-racial societies where every citizen will
have equal opportunities and where religion or colour will
not be a cause of discrimination but will, instead, bring
about creative dialogue in a permanent and fruitful contact
among cultures.

brought to an end, and in the case of Guinea-Bissau the
forces on both sides are behaving as comrades-in-arms of
sister nations of the Portuguese-speaking world.
182. Concerning the admission of Guinea-Bissau as a

Member of the United Nations, I have the honour of
reading the following message of my Government . as
presented in a letter addressed to you, Mr. President, by the
Foreign Minister, Mr. Mkio Soares[s/11438]:
“In the programmatic speech of the President of the
Republic on 27 July last, and in the communication
delivered by the Minister of Foreign Affairs to the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, Portugal
unequivocally expressed its free volition to recognize the
Republic of Guinea-Bissau.
‘The recognition de iure of the Republic of GuineaBissau by Portugal will be effected at an early date. In
keeping with this, necessary measures will be instituted
for the purpose, once the agreements regarding the
progressive transfer of administration, presently going on
between the Portuguese Government and the PAIGC,
have been defmitely concluded.

177. It is in this context that, on behalf of my Govemment, I reaffirm our obligations with regard to the Charter
of the United Nations and pledge full and close cooperation with its organs.
178. The Portuguese Government is prepared to develop
the process of decolonization, to supply all the information
requested by Article 73 e of the Charter, and to implement
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), and other relevant
resolutions concerning the Territories under Portuguese
administration.

“In these circumstances, the Portuguese Government, in
agreement with the PAIGC, addressed a request to all
friendly and allied countries to proceed with the immediate recognition of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau,
and facilitate the admission to the United Nations of this
third Portuguese-speaking nation.”

179. In this regard, the communication presented by the
Portuguese Foreign Minister to the Secretary-General during his historic visit to Lisbon’is very clear: we are prepared
immediately to transfer the administration to the Republic
of Guinea-Bissau, to accelerate the decoionization of the
Cape Verde Islands in close co-operation with the competent organs of the United Nations, and to enter into
formal negotiations with all the other liberation movements.
I

In fact, the Foreign Minister of Portugal has called on all
the Ambassadors accredited in Lisbon to make this view
known, and I understand that a number of friendly nations
have announced their recognition in the last two days. The
letter continues:
“The Portuguese Government wishes further to publicly
express its intention of withdrawing, as rapidly as
possible, its military effectives from the territory of
Guinea-Bissau, leaving there, and that temporarily, only
such of them as may be requested and determined by free
and mutual agreement.

180. The programme of action sketched out by the
President of the Republic can be compared, in its greatness,
its responsibility and its love of humanity, to the gallant
years of the epic Portuguese discoveries. From that speech I
quote the following words of hope and faith:

“The Portuguese Government stresses its intention,
shared by the PAIGC, to establish and develop relations
of active co-operation with the Republic of Guinea-Bissau
in the economic, cultural, technical, and other fields, on
the basis of independence, mutual respect, equality and
reciprocity of interests and harmonious relations between
the citizens of the two Republics.”

“If, in the life and history of a nation, we can speak of
a momentous hour, then it is surely when that nation
recovers its vocation, its true physiognomy, its real
personality, its genuine attitude to the world around it.
Today this great hour has struck for Portugal. It is with
the liveliest emotion that, before the Portuguese people,
at home and overseas, in perfect coherence with our
historic traditions and the ideals with which they have
inspired US, I make the formal statement that the time has
come to recognize the right of the populations of our
overseas Territories to take their future into their own
hands .”

183. We are sure that in this way our country is making a
solid contribution to peace and is once again writing a page
in the history of mankind. We are proud in joining all the
nations that stand for democratic ideals,
184. The PRESIDENT(trandation from Russian): I thank
the representative of Portugal for his statement and for his
kind words about the Soviet Union and its representative in
the Security Council.

181. No people has suffered more deeply than the
Portuguese through the mistakes made during I3 years of
an endless and inglorious war. That war is now being

19

185. The next speaker on the list is the representative of
Somalia. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make a statement.

contributions and assistance, both moral and material, given
by many individual countries and non-governmental organizations to the liberation movements in their struggle for
independence.

186. Mr. HUSSEIN (Somalia): I thank you, Mr. President
and all the members of the Council, very much for giving
me this opportunity to address the Council on behalf of the
current Chairman of the Organization of African Unity, the
President of the Supreme Revolutionary Council of the
Somali Republic, Jaalle Mohammed Siad Barre.

192. All the aforesaid efforts and contributions were not
complementary, it should be emphasized, to the tremendous efforts, sacrifices and continuous struggles made
and still being made by the peoples of the Territories
concerned.

187. Mr. President, first of all allow me to congratulate
you on behalf of the Chairman of the OAU on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of August. I am confident that your wisdom and
long experience will provide the necessary means of
leadership to expedite the handling of the issues which are
being brought to the consideration of the Council during
the period of your chairmanship. I wish, on this occasion,
to assure you and the members of the Council of the
unqualified co-operation of the Organization of African
Unity.

193. I should like to note that, as I am sure members of
the Council are well aware, over 80 States Members of the
United Nations had recognized the sovereignty and independence of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau ptior to the
recent and well-received declaration of the new Govemment of Portugal. As of now, more than two thirds of the
Member States have extended their recognition to this
Republic. As a result, the Republic of Guinea-Bissau
already enjoys full membership of the OAU and as such was
elected to a vice-presidency at the recent OAU summit
conference held in Mogadiscio. It is also a member of
several specialized agencies of the United Nations.

188. It gives me great pleasure to see your delegation
presiding over the Council at the moment when admission
to the United Nations of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau is
being discussed by the Council. This is significant because it
was your delegation which was the prime mover of the
historic General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), as a result
of which a large number of countries attained their
independence and are today full-fledged Members of the
United Nations.

194. The admission of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau to
the community of nations will further enhance the principle of universality enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations. I am therefore very happy to associate myself with
those who took the floor before me in extending to the
Republic of Guinea-Bissau my heartfelt congratulations on
this happy event and to welcome the Republic of GuineaBissau as it comes among us in the assurance that it will
make useful contributions to the work of the United
Nations.

189. However, this does not mean that the struggle for the
total liquidation of the domination of man by man,
whatever may be its degree or form, is over. It was for this
reason that the Organization of African Unity, on whose
behalf my country has the honour to speak, has taken right
from the very beginning a firm and unswerving position
with a view to liberating all countries and peoples from the
yoke of foreign domination. The ‘Organization of African
Unity is particularly committed, as can be seen .from the
Lusaka and Mogadiscio Declarations, as well as from all the
OAU summit meetings, to the freedom of those parts of
Africa which are still subjected to the most obnoxious and
nefarious type of domination-racial
discrimination-and of
the monstrosity of apartheid.

195. It is also our earnest hope that Mozambique, Angola
and the other African Territories still under Portuguese
control will join the United Nations as full-fledged members
by the thirtieth session of the General Assembly. The
attainment of their Independence and their subsequent.
admission to the United Nations of those Territories will
doubtlessly accelerate the process of eradicating foreign
domination in all its ignoble forms from the remaining
African territories, and especially from the southern part of
the continent, where the last vestiges of fascism, apartheid
and intolerable human injustices are perpetrated daily by
unlawful minority regimes against the legitimate inhabitants
of the area.
196. It is our belief that the recent radical change, since
25 April 1974, in Portugal’s position vis-a-vis the African
Territories under its administration will herald the opening
of a new spirit of co-operation and understanding. While it
is not our intention to underestimate the significant role
played by the Government of Portugal, it would also be
unfair not to recognize the great contribution which the
liberation movements have made to bringing about such a
change, a change which will be beneficial to both Portugal
and the African Territories concerned. Had this change
taken place earlier, the substantial loss of human life and
property could have been avoided. Nevertheless, as the
saying goes, ‘better late than never”. We sincerely welcome
the change and believe that without that change in
Portugal’s policy such losses would have continued unnecessarily.

190. In this connexion, the OAU is pleased to’note with
gratification the invaluable efforts made by the SecretaryGeneral for the implementation of the General Assembly’s
resolutions. I should be failing in my duty if I did not place
on record, with equal appreciation, the special tribute due
to the Committee on Decolonization, the Special Committee on Apartheid and the United Nations Council for
Namibia for the commendable work they have done in their
respective areas of activity designed to co-ordinate the
efforts of the United Nations and the OAU for effective
assistance to the liberation movements. These joint efforts
have brought about remarkable achievements.
191. Last but not least, I wish to acknowledge the
all-Important role played by the non-aligned countries.
Also, we cannot but recognize with deep gratitude the
20

202. Mr. TGGBE (Togo) (interpretation ,from French):
Thank you, Mr. President, for allowing me to speak in my
capacity as President of the African Group for the present
month.

197. In view of this new climate. I would like to auote the
following cable sent by my President, Jaalle Siah, in his
capacity as the current Chairman of the OAU, to the
President of the Government of Portugal, General Antdnio
de Spfnola, on 28 July 1974:

203. At this meeting when the Security Council has
considered the application for admission to the United
Nations submitted by the sister Republic of Guinea-Bissau,
the African Group, through me, wishes first of all to
express its sincere gratitude to you, Sir, and to the other
members of the Council and to the SecretaryGeneral,
Mr. Kurt Waldheim, for the very special diligence which
you have shown in your consideration of this application
for membership. The unanimity which has emerged in the
Council is an indication of the decisive effects of your
work.

‘Your recognition of the independence of GuineaBissau, as well as your stated intention of granting
independence to Mozambique, Angola and the other
Territories under your administration, is the beginning of
the restoration of normal relations not only between your
country and the continent of Africa but in particular,
between Portugal and the peoples of those Territories.
“This well-intentioned step will, without the shadow of
a doubt, result in a new and ever-lasting spirit of
co-operation and comprehension between Africa and
Portugal.

204. In recommending to the forthcoming General Assembly session the admission of Guinea-Bissau to United
Nations membership as a sovereign and independent State,
the Security Council has taken a timely and apt decision in
accordance with resolution 3061 @XVIII) adopted by the
General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session. That resolution clearly recognizes the sovereignty, independence and
territ0.d
integrity of Guinea-Bissau, certain sectors of
which were and remain illegally occupied by the foreign
troops of Portugal.

‘This new spirit will replace the hideous colonial era of
those Territories of the last 500 years by a spirit of
co-operation and understanding and will also contribute
to the achievement of international peace and security.
“It is my sincere hope that the others who are depriving
African and other peoples all over the world of their basic
human rights will follow this new and realistic approach
of the new Government of Portugal so that peace and
prosperity will at last reign throughout the world, and
mankind will achieve the long-cherished goal of living
together in peace and respect.”

205. The people of Guinea-Bissau won their independence
with courage and an unshakable determination to resist to
the end a redoubtable and contemptuous colonialist invader
that was driven to commit the worst follies by the very
prospect of its imminent defeat.

198. Here it is fitting to point out that this spirit of
co-operation and understanding, which my President has
emphasized, are the direct confirmation of the objectives
and ideals which the late Amilcar Cabral, the founder of
the PAIGC, advocated and for which he died. The
realization of these objectives has also been at the great loss
of many leaders and many other freedom fighters of the
liberation movements, and I wish to honour here and now
all those who have paid with their lives in the supreme and
just cause. Although they are dead, the names of these
heroes will find their proper place in the annals of history.

206. The people of Guinea-Bissau, in requesting admission
to the United Nations, are asking for no more than the
solemn and unequivocal recognition of their right to live in
freedom and in peace, like all other Members of our
Organization. That right cannot be the subject of any form
of bargaining, for it is the cornerstone of our Organization,
which does not recognize that any people has the right to
dominate any other.
207. Even now as we are speaking the war is still going on
in Guinea-Bissau. Enemy troops continue to violate the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of a free and peaceloving State. That is a contradictory and an unacceptable
situation, one which requires that the Security Council
reach a firm and speedy decision. It must, as a prior
condition, order the immediate and complete evacuation of
Portuguese troops from Guinea-Bissau. This is an excellent
opportunity to test the good faith of the present leaders of
Portugal who, after their recent talks with the SecretaryGeneral, have declared that they are prepared fully to
co-operate with our Organization with respect to the
implementation of the provisions of the Charter.

199. Before concluding, I wish to welcome the statement
just made by the representative of the Portuguese Government, in which he formally pledged the Portuguese
Government to continue negotiations with the leaders of
other African Territories under Portugal’s administration in
order to reach an immediate solution for the independence
of those Territories.
200. The PRESIDENT (transfa@on from Rusdzn): I thank
the representative of Somalia for his statement and for his
kind words about the Soviet Union and its representative in
the Security Council. I am also grateful to him for pointing
out that the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples was adopted by the
United Nations on the initiative of the Soviet Union.

208. The brilliant victory of the people of Guinea-Bissau
over colonialism and its advocates represents an important
and encouraging stage in the liberation of the African
continent from all foreign domination. It is an eloquent
example for all freedom fighters who are struggling for their
freedom in Africa and elsewhere.

201. I invite the representative of Togo to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.
21

the General Assembly the admission of the Republic of,
Guinea-Bissau to membership of the United Nations. The
history of that country, which has been marked by
struggles and sacrifices, reminds us of how futile it is to
obstruct the march of a people who are determined to win
their freedom and national independence. That decision is
quite justifiably the end result of the just struggle of the
people of Guinea-Bissau, who have constantly been supported by countless peoples of the world who cherish
justice and peace. It also reflects a tangible fact, as a
majority of Member States in our Organization have
already recognized the independence of that young State.

209. The present situation in Angola and Mozambique
with the number of interracial incidents and confrontations
over the past few days spur us to redouble our efforts and
remain vigilant, because Portuguese imperialism and colonialism and their henchmen have not yet laid down their
arms in Africa, and they are always prepared on any pretext
to sow division, hatred and terror.
210. Today, all of Africa welcomes with pride the victory
of these courageous freedom fighters. It pays a solemn and
worthy tribute to the memory of all its heroes, and
particularly to Amflcar Cabral, Secretary-General of
PAIGC, and Eduardo Mondlane, Secretary-General of
FRELIMO, both of whom were assassinated in a cowardly
manner. It reaffirms once again its complete and unswerving support for the young Republic of Guinea-Bissau, and
indeed for all the recognized African hberation movements.

217. We are pleased to emphasize the positive developments of the policy of the Government of Portugal,
which has expressed its intention of co-operating with the
United Nations in implementing the principles set forth in
the Charter and the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly intended to close a painful and depressing
chapter in the history of colonialism. It is our hope,
however, that the Portuguese Government will, without any
ambiguity, give concrete expression to those policies in all
areas under Portuguese domination.

211. The torch of freedom will continue to bum brightly
everywhere in Africa until its complete liberation from the
forces of foreign domination wherever they may be.
212. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): I thank
the representative of Togo for his statement and for the
kind words which he addressed to me.
213. The next speaker on my list is the representative of
Algeria. I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.

218. We also wish to state that we greatly appreciate the
efforts of the Organization and the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kurt Waldheim, to implement the many decisions of
our Organization on the granting of independence to
colonial countries and peoples that are still under the
colonial yoke.

214. Mr. TALEB-BENDIAB (Algeria) (interpretation from
French): Mr. President, first of all, as representative of
Algeria and on behalf of the Group of Non-Aligned
Countries in the United Nations, I should like to thank you
and the other members of the Security Council for allowing
me to take part in the work of the Council concerning the
application of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau for membership in the United Nations. May I also say how pleased
we are to see this meeting presided over by the representative of a great country which is a friend of ours and
with which Algeria maintains friendly and fruitful relations.

219. We are very pleased to say that the decision just
adopted by the Security Council is a source of great
satisfaction to us. We welcome it and we shaIl have an
opportunity to convey to the representatives of the
fraternal country of Guinea-Bissau, a member of the family
of non-aligned countries, our congratulations when the
General Assembly confirms the recommendation of the
Council.
220. I also wish to express the hope that the step just
taken by the Security Council, which is most deftitely
following the course of history, will be taken -in relation
also to all other countries that are still under colonial
domination.

215. The question now before the Council is of paramount importance for the non-aligned countries, which
have always fought for the independence of peoples under
colonial domination and exploitation. In their declaration
on the struggle for national liberation, the Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries, who met in Algiers
from 5 to 9 September 1973, stressed inter alia the
following:

221. The non-aligned countries will spare no effort in
continuing to give their support to and expressing their
solidarity with all those peoples that are fighting for their
freedom and independence, and we shall be guided by a
desire to promote peace and justice throughout the world.

‘The policy of non-alignment, one of the main aims of
which is the struggle for independence and the safeguarding of national sovereignty, fully identifies with the
liberation struggle of oppressed peoples against all forms
of domination and exploitation.”

222. The PRESIDENT (trandation from Russian): I thank
the representative of Algeria for the kind words about the
Soviet Union.
223. I now invite the representative of Guinea to take a
place at the Council table and to make a statement.

That policy has always been based upon the fundamental
principles contained in the Charter of the United Nations
and our policy of promoting the emancipation of the
peoples of the world.

224. Mr. MADDY (Guinea) (interpretation porn French):
Mr. President, as the Security Council gives favourable
consideration to the request for admission to the United
Nations of the independent State of the Republic of
Guinea-Bissau, allow me on behalf of my delegation to

216. We can therefore only be pleased when the Security
Council unanimously adopts a decision to recommend to
22

congratulate you on your accession to the presidency of the
Council for this month. I need not recall here the relations
of friendship and of frank collaboration which have existed
for years between the Government of the Republic of
Guinea and the Government of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics.

who laid down their lives for peace. In this glorious list of
heroes, the figure of the late lamented Amflcar Cabral is
ever present. Speaking to the seventh graduating class of the
Gamal Abdel Nasser Polytechnic Institute in Conakry on 6
October 1973, President Ahmed SBkou Tour& the Guinean
Head of State, said:

225. The Security Council, the fundamental role of which
is to preserve international peace and security througb
respect for the inalienable rights of peoples and States, has
today taken yet another step of utmost historic importance. In recommending to the General Assembly the
admission of the free State of Guinea-Bissau as a fullfledged Member of our Organization, we are repairing an
injustice which my country, the Republic of Guinea, has
always denounced.

“The name that your class will bear, and which you
must earn through your unconditional dedication to
Africa and the socialist revolution, is that of the immortal
fighter who, with outstanding courage, unquenchable
resolution and vigorous loyalty to the objectives of the
national liberation of Guinea-Bissau and the Cape Verde
Islands under Portuguese colonial domination, gave his
life so that Africa might live in freedom, dignity and
prosperity. That name is the name of the founder of
PAIGC, Comrade Amflcar Cab&.”

226. If yesterday the theoreticians of colonialism could
calmly and in the language of hatred speak or write in a
vain attempt to evade the fact that oppression of man by
man is an injustice which accumulates in memory and thus
is ever present in men’s minds, it is certain that today, more
than ever before, the struggle for dignity proves that
enslavement is for us all a disease for which there is only
one treatment, freedom. In this regard the solemn act of 24
September 1973 at Madina-Bee speaks for itself.

230. With the Republic of Guinea-Bissau, Africa and the
other Member States of the United Nations, true to the
fundamental principles of the Charter, will henceforward
provide the proof that we wish to assume all our responsibilities in order to demonstrate that there is no superior
race and no man of providence that can delay the
prodigious acceleration of the process of the liberation of
peoples.
23 1. Today, no matter how praiseworthy our efforts, they
could not be complete or in conformity with the spirit and
the letter of the Charter if tomorrow Mozambique, Angola
and the Cape Verde Islands were not quickly to rejoin the
international community of independent countries. The
same would be true if the elementary rights of Africans
were to continue to be flouted in Rhodesia, in Namibia and
in South Africa-to mention only those instances.

227. There is no need to review the fighting and the
struggle in which the peoples of Angola, Guinea-Bissau, the
Cape Verde Islands and Mozambique have been engaged
and are still engaged. We are sufficiently familiar with the
fact that they were at the root of the events which took
place on 24 April last, events which brought freedom and
peace to the people of Portugal. In requesting admission to
the United Nations, the Republic of Guinea-Bissau intends
to help strengthen that peace which is so dear to us all. Did
it not declare on 24 September 1973, in proclaiming its
independence, that it accepted the obligations of the
Charter of the United Nations and solemnly undertook to
discharge those obligations? The recognition of that
country by more than 90 States Members of our Organization is proof that the Republic of Guinea-Bissau is ready
to co-operate in a frank and loyal manner with ail States
without distinction.

232. For the Republic of Guinea and brother African
States, to accord unreserved support to the candidature of
the sister Republic of Guinea-Bissau is more than a duty. It
is to preserve their own dignity, their personality and their
specific identity through what is greatest in man, freedom.
Our peoples, historically united by the same misdeeds,
marked by the same deficiencies, concerned by the same
needs and cherishing the same hopes, have a vast potential
wealth, and that is their capacity to expand their creative
abilities, their authority and their desire to live in freedom,
conceived as the means to ensure quickly a human progress
.
commensurate with their ambitions.

228. Freedom is like the light of the sun. It shines for
everyone. Whoever tries to keep it for himself will have the
least of it. Need I recall that all too often civilizations, after
playing a predominant roie in social development, have seen
their values deteriorate and their influence shrink? Yet the
causes of this decline of a civilization are none other than
its own inability to adapt to the conditions and the changes
flowing directly from developments which it has itself
initiated. Such has been the tragedy of many colonial
Powers, and such will be the fate of those who still turn
deaf ears to the will of the peoples-

233. The PRESIDENT (tmnslation from Russian): -I thank
the representative of Guinea for his statement and for his
kind words about the Soviet Union. I fully share his views
concerning the friendly and fraternal relations existing
between our two countries.
234. I invite the representative of Yugoslavia to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.

229. Beyond the traditional procedure which the Security
Council is accomplishing today, we are promoting the
equitable and dynamic progress of all peoples whose
aspirations to sovereignty, independence, happiness and
security are the prime movers of universal progress and the
positive forces of development in world society. At the
same time, we bow respectfully to the memory of ail those

235. Mr. JOB (Yugoslavia): Mr. President, may I first
thank you and the Council for the decision to invite me to
participate in the discussion of Guinea-Bissau’s application
for membership in the United Nations.
236. I should like to commence this short intervention by
complimenting the Council
_ on the historic and unanimous
23

decision it has taken today to recommend to the General
Assembly the admission of’ the heroic and trail-blazing
Republic of GuinetiBissau into the United Nations. That in
itself makes this a great day and a great event to be both
celebrated and taken as a most profound lesson.
237. It was very gratifying that the representative of
Portugal, Ambassador Jose Veiga Sii~o, was able to state
here his Government’s support for the admission of
Guinea-Bissau and that the Government of Portugal made
that possible by its recent positive statement.

situation to arise in which a movement in one part is
accompanied by a freeze in another part. That is why
Guinea-Bissau must be followed without delay by Mozambique and Angola and others. Ii is also why we are sure
that, after the tremendous change in what were Portuguese
colonies, our collective ability-the ability of the United
Nations with respect to Southern Rhodesia, Zimbabwe and
sanctions, Namibia, and uparfheid in South Africa-is ten
times greater than heretofore.
244. There is no need for me here today to explain how
much the Yugoslav Government and the peoples of
Yugoslavia cherish today’s decision of the Council or to
stress the warmth of their admiration for and congratulations to the representatives of Guinea-Bissau and Cape
Verde. The Council is well aware of Yugoslavia’s role in-the
fight against colonialism and neocolonialism, imperialism
and hegemony of any kind. We were fortunate in contriiuting what we could to the Council’s historic meetings in
Addis Ababa in 1972. We recognized the new Republic of
Guinea-Bissau, our brothers, on the very first day.

238. Let me also underline the constructive and dynamic
contribution of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kurt Waldheim.

239. The pending admission of Guinea-Bissau to the.
United Nations is a historic victory for Guinea-Bissau, for
all our brothers, African nations united in the Organization
of African Unity, for the whole non-aligned movement, for
all those who fought and are fighting colonialism in any
form anywhere, and for those who came to recognize that
one cannot enslave without becoming a slave and that in
our world the liquidation of one’s own colonial rule and
yoke over others is the only way for one to have a decent
life and to command the respect one always wants and
needs from the decent international community.

245. We pledge anew our solidarity with, and our support
and assistance for, the national liberation movements of
Mozambique, Angola and others. We are sure that the
success of their action today constitutes the best implementation of the decisions of its Fourth Conference of
Heads of States or Government of Non-aligned Countries in
Algeria last year, and that the new member of the
non-aligned movement brings new added strength to it,
soon to be followed by others.

240. It is incumbent upon me, the representative of a
country that survived, asserted its independence and was
liberated through our own war of national liberation, to
stress that we who are present here would not be able to sit
around this table and celebrate the Council’s just decision
were it not for the heroism and sacrifice of the fighters of
PAIGC, both dead and alive. And here the name of Am&car
Cabral stands out both as a fighting memory and as an
exacting inspiration. Without their epic struggle, no developments such as the ones we are all happy about would
take place. The positive evolution that took place in
Portugal is itself a confirmation of the rightness of struggle,
of wars of national liberation, of maintaining unremitting
pressure and of springs of decency and constructive realism
surviving even the longest night.

246. Let me end, then, with a word about our world
Organization. The fighters and Government of GuineaBissau know what a potent force on their side they had and
have in the United Nations. Now the United Nations must
continue doing for others what it has done and is doing for
Guinea-Bissau. Their swelling of our ranks means the
infusion of new strength into our Organization in its
progress towards-full universality.
247. This Organization is, then, uniquely endowed, motivated and obligated to wage a constant fight to keep the
interests of the huge majority of States and peoples on the
priority agenda of all decision-making processesand factors
in the world and to wage a constant iight to prevent those
interests being relegated to any low-priority shelves. That
remains the only basis from which we can conduct any
struggle to prevent the United Nations itself from being
pushed aside to the margins of world politics. The
prevention of that is in the vital interest, perceived or
unperceived, of everyone. It is for that reason that
Guinea-Bissau’s struggle was a contribution to us ali for our
common good and security.

241. My delegation would like to express here our firm
expectation that the negotiations will result in finding a
formula containing a speedy, peaceful solution for the
problem of the Cape Verde Islands in the context of the
unity of Guinea-Bissau and Cape Verde.
242. It goes without saying that there is an equally firm
expectation on our part that the Government of Portugal
will on the basis of its declared policies make it possible, by
appropriate deeds, for the Security Council soon to adopt
recommendations similar to that of today concerning
Mozambique and Angola also.

248. The PRESIDENT (translation porn Russian): I invite
the representative of Morocco to take a place at the
Security Council table and to make a statement.

243. The present phase of success in the anti-colonial
struggle-and we want it to be that way, and we are
prepared to contribute by all means, as we always havemarks the beginning of the end. We have always considered
it one struggle cross-linked, one front where any successor
breakthrough @*one sector leads to successesand victories
in another. Nothing is isolated, and we must not permit a

249. Mr.

LAHLOU
(Morocco) (interpretation
from
Thank you, Mr. President. I believe I should. be
brief. On the occasion of this event of such great
importance-consideration
of the application of GuineaBissau for membership in the United Nations-the voices to
French):

24

neighbours to support us in the course we have entered
upon to ensure the complete unity of our territory. In
accordance with the principles of the Charter, my Sovereign, my Government and the people of Morocco have
firmly resolved to recover that cherished part of our Sahara,
and for this we prefer, over all other means, that of
negotiation.

be heard are not just those of the representatives who have
spoken. Indeed, there are very many other countries which,
because they are members of certain groups or organizations, have explicitly or implicitly asked those who have
spoken to represent them in the consideration of the matter
before the Council. We think that is a good procedure. It
certainly does show the cohesion which exists in the
African Group at Headquarters. It is also an expression of
the African unity embodied in the Organization of African
Unity and of the harmony which reigns among the
non-aligned countries.

254. Finally, Mr. President, the Morocco delegation recognizes in you one who has always supported the struggle of
oppressed peoples for their freedom. We likewise welcome
the historic decision just taken by the Council over which
you preside. We hail the courageous people of GuineaB&au, on this day which the news agencies have described
as D-Day for Guinea-Bissau. We pay a deeply-felt tribute to
the memory of the martyrs who selflessly shed their blood
for the freedom of all of Africa, first and foremost the
African hero Amilcar Cabral.

250. It is difficult for my delegation to fmd the right
words to convey our pleasure at seeing Guinea-Bissau, a free
and sovereign country, coming to our Organization and
joining us for the greater glory of the principles of the
Charter. After a long and painful struggle, that country will
in the near future mobilize its efforts to promote the
economic and social development of its people. The
co-operation of all countries will surely be extended to it,
and first and foremost the co-operation of Portugal. A
people cannot be accused of being intrinsically colonialist;
colonialism is but the extension of a hateful past, a past
that has been dark for some, benevolent for others, but a
past which, under the rule of the United Nations, cannot be
to the advantage of anyone.

255. It is a source of deep joy for my country, which has
always stood side by side with the fqhters for freedom of
Guinea-Bissau, to see that country join the concert of
nations. We offer them our most heartfelt congratulations.
256. The PRESIDENT {translation from Russian): I
should like to inform the members of the Council that the
President has received a request from the representative of
Cyprus that the delegation of Cyprus should be given an
opportunity to speak at today’s meeting on the question
under discussion. In accordance with established practice
and the provisional rules of procedure, and in the absence
of objections, I intend to invite the representative of
Cyprus to participate without the right to vote in the
Council’s consideration of the question.

251. “Conversation has its ramifications”, says an Arab
proverb. I believe that one member of the Council allowed
himself to go off into ramifications. He brought up another
case of colonialism, the Sahara. In fact, if my last idea is
accepted, it must also be accepted that for a part of the
territory of Morocco to remain under foreign domination is
an anachronistic and a shocking fact. That, furthermore, is
a matter that is well known to the Members of the United
Nations, for the subject has constantly been before the
United Nations ever since Morocco regained its independence in 1955. Ever since that date Morocco has
consistently called for the restoration of its territorial
integrity and the return of a part of its national territory.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. 2. Rossides
(CLpnrs) took a place at the ClunciZ table.
257. The PRESIDENT (transrcltion from Russian): Before
calling on the representative of Cyprus, I shall give the floor
to the representative of Mauritania, a member of the
council.

252. Our claim is based primarily on irrefutable political
and juridical considerations. When, in 1912, Morocco, at
the end of its strength, was among the last to yield to the
wave of colonialism, it assured the integrity of its territory
in protectorate agreements that it was obliged to sign with
the colonial Power. The protectorate broke up our territory
into zones of influence, but the sovereignty of the King of
Morocco over the entirety of his territory was never
contested. Following the signing of a convention with Spain
on 27 November 1912, a zone of Spanish influence was
created over the regions to the south and north of the
Moroccan territory, Sakia El-Hamra and Rio de Oro, which
was administered in the name of the Caliphate of the
Sultan, that is, in the name of the representative of the
King of Morocco.

258. Mr. EL HASSEN (Mauritania) (inferpretation from
French): This is not a case of formally exercising the right
of reply; quite the reverse, indeed, because it is not the
custom of my delegation to exercise the right of reply
against anyone in the United Nations, and particularly
against the representative of a friendly country with which
my country maintains very close relationships of brotherhood and co-operation.
259. I simply wanted to repeat what I said at the
beginning of this meeting. I said that what we are now
doing in the Security Council is an event of considerable
importance. It is an event which will certainly have a
significant impact on decolonization in general and on
decolonization in Africa in particular. We voiced the hope
that this event will give the necessary impetus so that all
oppressed peoples, and especially the African peoples, that
are still struggling for their freedom may succeed in
recovering that freedom together with their dignity.

253. It is true that in the north-west region of Africa there
is a desire to create a solid entity, the Arab Maghrcb. My
country has always worked to bring about the achievement
of that unity and sought to establish peaceful boundaries
with our neighbours. Nothing, then, is more legitimate
today than that we should count on the solidarity of those
25

affinity with all the African countries, and particularly with
Guinea-Bissau whose heroic struggle and self-sacrifice in
fighting for its freedom has evoked our profound admiration. Indeed, we feel particularly gratified to note that
the representative of Portugal has offered the full cooperation of his country for the establishment of a free
Guinea-Bissau and for its progress in all fields, economic,
technical, cultural and others, in a show of mutual respect
and reciprocity of interests between the two republics and
in the service of democratic ideals.

260. It was in this spirit that my delegation appealed to
the administering Power, Spain, which now occupies the
so-called Spanish Sahara, to implement, without further
delay, the numerous resolutions of the United Nations
adopted on 13 consecutive occasions by the General
Assembly by an overwhelming majority-resolutions,
it
must be recalled, that were supported not only by the
majority of Member States represented here but also by all
those directly or indirectly involved in the problem.
261. That being so, my delegation does not believe that
any statement whatsoever concerning ownership of the
Sahara should be such as to give any rights to anyone
whatsoever or to facilitate decolonization. If that were the
case, my delegation would have a great deal to say on the
subject. But we believe that we have gone beyond that
stage. What we should do now is ask the administering
Power to hasten the pace of decolonization of this
Territory as it has been asked to do by the United Nations.

264. We hope that in the post-colonial period of GuineaBissau its people will find no further interference with their
freedom, unity, progress and prosperity.
265. We look forward to seeing Angola and Mozambique
also free and joining the United Nations. Thus the
community of nations in this Organization will become
more and more universal, as it was intended to be.

262. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): I call
on the representative of Cyprus.

266. These words, are expressed from the heart at a
moment of great trial for Cyprus, and we do hope and wish
for the people of Guinea-Bissau that they will find their
post-colonial period a happy one and without the troubles
that Cyprus is meeting with now.

263. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): Thank you, Mr. President,
for allowing me to participate in this meeting on GuineaBissau at this late hour. My purpose is to express, on behalf
of my Government and the people of Cyprus, our profound
gratification on this happy occasion of the unanimous
recommendation by the Council to the General Assembly
of the admission of Guinea-Bissau to full membership in the
Organization. Needless to say, my country was one of the
first to recognize Guinea-Bissau as a State. I am particularly
happy to see one more Member from our brothers in the
African continent and in the Organization of African Unity
join the United Nations and bring its valuable contribution
to the work of the Organization in the common cause of
freedom, justice and peace in the world. We have a great

267. The PRESIDENT (translation porn Russian): I have
no further speakers on the list. The Security Council has
concluded consideration of an important and urgent question. It has unanimously adopted a resolution recommending the admission to the United Nations of a new
State-the 138th-the Republic of Guinea-Bissau. The
members of the Security Council may congratulate themselves on this decision and conclude today’s meeting with
the feeling of having discharged their duty.
The meeting rose at 7.25 p.m.

26
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

W.S.

1.50 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

7482151-October

1975-2050
