,

UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL
THIRTY-NINTH

COUNCIL

RECORDS
YEAR

MEETING:

30 MARCH

1984

NEW YORK.

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2525) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda ,....,...........................................

1

Letter dated 29 March 1984 from the Permanent Representative of Nicaragua
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16449). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

WV.2525

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention .of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
”
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of. the document indicates the supplement in which it appears. or in which
information about it is given.
. The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has ‘been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.
.
:

..
.

.i
,.

,‘.,
i,

L :

8

.‘.

_ .

‘

‘,
‘

‘. ’

2525th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 30 March
President:

Mr. Javier ARIAS

STELLA

(Peru).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, Egypt, France, India, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Upper Volta, Zimbabwe.

Provisional, agenda.,(S/Agendal2525)
1. Adoption
2.

of the agenda

Letter dated 29 March 1984 from the Permanent
Representative of Nicaragua to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16449)
The meeting

was called to order at 4.35 p.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 29 March 1984 from the Permanent Representative of Nicaragua to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/16449)
I. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Spanish]:
I should like to inform members of the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives
of Guyana and Honduras, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in conformity with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure.
At the invitation
of the President, Mr. Sinclair
(Guyana) and Mr. Flares Bermridez (Honduras) took
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Spanish]:
The Council is meeting today in response to a request
contained in the letter dated 29 March 1984 from the
representative of Nicaragua to the President of the
Security Council (S/16449). The first speaker is the
representative of Nicaragua, upon whom I now call.
3. Mr. CHAMORRO
MORA (Nicaragua) [interpreration from Spanish]: Recently, Sir, I had an opportunity

1984, at 3.30 p.m.

to express to you our congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the month of
March. On this occasion we should like to thank you for
the diligent manner in which you have convened this
meeting. The fact that you are a distinguished Latin
American, a son of the fraternal people of Peru, guarantees a full understanding of the circumstances in the
Central American region at the present time, which
seriously threaten international peace and security. We
are sure that you, better than anyone else, understand
the basic origins of the crisis in our region: the oppression, exploitation and poverty that history has visited
upon the Latin American peoples.
4: It was really not our intention to convene the Council only two months after having already done so; nor
had we intended to do so on four earlier occasions in
1982 and 1983. Regrettably,
however, the criminal,
cowardly.war being waged by a major Power against
our people has made this necessary. That Administra^ tion; notwithstanding
our ‘constant .efforts to bring
about peace among the fraternal peoples of Central
America, has continued to aim its efforts at the destruction of our revolution and of our country in general.
5. Today, once again, we have come to denounce
further acts of aggression which, owing to their level
of sophistication,
the equipment used and techniques
employed, represent a qualitative leap forward in the
covert operations against our people.
6. We have come here with confidence and certainty
because the international community’s
expressions of
concern and repudiation in debates and resolutions on
this subject have in fact contributed to avoiding a confrontation with unpredictable consequences in our region. We have come here in’ the hope that the international community’s
rejection will prevent a future
of desolation and death following in the wake of acts
of aggression against our country. Finally, we have
come here so that the international community’s
outcry, together with Nicaragua’s devotion to peace and
the efforts of the so-called Contadora Group, will lead
the peoples of the region along the path of peace and
prosperity.
7. Regrettably, the international community’s efforts,
as expressed in the Security Council, the General
Assembly, the Contadora Group and the Movement of
Non-Aligned
Countries, have not been sufficient to
prevent resort to military solutions in the region. Although those efforts have prevented a regional war,
they have not been able to prevent crimes against Nic-

.’

aragua which cause concern and alarm in our country,
because we are a peace-loving people.

and during the Granadero I manoeuvres they will
expand and rebuild the runways in Jamastran, department of El Paraiso, Comayagua, department of Copan;
and La Florida. Nine hundred men from 43 support
groups in Palmerola are at present helping prepare the
Granadera I manoeuvres. Fifty men of the Rapid Deployment Command from McDiel, Florida, are in Palmerola, in charge of direction and control of the operations of the joint Honduras-United States exercises.
There are 480 men from the 1Olst Aviation Battalion
located in Palmerola, Comayagua, who will give air
support to the Granadero I manoeuvres, as they did in
the Ahuas Taras II manoeuvres. There are I34 CIA
agents in charge of giving support and advice and directing the actions of their mercenaries and of the
Nicaraguan counter-revolution. Three hundred men
from the 224th Military Intelligence Battalion of Fort
Stewart, Georgia, with 12 Mohawk QU:l aircraft and
seven N/D helicopters are carrying out reconnaissance
flights in Salvadorian and Honduran airspace in support
of the Southern-Command activities.

8. May I ask the international community if the Nicaraguan people’s alarm is not justified in the face of the
increased military presence of the United States in
a Central American country which it has turned into
a “hired” republic where it is building an infrastructure for aggression. May I ask the international community whether the Nicaraguan people are not justifiably alarmed at the large-scale military manoeuvres
which have been going on uninterruptedly, with changesof nameonly, in the territories and waters of Central
America and the waters of the Caribbean. May I ask the
international community if the Nicaraguan people are
not justifiably alarmed at the. criminal mining of their
ports, which endangers international navigation and
makes explicit the economic blockade begun a number
of years ago. May I also ask the international community if the Nicaraguan people are notjustifiably alarmed
at the constant efforts of the American Administration
to obtain funds necessary to finance the mercenaries of
the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA).

12. The American military presence in Honduras has
not been only in the form of sending United States
military personnel; there has also been the building and
expanding of military facilities.

9. Regrettably, the shortsightedness and lack of political vision of the present American Administration,
together with the historical failure to understand the
realities of Nicaragua, continually lead it astray in its,
analyses while its mistakes become ever more dangerous. They believe that our alarm and concern at their
crimes will make us willing to negotiate; instead our
fighting spirit has only been increased and our antiimperialism and determination have made us willing to
fight to the death, whether against them or their puppets, in the war against our national sovereignty and
territorial integrity.

13. We shall not use our own words to describe the.
intentions of imperialism and its puppets. What better
way to unmask their objectives than to quote the very
words of the Senator from Tennessee, a member of the
Military Construction Sub-Committee of the Senate
Appropriations Committee, Jim Sasser.
“The facilities that have already been built or that
it is planned to build in Honduras will make it easier
ta carry out a war in the region. Those facilities could
in fact serve to encourage ,Honduran military corn-e
manders to attempt a military solution to their poiitical and diplomatic problems with Nicaragua.”

10. The American military presence is in its new
“land aircraft carrier”, bought a few years ago, the
name of which is not America or The New Jersey but
“The Honduras”.
It is not an invention of the Nicaraguan Government; it is a palpable reality which has
been amply proved by the American information media
and other sources. According to information that we
have, the present United States military presence in the
fraternal Republic of Honduras may be summed up as
folfows.

14. The Honduran military infrastructure has been
modified since the beginning of Honduran-United
States military manoeuvres in 1981. Fourteen military
basesand runways have been remodelled or expanded
in six Honduran departments.
15. During the Granadero I manoeuvres planned for
April, United States military engineers will expand
two more runways, at Cucuyagua and Jam&t& in
Copan and El Paraiso departments bordering on El
Salvador and Guatemala. They will also build three
troop-training centres and will install complex 40-channel satellite-communications equipment at the Palmerola base.

11. There are ..150men of the Green Beret special
forces battalion in charge of training counterinsurgency
forces and classical infantry among Hondurans and Salvadorians in a special military training centre inPuerto
Castilla, department of Colon. There are 150men of the
Tactical Air Command in charge of the functioning and
management of the Ule Ridge radar station, Department of Francisco Morazan. One hundred men of the
special combat group from the naval base at Norfolk,
Virginia, are in charge of the management and operation of the Tigre Ridge radar base. There are 600 men
from the Engineer Battalion of Fort Bragg, North
Carolina, in charge of enlarging the runways in San
Lorenzo, El Aguacate, Puerto Lempira and Palmerola,

16. Already under construction in the Honduran
province of El Valle are barricades against armoured
vehicles, as well as radar stations. The highway from
Mocordn to Puerto Lempira is being remodelled and
expanded, as is the highway from Los Trojes to Cifuentes. Those highways border the Jalapa valley in Nic2

r

araguan territory, which has been a priority objective of
the counter-revolutionary
and mercenary forces operating in Honduras.

eluding in June. S-mall land units of the United States
Army, made up of 100 to 200 soldiers, will be deployed
in regions of Honduras very close to the borders with
Nicaragua and with El Salvador, and what we might
call mini-manoeuvres
will be going on on a permanent
basis.

17. United States military assistance to Honduras has
increased significantly since 1980. In 1980 it amounted
to $3.7 million,
and it increased to approximately
$40 million in 1983. This year, 1984, $41 million has
been approved, and the Reagan Administration
has
requested the appropriation of an additional $37 million
in assistance.

23. Indeed, both in Central America and in the Caribbean, the United States, starting in April, will carry out
the largest military manoeuvres ever held in Central
America’s territory and waters, as well as in the Caribbean Sea. It will even try to involve other countries of
the area and thus attempt to exceed its performance in
the past when it made notorious use of its well-known
puppets. In these Granadero I and Ocean Venture II
manoeuvres, thousands of United States soldiers will
be mobilized on our region’s lands and waters, as well
as hundreds of combat planes, including B-52 bombers,
and dozens of warships. In addition, on this occasion
manoeuvres in Honduran territory will be carried out
not only in areas close to the Nicaraguan border, but
also in areas close to the El Salvador border.

18. Furthermore,
as part of its advice and military
training, the United States has sent Honduras 89 mobile
training groups, 40 Huey helicopters, six T-28 planes,
nine A-37 planes, 11 landing-craft, 10 “Pinafia” speedboats, 24 howitzers and, in this year only, more than
30 tons of war material, including thousands of M-16
rifles, ammunition,
uniforms and camping equipment.
It is important to point out that all the military equipment being transported to Honduras in the joint military
manoeuvres with the United States is left in that country as a gift and is not counted in the assistance budget
approved through normal channels.

24. As an immediate result of the massive and permanent United States military presence in Honduras,
there has been an accelerated increase in the military
operations of the CIA mercenaries from bordering territories, especially Honduras, where they have the unconditional support of the army and the Government of
the country.

19. Furthermore,
the various naval and military manoeuvres and exercises being carried out by the armies
of the United States and Honduras throughout this
period and aimed, as they themselves admit, at intimidating the Sandinist popular revolution and the Central
American re.volutionary movement, and the building of
military bases and training centres for the Salvadorian
army and the counter-revolutionary
gangs all reveal the
interventionist policy of the United States in our region,

25. That, in turn, has resulted in the proliferation
of counter-revolutionary
bases and camps in neighbouring territories, where training and resupplying is
going on systematically.
I wish to make clear to the
members of the Council that my Government will continue to believe in the good intentions of the Government of Costa Rica and in its constant and active
neutrality, and, for that reason, we maintain our understanding that the camps located in its territory do not
have the official support of its Government but that, on
the contrary, it is the CIA and its mercenaries that are
trying to create political problems between our two
countries. We hope that the two peoples and Govemments, with the necessary maturity and independence,
will be able to contribute to a relaxation of the tensions
in the area and to an improvement
in our bilateral
relations, thereby promoting peace and progress in
Central America.

20. The joint United States-Honduras
military and
naval exercises, Big Pine II, which lasted seven
months, are but one expression of the military involvement of the United States in Honduras in the past
four years. After the spectacular end of those manoeuvres, a whole military infrastructure remained behind,
practically turning Honduras into a country under military occupation. Approximately
5,500 United States
troops took part in the exercises on land, with the
assistance of the United States Navy and Air Force,
which raised to almost 15,000 the number of troops in
the area.
21. Once the Big Pine II manoeuvres werecompleted,
the United States did not,hesitate to revea1 its intention to continue to consolidate its military presence in
Honduras. Commander Amie Schossboy, stationed in
the Southern Command, in the Panama Canal Zone,
said, “Plans exist to continue military exercises until
1988.”

26. On the other hand, we are absolutely certain that
our region is now in a particularly
critical and difftcult period and that at any time this could lead to a
conflict with serious consequences. That is why, in
order to alert the international community, I shall now
give a detailed list of the location of these various
camps in Honduran territory and shall describe the
specific acts of aggression of which we have been the
victim since the last Council meeting on this subject
[2513rh meeting], early in February.

22. As a further demonstration
of its military force
with the clear objective of intimidation,
and seeking
results favourable to its interventionist
policy in .El
Salvador, Reagan Administration
officials said that the
United States will carry out further small-scale military
manoeuvres in Honduras, beginning in March and con-

27. There are now 15 counter-revolutionary
camps in
Honduran territory being used by the CIA to train its
3

Somozist mercenaries against our country, all along the
border with Nicaragua. I shall now read out the list of
those camps.

ruary, two fast launches of the Pirafia type, coming
from Honduran territory, launched a 15-minute attack
against Punta San Jose, in the Chinandega department.
On 14 February, a counter-revolutionary
group of undetermined
size, coming from Honduran
territory,
harassed the border village of Santo Tomas de1 Nance,
in the Chinandega department, for 10 minutes and sabotaged an electric power station, leaving the village
without any electricity. On 16 February, a group of
30 members of the Honduran army, using M-60 machine guns, 81-mm mortars and rifles, attacked the
village of Las Papayas, 2 kilometres to the north of El
Espino. On 24 February, members of the Honduran
army harassed the village of El Ranchon, located
5 kilometres to the north-west of Cinco Pinos in the
Chinandega department. No damage was reported. On
the same day, two fast launches of an undetermined
type tried to penetrate close to the fuel storage facilities
at El Bluff, in the Zelaya department, but were driven
off by our troops. The enemy withdrew in a southerly
direction. On 29 February, a counter-revolutionary
group of undetermined size harassed the frontier posts
of San Juan de1 Norte, on our southern border. On the
same day, members of the Honduran army used smallarms fire to harass the border post of La Ceiba, located
5 kilometres to the west of Somotillo, in the Chinandega
department.

28. First, there is the “Las Tunas” camp, located
11 kilometres to the west of El Espino in Honduran
territory; it has 200 counter-revolutionaries.
Second,
there is the “Cerro Las Uvitas” camp, 13 kilometres
to the north of Santo Tomas de1 Norte in Honduran
territory,
with 300 counter-revolutionaries.
Third,
there is the “Cacamuya”
camp, which is 15 kilometres
to the south of El Espino in Honduran territory and
has 100 counter-revolutionaries.
Fourth, there is the
“Santa Rita” camp, 9 kilometres to the south of El
Espino in Honduran territory; it has 300 counter-revolutionaries.
The fifth camp is called “Las Dificultades”. It is 1 kilometre to the north of the town of Las
Dificultades in Honduran territory, and it has 200 counter-revolutionaries.
Sixth, there is the “La Lodoza”
camp, which is 17 kilometres to the north of the village of San Fernando in Honduran territory and has
200 counter-revolutionaries.
Seventh, there is the “San
Jose” camp, 13 kilometres to the north of the village of
San Fernando in Honduran territory, with 500 counterrevolutionaries.
The eighth camp is called “Nubarrones”. It is 13 kilometres to the west of Jalapa in
Honduran territory and has 250 counter-revolutionaries. Ninth, there is the “Las Mercedes” camp. It is
1 kilometre to the north of Trojes in Honduran territory and has 60 counter-revolutionaries.
Tenth, there
is the “Quebrada de Oro” camp, 22 kilometres northeast of Jalapa in Honduran territory, with 700 counterrevolutionaries.
Eleventh, there is the “Buena Vista”
camp, located 19 kilometres to the north-east of Jalapa
in Honduran territory, with 110 counter-revolutionaries. The twelfth camp is the “Las Vegas” camp. It is
2 kilometres to the north of the mouth of the Poteca
river in Honduran territory and has 200 counter-revolutionaries. Thirteenth, there is the “Banco Grande”
camp, 39 kilometres north-east of the village of Murra
in Honduran territory, with 570 counter-revolutionaries. The fourteenth camp is called “Rus Rus”. It is
located 35 kilometres to the north-west of the village of
Leymus in Honduran territory and has 300 counterrevolutionaries.
Fifteenth, there is the “Auka” camp,
27 kilometres to the north-east of Waspan in Honduran
territory, with 100 counter-revolutionaries.

32. On 1 March, a counter-revolutionary
group
harassed from Honduran territory the frontier post of
Leymus, in northern Zelaya. On 3 March, members of
the Honduran army launched a 15-minute attack on the
frontier post of La Ceiba. On the same day, an olivedrab helicopter flew over the port of Potosi, in the
Chinandega department,
at an altitude of approximately 1,000 metres, attacking its installations with
six rockets. No material or human damage was reported. Also on 3 March, two Pescusa motorized vessels came into contact with mines near El Bluff. On
3 March, 50 Honduran army troops attacked the frontier post of Las Minitas, three kilometres north-east of
Somotillo, in the department of Chinandega.
33. On 5 March, two Pirafia speedboats raided the
Potosi sector of the department of Chinandega, with
undetermined air support and an artillery launch, which
opened fire on Sandinist naval vessels moored there,
wounding six comrades and killing one; and an undetermined
number of counter-revolutionary
troops
attacked from Honduran territory the villages of Leymus and Waspan in northern Zelaya.

29. I think it is worth pointing out that the names
I have just read out are not unknown to the diplomatic
missions to the United Nations; on various occasions
the United States press has accurately reported about
this.
.,

34. On 6 March, two Cessna aeroplanes flew from
Honduras and attacked the frontier post of Leymus
in northern Zelaya; Honduran army troops launched a
20-minuteattack
on the frontier post of El Naranjo, five
kilometres north-west of Somotillo in the department
of Chinandega; counter-revolutionary
elements and
Honduran army troops attacked, with small arms and
81-mm mortar fire, the community of Vado Ancho, one
kilometre south of Santo Tomas de1 Norte, causing the
death of an 11-month-old girl; and two Pirafia speed-

30. I shall now summarize the acts of aggression committed against Nicaragua in the period between 4 February and 29 March 1984.
31. On 4 February, a group of counter-revolutionaries and members of the Honduran army attacked,
from Honduran territory, the border port of La Tablazon, 5 kilometres to the.north of Dipilto. On 12 Feb4

boats attacked the military unit stationed at Montelimar
in the department of Managua and then withdrew to the
South.

41. On 28 March,
the Panamanian
freighter
Homin No. 7 was attacked with 50-mm guns by a Piraiia speedboat from Honduras. On 6.50 p.m. on that
same day, the fishing boat Aracely Pe’rez struck a mine
in Corinto and sustained serious damage to its stem.

35. On 7 March, two speedboats, with helicopter support, attacked the Sandinist naval unit and the frontier
post at San Juan de1 Sur with cannon fire, small arms
fire and four rockets. On 8 March, the Panamanian
vessel Norcaribe hit a mine in the port of Cot-into and
was seriously damaged. On 9 March, an undetermined
number of Somozist mercenaries based in Honduran
territory in the San Jeronimo sector, in co-ordination
with Honduran army troops, attacked, with mortars
and various kinds of small arms fire, the military installations at El Naranjo, four kilometres north of Somotillo.

42. On 29 March,
two Pi&ta-type
speedboats
attempted to lay mines along the Pacific coast but were
taken by surprise and driven off by Nicaraguan coast
guard vessels, which hit one of them, setting it on fire.
At 5.00 a.m. on that same day, an undetermined number of Honduran troops, operating from Honduran territory, attacked Catarina sector, three kilometres from
La Ceiba. They also harassed the La Ceiba observation
post, five kilometres
from Somotillo,
with various
.artillery and 81-mm mortar fire. Fortunately,
there
were no casualties to mourn. Also on 29 March counter-revolutionary
groups operating from Honduras
attacked and sabotaged Salto Grande in the Bonanza
sector of northern Zelaya, damaging an electricitygenerating dam and thus harming the economy of the
Miskito population. They were subsequently driven off
by our forces; several counter-revolutionaries
were
killed or wounded and the remainder fled towards
Wuapuc territory in Honduras. Also on the same date,
two Nicaraguan fishing boats in Cot-into harbour were
seriously damaged after hitting two mines.

36. On 10 March, a lo-man Honduran army patrol
waged a five-minute attack against the La Reforma
observation post, five kilometres north-west of Somotillo; and a group of approximately
30 to 40 Somozist
mercenaries, jointly
with Honduran
army troops,
waged a one-hour attack with AK and FAL rifles
against the La Minita observation post, three kilometres north-west of Somotillo.
37. On 11 March, a group of Somozist mercenaries, of
undetermined size and originating from Honduran territory, attempted to sabotage the Villanueva electric
substation, 10 kilometres south-west of Somotillo, by
firing RPG-7 rocket launchers. They neither hit their
target nor caused any damage.

43. On 30 March-today,
that is-at 5.50 a.m., there
was an explosion in Cot-into, between Buoys One and
Two. The Nicaraguan vessel Alma Sultana, which was
engaged in dredging, was seriously damaged as a result;
two reservist comrades were wounded and a member of
the Sandinist People’s Army was killed.

38. On 12 March, a group of mercenaries, also of
undetermined size and originating from Honduran territory, destroyed with explosives several electric
power pylons two kilometres north-west of Somotillo,
subsequently returning to Honduras.

44. This detailed account reveals not only the presence of and increase in military camps in Honduran
territory, but also the aggression, attacks and violations of our territory, our air space and our territorial
waters. We have presented it because we consider it
very important that the international
community
be
made aware of the factors which constitute this new
phase of the aggression.

39. On 25 March, an undetermined
number of
Honduran troops attacked, from Honduran territory,
Sandinist People’s Army units five kilometres southwest of Somotillo, firing forty 81-mm mortar shells; and
combined Honduran army and counter-revolutionary
forces based on Honduran territory carried out an artillery and mortar attack against the Nicaraguan community of La Ceiba, five kilometres north-west of Somotillo.

45. First of all, attacks and other incidents have been
taking place daily against our borders and against our
ports. Secondly, we are aware of increasingly direct
participation
in these attacks by the Honduran army,
whether acting alone or in support of the counter-revolutionary groups. Thirdly, it is important to emphasize
the use of sophisticated equipment, both aircraft and
boats, which far exceeds the technical capacity of not
just the mercenaries and counter-revolutionary
elements but also of the Honduran Army. Consequently,
this implies an increasingly significant involvement of
the great Power to the north-the
United States.

40. On 27 March, 30 Honduran army troops attacked,
with small-arms fire and from Honduran territory, a
Sandinist People’s Army patrol passing through the
Loma de 10s Pastores sector, one kilometre south ‘of
Santo Tomas de1 Nance in the department of Chinandega; and in the naval sector of Corinto two Pirafiatype speedboats from Honduran waters attacked a Nicaraguan coast guard vassel on patrol off the port of
Corinto. At the time of the attack two aircraft overflew
the area with their lights extinguished. As a result of this
criminal attack, two sailors were wounded, and at present one of them is in critical condition.

46. Barely two weeks ago the Co-ordinating Bureau
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries adopted a
communique
[S/26422, annex] recalling the Political
Declaration of the Seventh Conference of Heads of _
State or Government of Non-Aligned
Countries [see
5

S/1567.5 and Corr.1 and 2, annexl. held at New Delhi
in March 1983, which denounced the threats and acts of
intimidation
and aggression against Nicaragua,. the utilization of the territory of foreign countries in and outside the region as bases for aggression and the training
of counter-revolutionary
forces and the commission of
terrorist actions and sabotage. It also expressed its
profound concern over the new escalation of such actions and condemned the laying of mines in the ports
of Nicaragua, stating further its firm opposition to
any measure designed to blockade any country of the
region.

51. One week after that incident, on 28 March, the
vessel Znderchaser, of Liberian registry, hit a mine
while leaving the port of Corinto, causing it to explode.
Nicaraguan authorities are now assessing the damaged
sustained by that vessel.
52. Yesterday, as I have already mentioned, two Nicaraguan vessels in the harbour of Corinto were seriously damaged when they hit two mines. Fortunately,
on that occasion there were no casualties; however,
both vessels were virtually destroyed.
53. In addition to irreparable loss of human life and
extensive material damage, these actions have had
grave consequences
for Nicaraguan
international
trade. A number of freighters of various nations have
decided not to unload merchandise in the port of Corinto and, instead, do so in Puerto Caldera, in Costa
Rica, thus jeopardizing normal loading and off-loading
operations in our country.

47. When that communique
was adopted at United
Nations Headquarters, here in New York, a number of
incidents had already taken place which, apart from
causing casualties and substantial material damages,
had endangered international
navigation.
48. These grave incidents arising from the indiscriminate mining of our ports and the combination of air and
sea attacks against those ports and other economic and
military targets, under the guidance and with the financing and logistic support of the CIA, began, as
I have pointed out, on 25 February, when a Pirafiatype launch from El Bluff, on the Nicaraguan Atlantic
coast, scattered a number of mines which, the next day,
caused the sinking of the Nicaraguan motor vessel Pescasa 15, wounding two comrades. The next day, the
motor vessel Pescasa 23 hit two mines and was totally destroyed, with nine comrades wounded and two
others missing.

54. This strategy of terror involving
the use of
T-28 aircraft and-high-speed Piraria boats, as well as
the mining of our territorial waters, which reflects a
turning-point in the methods of the “covert war” being
waged against our country, is the most tangible example of the State terror that has been unleashed by the
current United States Government against our people
and Government. This is a violation of the most elementary norms of international
law, which must be faithfully respected by all States-particularly
when the
State involved is a great Power and a permanent member of the Security Council.

49. On 1 March this indiscriminate mining of our ports
also began to affect vessels of other nationalities.
A Dutch dredging vessel, Geoponte VI, which was
carrying out dredging operations in the port of Corinto
under Dutch Government financing granted to the Government of Nicaragua, was damaged from the blast of
an underwater explosion. This explosion resulted in
four wounded, among them two Dutch workers, and
the loss of more than $1 million for the Dutch company.
On 7 March the freighter Los Car&es, of Panamanian
registry, was damaged by a mine explosion as it was
leaving the port of Corinto, causing injuries to a number
of Mexican and Panamanian sailors.

55. The increasingly brazen use of State terrorism
by the United States Government, through the CIA,
means that it has run out of pretexts against our revolution and also lost all hope it had placed in its mercenaries and its Somozist counter-revolutionaries,
whom
it has, without success, for months and months supported to the tune of millions of dollars, even taking that
money from its own people.
56. The latest actions suggest to us that the Reagan
Administration
intends to proceed with a military
blockade of Nicaragua. The international
community
has the responsibility to restrain a Government which,
abusing its economic and military power, is resorting
ever more openly to force to resolve international conflicts, under pretexts that are as implausible as they are
dangerous.

50. While we were still alerting the international community to the gravity of these incidents, and no more
than 13 days after the Non-Aligned Movement had condemned such acts, the Soviet vessel Lugansk, which
was transporting petroleum to our country, upon entering the port of Sandino was seriously damaged by the
explosion of a mine with which it had come into contact. As a result, five Soviet sailors were injured, adding
to the list of Dutch, Mexican and Central American
sailors who had previously been innocent victims of
these acts of sabotage carried out by the American
Administration
against the Nicaraguan Government
through covert operations currently being publicly discussed in the United States Senate.

57. Moreover, not content with the damages it has
inflicted on our people, the Reagan Administration
is
planning to increase its military assistance to its freedom fighters, who every day kill men, women;elderly
persons and children in my country. Two weeks ago
that Administration
announced its decision to appropriate $21 million for the CIA mercenaries, thus fully
disclosing not just its determination to press ahead with
realizing its criminal plans against Nicaragua, but also
its indifference to and disregard for the American peo6
.

.

ple, international public opinion and the peace-making
efforts of the Contadora- Group. Those $21 million
would be obtained by cutting that amount from a bill
intended to provide $200 million to impecunious American senior citizens and to improve the already precarious situation of the country’s elderly, thus showing
that the Administration
is prepared to sacrifice its own
citizens to its warmongering policy and the attainment
of its military options.

62. The Contadora Group has continued in its efforts
in its quest for peace in- the region. However, the
Group’s hard work has been seriously impeded because, consistent with their friends in the north, certain
Central American countries have refused to enter into
concrete commitments
that would once and for all remove the spectre of war which has afflicted the region
in recent years. Moreover, the main obstacle to the
Contadora Group’s efforts and the quest for peace is the
United States Government.

58. The international community cannot remain passive in face of the buildup of the United States military
presence in El Salvador, where by its interference it is
preventing a reasonable political solution to the civil
war in that fraternal country, a solution that would help
get to the bottom of. the region’s crisis. Recently the
Non-Aligned Movement, concerned over the deterioration of the conflict owing to continued foreign intervention, expressed its hope that it would cease and
appealed to those involved to adopt a constructive position and to refrain from providing military assistance
that might impede that process.

63. The height of cynicism is the fact that President
Reagan’s new special envoy to Central America, before
setting off for our region recently said that there was, on
the one hand, no incompatibility
between the military
activities of the United States in the region and the
pressures on Nicaragua and, on the other, the activities
of the Contadora Group. He went on to add that Contadora was a Latin American initiative and that security
problems required another kind of response, namely,
the kind of support that the United States Administration intends to lend Contadora.

59. Unfortunately,
even though it might have been
expected, the United States reply continues to be the
building up of its military presence in that country.
In the last few days it has tightened its military grip
around El Salvador. Let me give a few brief examples.
It has sent the aircraft carriers America and John F.
Kennedy to the Atlantic and the Pacific; it has stationed
2,500 soldiers along the frontier between Honduras and
El Salvador; it has mounted counter-insurgent agents in
the north-east strip of El Salvador. It is continuing with
its $I-million-a-day
military aid which serves only to
add to the long and painful list of more than 50,000 Salvadorian deaths, and it has increased its spy overflights. With regard to those spy flights, we have all
been informed today by The New York Times that
American officials accept that this sort of thing has been
going on for some time in order to facilitate the military
efforts of the Salvadorian army.

64. The special envoy holds out peace laurels in one
hand while brandishing the sword of war in the other.
This is the cynical statement of an official, but it clearly
reflects the ‘American position in the sense of not only
not taking seriously the peace-making efforts of the
Contadora Group, but of impeding those efforts.
65. It was our full understanding of the situation that
led Commander Daniel Ortega Saavedra, Co-ordinator
of the Governing Junta of National Reconstruction
of
Nicaragua, to make an emergency trip recently to the
fraternal Republic of Mexico, where he requested of
President de la Madrid implementation
of urgent and
exceptional measures by the Contadora Group to prevent war in Central America. It was also that same
concern and same devotion to peace on the part of
Nicaragua which prompted our sending missions to the
other Contadora countries-that
is, Colombia, Panama
and Venezuela-as
well as to other countries of the
region.

60. The false democratic facade that the United States
has sought to give the so-called elections in El Salvador
can but make the situation there more difficult and
complex. Mr. Reagan’s sole objective is to be able
to justify the military
assistance buildup, but let
Mr. Reagan not believe that El Salvador is Grenada, or
that by sending in his Marines he can win a victory like
the pyrrhic victory obtained in Grenada.

66. My country believes that the efforts to achieve
agreement in the region only among the Central American countries, without taking into account the United
States, could lead us to a possible failure of the already
difficult negotiations that have been taking place in the
Contadora Group. Peace in Central America requires
as a sine qua non the clear and definitive commitment of
the United States, which so far, besides pretending to
be a mere spectator in the region’s crisis, has in fact
brought to bear all kinds of political pressures to prevent a genuine, just and lasting solution to the conflicts
of the region. Furthermore,
not content with that and
contrary to the utterances of the Contadora Group, it
has stepped up its dirty, undeclared war against my
country through the CIA mercenaries and has significantly increased its military presence in the area.

61. The only reasonable solution for the Salvadorian
people which the international community is aware of,
and on which various democratic Governments have
already expressed their views, is a dialogue between all
the representative forces, the Farabundo Martl National Liberation Front (FMLN), the Democratic Revolutionary Front (FDR) and the Government,
which
should have as its object the formation of a broadly
representative national government. We thus urge the
international
community and, in particular, the Contadora Group to lend their good offices for the attainment of this object.

67. In an interview published in The New York Times,
the President of the.United States replied to the ques7

tion of how one could explain or justify United States
support for people who are trying to overthrow a Government with which the United States has diplomatic
relations, saying:

72. I wish only to remind President Reagan that it
would be good for his Administration
to reconsider its
errors and, having given them serious thought, to act
with the maturity that should properly characterize the
rulers of an empire such as that of the United States,
thus steering the world away from a holocaust with
incalculable consequences.

“I see no contradiction
between our suu~ort
for
the democratic Government of El Salvador *and the
Contras. We have told Nicaragua very clearly that
this would stop when they fulfil their promise, restore democracy and hold elections. Now pressure
has compelled them to say that they will hold elections, apparently next November. But so far there is
nothing to indicate that the elections will be anything
other than ‘rubber stamp’ elections, which characterize all totalitarian Governments.”

73. Mrs. KIRKPATRICK
(United States of America): Once again the Security Council has been called
into session to hear a complaint by the Government
of Nicaragua against the Government of the United
States. By now the Council must be quite familiar with
the thrust of the Nicaraguan complaint, it having been
put before this body in one form or another on some six
occasions over the past two years. The details change,
but the substance of the complaint remains essentially
the same-that
Nicaragua is the peaceable, innocent
victim of an aggression that is orchestrated by, if not
carried out by, the United States. Previously it had in
fact been suggested, last year and the year before, that
the United States was just on the verge of a massive
military invasion of Nicaragua. That charge is absent
this year, but the essence of the complaint has changed
little beyond that important specific.

68. In this way, Mr. Reagan seeks to appoint himself
legislator, judge and hangman with regard to the entire
internal political life of a country. Consequently, he is
acting as an international outlaw. His conduct is in the
mould of what is known in current international
doctrine as “State terrorism”.
My country reserves the
right to do whatever it deems fit to demand in due
course the compensation that in justice should properly
be accorded to it for the devastation and killings resulting from the criminal policy of this international
terrorist. In the mean time, we request this supreme
body to take the necessary immediate action to stop
war in Central America, because it has the competence
and the responsibility.

74. It is probably not surprising that the Nicaraguan
complaint comes before the Council in the wake of the
elections in neighbouring El Salvador-that
happened
in March 1982 as well. It happens virtually every time
we have a debate on Central American policy in the
United States Congress.

69. Before I conclude my statement I should like to
ask the representative of the United States-as
she
is one of the most eminent and closest collaborators
of the current Administration-to
explain to me what
moral authority is possessed by Mr. Reagan, who, it
should be remembered, was elected in 1980 by less than
30 per cent of the United States electorate, to demand
that we should introduce in Nicaragua political system X or political system Y. Moreover, what right does
he have to try to do so by brute force, reverting to the
era of gunboat diplomacy and the big stick?

75. The Marxist-Leninist
Government in Nicaragua
cannot have been happy with the election in El Salvador. Indeed, we have just heard the representative of
Nicaragua suggest that the elections in El Salvador only
make the situation more difficult and complex. One
must ask: difficult for whom, complex for what?
76. The Nicaraguan Government itself promised democracy, national independence and self-determination to the people of Nicaragua before that Government
came to power. Its members made those promises in
writing; they made them in public arenas; they made
solemn pledges as they sought help from the Organization of American States (OAS), from the United States
and from their neighbours. And, indeed, Sandinists
received help from the OAS, from the United States
and from Nicaragua’s neighbours in their efforts to
overthrow the dictatorship headed by Anastasio Somoza. It is interesting that today, as last year and
the year before, the Government of Nicaragua, which
sought and received help from those regional groups
and those neighbours, does not appeal to those regional
groups and those neighbours in the hemisphere to help
it with its current problems. Could it be because they
are too well informed?

70. I should also like the United States representative
to explain to me who appointed President Reagan as the
champion of liberty and the guardian of democracy, and
who authorized him to establish the parameters determining the concepts of democracy and freedom, which
in his case, however, cover a wide range, starting in
El Salvador and ending in South Africa.
71. I should also be glad if the renresentative of the
United States would eiplain to me on what basis President Reagan seeks to appoint himself a defender of
human rights in the world, when there are grave social
imbalances in his own country, despite its being a great
economic Power, when the Hispanic and black minorities in that country are third-class citizens, treated with
contempt, and when beggars sleep at night in the streets
of Manhattan near the manhole covers to protect themselves against the harsh winter.

77. Nicaragua began the process of militarization
and
the introduction of foreign advisers in Central America.
Nicaragua began the process of destabilization
of its
8

neighbours. I have no interest today in laying all the
facts of these matters before the Council. The Council is presumably familiar with most of them. I would
just point out, concerning the process of militarization
of Central America, which was begun by the Govemment of Nicaragua, that today Nicaragua continues to
increase its army and its stores of weapons. It now
has some 107,000 persons under arms, including the
army, the reserves and the militia. It continues to receive weapons from diverse places in the Soviet bloc,
augmenting an already formidable arsenal of tanks,
heavy artillery, armoured personnel carriers and multiple rocket launchers.

thousand Miskito Indians are fleeing from the Sandy
Bay Norte area of Nicaragua. this is north of Puerto
Cabezas, about which we have, heard a good deal.
Those thousands of Miskitos this day fleeing Nicaragua
are headed towards Honduras, fleeing from the camps
into which they have been forced by the Nicaraguan
Government in gross violation of their human rights. As
they flee, knowing that they will live under hard physical conditions in Honduras, they are being bombed by
Sandinist push-and-pull type aircraft. They are being
harassed, tired upon. Every effort is being made to
prevent their exodus from Nicaragua, as every effort
was made to prevent their living in freedom and peace
in Nicaragua.

78. I would mention in addition to the process of
militarization
that Nicaragua began the process of
introducing
foreign military personnel into Central
America. Today it maintains much the largest contingent of foreign military advisers in the area: some
3,500 or more Cuban and other military and security
advisers, more than 100 Soviet and other Eastern bloc
advisers, Libyan advisers, PLO advisers, some 5,000 to
10,000 Cuban and other civilian advisers, an increasing
number of whom are young males who have completed
military training.

83. The Government of Nicaragua has apparently still
not learned that those who wield swords against their
own people and their neighbours risk having swords
turned against them.
84. Nicaragua comes to this Council to seek protection while itundermines
and overthrows neighbouring
Governments and represses its own people. It comes to
the Council speaking of mercenaries who attack the
Government of Nicaragua. We have in our time heard
from totalitarian Governments many examples of the
efforts of Governments to dehumanize their own people, to declare their own fellow citizens non-people.
Totalitarians
regularly define those who oppose them
as non-people. The counter-revolutionaries
described
by the representative of Nicaragua are Nicaraguans.
They are Nicaraguans who today, as in the past, are
seeking the democratic solutions that they have so long
sought. They are seeking democracy and freedom in
their Government, just as they sought democracy and
freedom when they overthrew the previous dictator of
Nicaragua only to see him replaced by new military
dictators.

79. Nicaragua began the process of destabilizing its
neighbours in the hemisphere. Again I have no desire
today to give the Council a comprehensive list of Nicaragua’s efforts. There may be time for that in the
course of this discussion. I would simply remind the
Council that Nicaragua continues to assist guerrillas in
other countries, principally,
but not exclusively, the
FMLN and FDR in El Salvador, through shipments of
arms and other supplies, through training and through
the provision of command and control centres.
80. Nicaragua comes before this Council once again,
as six times in the past, seeking to prevent its neighbours from defending themselves against Nicaraguanbased efforts at the subversion and overthrow of neighbouring countries.

85. As I said, we can understand that the elections
in El Salvador cannot have been a happy occasion
for the Government
of Nicaragua. The spectacle of
hundreds of thousands of Salvadorian workers and
peasants voting enthusiastically
in a closely contested
election represented a repudiation of the Nicaraguanbacked guerrillas who had denounced and tried to sabotage the election. It represented a repudiation of the
Nicaraguan style of democracy, which substitutes the
will of the Government for the consent of the people. It
represents an embarrassing contrast with the Sandinist
dominated and controlled election process, so-called,
now under way in Nicaragua.

81. It cannot be, as we have said before, that one
country has the right to destabiiize by violence its
neighbours and that they have no right to defend themselves. It cannot be that one country, Nicaragua, has
the right to introduce foreign arms and advisers to
destabilize its neighbours and that they have no right to
defend themselves. It cannot be that one country, Nicaragua, has the right to the most advanced technical
material and that they have the right to only primitive
weaponry.

86. Indeed, the nature of the conflict in Central
America is illuminated
by the policies of the Govemments of El Salvador and Nicaragua as they search for
solutions to the conflicts which afllict their countries.
In response to the declaration by the armed opposition
in Nicaragua-that
is, the Contras, the famous counterrevolutionaries-that
they were prepared to lay down
their arms if they could only participate in peaceful
political competition
in Nicaragua .and settle Nicara-

82. The Government
of Nicaragua
continues its
efforts at internal repression as well as external destabilization.
Again I have no desire today to take up
the time of the Council with a full description of Nicaragua’s internal repression in the last year, since we
last discussed this matter. I would, however, bring to
the attention of the Council and others who are interested the fact that at this time, as we meet here, several
9

gua’s political questions through the ballot box, the
Nicaraguan Government announced that such opponents would not be permitted to participate under any
circumstances and would in fact be tried in absentia as
criminals.

singer and consisting of 12 distinguished American
citizens from both political parties representing very
diverse points of view, undertook an intensive, sixmonth examination of the Central American crisis. The
Commission heard testimony from hundreds of expert
witnesses. It made on-the-spot visits to each of the five
Central American countries and to the four countries
comprising the Contadora Group and reviewed voluminous documents.

87. The Government of El Salvador, to the contrary,
took exactly the opposite position and actually invited
the armed opposition to participate in the election on
condition that they laid down their arms and agreed to
peaceful political competition. The Government of Nicaragua continued to provide arms, supplies, training
and other forms of assistanceto Salvadorian guerrillas
dedicated precisely to sabotaging the political process
and imposing a dictatorship in El Salvador.

92. Its conclusions and recommendations are the
product of as careful an examination of the problems
of Central America that we are likely to have for some
time. They form the basis of the Central American
Democracy, Peace and Development Initiative Act of
1984, which President Reagan has submitted to the
United States Congress. This bill represents a farreaching attempt to address the problems in Central
America comprehensively. It identifies the United
States firmly and unequivocally with the aspirations of
the peoples of Central America for social and economic
development, for democracy and human rights and for
a peaceful solution to the conflicts now plaguing the
region.

88. Since the beginning of this year Nicaraguan-supported terrorists in El Salvador have assassinatedthree
members of the Constituent Assembly, a military judge
and a campaign organizer. Under the slogan “Electoral
farce no, popular war yes**-how is that for a peaceful
solution?-the armed insurgents in El Salvador have
done everything possible to disrupt the elections and
reduce voter turn-out. They disenfranchised thousands
of voters by seizing and destroying their identity cards,
which are necessary for voting. They mined roads,
threatened drivers, threatened gas-station owners selling fuel. In some places citizens were told there would
be lots of bombs going off and that they had therefore
best stay away from polling places.

93. The fundamental conclusion of the Commission is
that the roots of the crisis in Central America are both
indigenous and foreign; the discontents are real and, for
much of the population, conditionsof life are miserable.
While these conditions invite indigenous revolution,
they have also been exploited by hostile outside forces
-specifically by Cuba, backed by the Soviet Union,
now operating through Nicaragua-which will turn any
revolution they capture into a dictatorship, threatening
the peace and stability of the region and robbing the
people of their hopes for liberty.

89. On election day the guerrillas attacked the towns
of Jucuapa, Chinameca, El Triunfo and Santa Clara as
the voting was taking place. On election eve they killed
soldiers stationed in Tejutepeque and prevented voting.
Guerrilla sabotage caused about 80 per cent of the
country to be blacked out over 12 hours immediately
preceding the opening of the polls. This loss of electrical power severely disrupted the final sorting and
dispatch of voting materials and obviously had an effect
on the timely arrival of voting materials to some polling
places.

94. The interrelationship of these problems is such,
the Commission concluded, that neither the military,
nor the political, nor the economic, nor the social
aspects of the crisis should be considered independently of the others. Without progress on the political,
economic and social fronts, peace on the military front
would be illusive and fragile. But unless the externally
supported insurgencies are checked and the violence
curbed, progress on those other fronts will also be
illusive and fragile. Progress in any one, therefore,
is not enough. All the sources of the crisis must be
addressed, and be addressed simultaneously.

90. None the less, despite all that, some 1.4 million
Salvadorians, over 75 per cent of all eligible voters, cast
their ballots. According to scores of firsthand reports
by election observers, they voted in freedom, with
genuine enthusiasm. The observer delegation from
Colombia called the election “an impressive demonstration of the will of the Salvadorian people to find
a democratic solution”-and its view was shared by
most observers.

95. The distinguished President of Costa Rica, Luis
Albert0 Monge, has characterized the report of the
National Bipartisan Commission on Central America as
“an intervention against misery and ignorance”. That,
surely, was the intention of the Commission: to call
upon the United States Government and the American
people to become fully engaged at the side of our Central American neighbours in the struggle against misery
and ignorance.

91. A democratic solution is also the chief, indeed
the sole, objective of United States policy in Central
America. Nothing more clearly illustrates the seriousness with which the United States has approached the
problems of Central America or the commitment of the
American people to finding a democratic solution to
those problems than the report of the National Bipartisan Commission on Central America. That Commission, chaired by former Secretary of State Henry Kis-

96. In order to combat injustice and poverty, the
Commission has proposed a series of bold measures
10

to support agricultural development, education, health
services, export promotion,
land reform, housing,
humanitarian
relief, trade credit insurance, and small
businesses and other activities. Because democracy is
essential to effective development,
special attention
will be given to increasing scholarships, leadership
training, educational exchanges and support for the
growth of democratic institutions.

Adherence to the overall agreement to those 21 points
would be required for membership in CADO.
100. In drawing up those recommendations
the Commission drew heavily on its consultation with the leaders of the Contadora countries. It declared that the
Contadora countries are engaged in a bold, new experiment; they deserve the gratitude and encouragement of
all the nations in the region. These are also the views of
the United States Government.

97. A programme of substantial assistance is proposed to revitalize the Central American Common
Market and the Central American Bank for Economic
Integration,
which made a major contribution
to the
region’s rapid economic growth in the 1960s and early
1970s and which today could stimulate increased intraregional trade and economic activity. To give structure,
consistency and continuing direction to this sustained
effort, the Commission proposed a high-level meeting
of United States officials with their Central American
counterparts to consider the creation of the Central
American Development
Organization
(CADO). This
organisation would provide guidance and review, as
well as assistance, for economic, social and political
development programmes of those Central American
nations eligible to join by reason of their commitment to
internal reform and democracy, as well as to external
non-intervention.
It is envisioned that other democracies outside the region would participate as well in
this major effort to channel external assistance to the
region.

101. As the Commission repeatedly emphasized, all
elements of the crisis must be addressed simultaneously. No short cuts were discovered, no gimmicks,
diplomatic or otherwise. Thus as one element of the
broad programme the report recommends increased
military
assistance, under proper conditions,
to
the Governments of El Salvador and Honduras. That
assistance will reinforce the diplomatic
effort by
helping create the conditions under which peaceful settlements may be reached and the objective of a better
life in freedom and national independence for all Central Americans successfully pursued.
102. In discussing Central America, there is a tendency sometimes to succumb to despair, especially by
those who know little about the region. But the Commission found everywhere “a hope for a democratic
future and a readiness to sacrifice towards that end”.
103. I believe the election just held in El Salvador
demonstrates as clearly as any single event could that
the people of that country have not succumbed to despair and that they are ready to sacrifice for a better,
brighter, democratic future. The Commission’s
report
stated:

98. The ,Commission
also squarely confronted the
dangers created by the unprecedented military buildup
in Nicaragua, the regime’s ideological commitment
to
the export of revolution and its military ties to the
Soviet Union and Cuba-dangers
which weigh heavily
on the neighbouring countries. I will not on this occasion, as I have said before, describe in detail this military buildup or demonstrate the extent of Nicaragua’s
intervention in neighbouring States or its militarization
and military ties. All those points are thoroughly covered in the Commission’s
report.

“The people of Central America have lived too
long with poverty, deprivation and violence. The
current turmoil must not be allowed to shatter their
hopes for a brighter future. They have endured too
many generations of misrule to let their aspirations
for democratic political development be dashed, in
this generation, on the rocks of fear, division and
violence.

99. What I wish to emphasize here is the Commission’s call for a vigorous diplomatic
strategy and a
negotiating
effort designed to resolve the conflict
and to include Nicaragua in a regional settlement that
would ensure lasting security guarantees, as well as
national independence for all the nations of Central
America. Such a settlement would be squarely based
on the principles contained in the 21-point proposal
of the Contadora Group [see S/16042, annex]. They
include: respect for sovereignty and non-intervention
verifiable commitments
to non-aggression and an end
to all attempts at subversion; limitations on arms and
sizes of armed forces; prohibition of all military forces,
bases and advisers of foreign nations; no‘military
forces, bases or advisers of non-Central American countries; commitment
to internal pluralism and free elections in all countries; provision for verification of all
agreements; and establishment of an inter-government
council, to meet regularly and review compliance.

“Not least, their own security and ours must no
longer be threatened by hostile Powers which seek
expansion of influence through the exploitation
of
misery.
“The crisis thus poses an urgent challenge to the
United States, but that challenge in turn presents us
with an opportunity, an opportunity to help the people of Central America translate their dreams of a
better and freer life into a reality.”
104. That is our wish. It is our only wish. The rest is
hard work, good will, fortitude and uncompromising
commitment
to democratic values and practices and a
respect for the principles embodied in the Charter of the
United Nations.
11

105. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Spanish]: The next speaker is the representative of Honduras. I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
106.

110. At the last meeting of the Security Council convened at Nicaragua’s request [2523th meeting] to deal
with attacks on its territory alleged to have been carried
out by military planes from Honduran territory, the
delegation of Honduras affirmed with complete certainty that such an accusation was entirely groundless.

Mr. FLORES

BERMUDEZ
(Honduras) [interMr. President, allow me on
this occasion, on behalf of the delegation of Honduras,
to congratulate you on your wise conduct this month of
the debates in this most important forum. Your broad
experience as a statesman guarantees a successful outcome of the Council’s work. At the same time I should
like to thank the members of the Council for allowingme to speak as it begins its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
pretation

from

Spanish]:

111. The facts have once again demonstrated that
Honduras was right and that the Nicaraguan charges
were irresponsible. Today we are faced with another
series of charges just as invalid as all the preceding
ones.
112. In the message from the Governing Junta of National Reconstruction
to the people of Nicaragua and
the world of 13 March of this year, distributed on that
same date as a Security Council document at the request of the representative
of Nicaragua [S/16413,
annex], among other slogans and groundless assertions
there appears the fanciful interpretation that they give
to the training activities that the Honduran armed forces are carrying out in co-operation with the United
States, and reality is falsified once again by alleging
certain designs aimed against El Salvador and Nicaragua. This argument has been repeated here yet again.

107. The Council is meeting forthe third time at the
urgent request of the Sandinist Government in order to
consider another repetitious montage of national political propaganda, resorted to by that Government almost as a matter of routine, notwithstanding the negative and fruitless experiences of the two previous
occasions the Council met on the subject.
108. Honduras has once again had to request the
Council to allow it to participate in the meeting on this
item, because it feels obliged, out of respect for the
Council, to provide it with as much information
as
possible in order for it to see how one of its members is
trying to distort and make use of this body for purposes
that do not best servethe re-establishment
of internal
peace in Nicaragua or the maintenance of peace and
security in Central America.

113. The Government of Honduras has on many occasions contacted the Sandinist Government to deplore
such systematic tactics that are at variance with proper
international conduct. We have also done this on various occasions before the OAS, this Council and the
United Nations General Assembly, where we have also
provided well-documented
replies refuting false charges of responsibility
for past events and tendentious
interpretations
of actions carried out by Honduras in
exercise of its full responsibility
over its territory. All
these accusations are being repeated once again today.
This is all part of the pathological lies resorted to by the
Sandinist regime.

109. With the same lack of decorum, the same strategy of diverting attention from its crisis at home, the
same purpose of preventing the process of bringing real
democracy to its authoritarian structures, the same aim
of continuing to attempt to deny on the one hand the
internal struggle being waged against that Government
by anti-Sandinist rebel forces based in Nicaraguan territory and on the other the presence of thousands of
foreign military technicians and advisers who direct the
Sandinist troops and distort the very identity of Nicaragua, with the same objective of covering up policies
of extermination
that have caused the mass exodus of
ethnic groups and the lack of respect for religious freedom, with the same intent of hiding the progressive
frustration of Nicaraguans at the Sandinist Govemment’s lack of respect for the fulfilment of the objectives or the bases of the revolution-political
pluralism,
a mixed economy and non-alignment-with
this same
strategy, these same intentions and purposes, the Sandinist Government has come here once again to denounce dangers and imaginary attacks on its territory
from the neighbouring States, trying to draw attention
to the region, to turn Central America into an area
subject to confrontation between the two major Powers
and, finally, to frustrate the diplomatic efforts that are
being made within the scope of the Contadora regional
peace process to build a climate of security, peace,
democracy and economic and social development in
Central America.

I14. Although Honduras has already submitted considerable detailed information,
we believe it is necessary once again to make clear that Honduras has a
constant and sincere desire for peace, as is shown by its
invariable and constructive participation
in the Con:
tadora Group. We state again that the measures that
have been taken to improve the professional level of the
armed forces of Honduras-including
the joint exercises carried out with members of the United States
Army-are
eminently defensive in nature and are designed to protect our sovereignty. This is in contrast to
the unconscionable arms race engaged in by Nicaragua
and to its policy of flagrant intervention in other countries of Central America, with the purpose of internationalizing the conflict in which it is involved today.
The military manoeuvres in ,which Honduran armed
forces are participating are not prohibited by the documents adopted by the Contadora Group-for
example, in the first document on the measures to be taken to
fulfil the commitments entered into in the Document of
Objectives, the Contadora Group proposed that there
should be a duty to report,to the other States on the
12

carrying out of manoeuvres. Honduras not only has
reported to the other States but has even extended
invitations to the countries of the Americas-including
Nicaragua-and
of Europe to observe the military exercises.

nal conflicts
cation.

it is facing, either by action or by impli-

120. The fact that the Sandinist Government
is
seeking to jeopardize the peace efforts of the Contadora
Group is reflected in these incidents. It is reflected also
in the request to convene the Security Council, since
the aim is to undermine the confidence of the other
Central American countries in the regional peace procedure: It is trying also to maintain in its country a war
psychosis by continuing to feed the voracious appetite
of its arms race and by its desire to make the Central
American region a scene of confrontation and ideological pressure between different blocs. This is of particular concern because of the unusual presence of
warships from outside the continent in the Caribbean, where Guatemala, Nicaragua and Honduras have
coastlines.

115. The achievement of peace, democracy, security
and co-operation for development in Central America is
the sole objective of the foreign policy of Honduras.
That is why we are seeking diplomatic solutions that
would eliminate the causes of the conflicts in the region.
That is a fact.
116. The Sandinist Government has an unequivocal
attitude: it seeks to create confrontation and thereby to
undermine the order and respect that should exist when
there are clearly delineated boundaries between the
Central American countries and when there is a regional peace procedure under way involving the five
Central American countries.

121. The fact that the Sandinist Government is intervening in neighbouring countries is confirmed by the
support, so far unsuccessful, it gives to the promotion of subversion in Honduras, and of the guerrillas in El Salvador by supplying them with weapons.
As part of this strategy, a week ago Commander Humbet-to Ortega Saavedra, Nicaragua’s Defence Minister,
announced the possibility that local guerrilla fighters
would mine the ports of the other Central American
countries, from Guatemala to Panama. This statement
is a new and very clear threat of the use of force against
other countries, in open violation of the Charter of the
United Nations. Moreover, it is an open admission that
the subversive groups attempting to destabilize Governments in the area are operating with the support and
under the control of the Nicaraguan Government,
as
Mr. Edgardo Paz Bamica, the Minister for External
Relations of Honduras, said in his firm message of
protest [S/16444. It was precisely in application of
Commander Ortega Saavedra’s statement that terrorist
acts were carried out in Tegucigalpa and San Pedro
Sula: five bombs exploded, leaving one person dead
and one wounded.

117. The many violations of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Honduras by Sandinist troops-as is
clear from the many protests made to the Government
of Nicaragua and communicated to the OAS and to the
United Nations-demonstrate
that that regime has no
respect for boundaries. An even more serious example
of this was furnished recently by the Sandinist Government when it unilaterally removed the monuments
delineating one part of the boundary between Honduras
and Nicaragua and moved them into Honduran territory, committing a series of abuses harmful to Honduran citizens. Notwithstanding
this flagrant violation of
the rules of international
law and the principles contained in the treaty delimiting
the respective boundaries, Honduras, in order not to inflame the situation
still further, has proposed to the Government of Nicaragua that a committee of engineers of both countries
be established to ensure that the monuments that have
been moved are quickly and permanently
put back
where they belong.
118. The Sandinist Government has on a number of
occasions also violated the territorial
sovereignty
of other Central American countries. As an example,
I would refer to the note addressed by Costa Rica to
Nicaragua and distributed on 2 March for the information of the States Members of the United Nations. In
that note, the Government
of Costa Rica protested
against a “flagrant violation’*
by Sandinist troops of
Costa Rican territory and stated that this cast suspicion
on the sincerity of the intentions of the Nicaraguan
Government to promote a relaxation of tension in the
area. Later, on 13 March, in the message of the Goveming Junta of Nicaragua already referred to, it was stated
that there were anti-Sandinist
bases of operation and
camps in Honduran territory. Similar statements have
been made today regarding other territories.

122. Honduras has been the victim of frenzied attacks
by the Sandinist Government.
Between 3 and 11 January, in only three incidents in Honduran territory,
11of our compatriots were killed. Since 3 February, the
Sandinist Government
has gone even further. In its
message of 13 March to the world, it appealed for
technical and military assistance, thereby making clear
its intention to continue to arm itself frantically,
at
the precise moment when the working Commission on
security affairs established under the Contadora procedure was to study the methods for applying a policy
for the control and reduction of armaments and troops
in order to restore a military balance in the area, to
establish international control machinery, to eliminate
the illegal traflic in weapons and to put an end to acts of
subversion and terrorism.

119. Honduras has formally appealed to the Govemment of Nicaragua to act with the wisdom required by
the circumstances, in order to avoid spreading the inter:

123. The Sandinist Government called for a meeting
of the Co-ordinating Bureau of the Movement of Non-

13

Aligned Countries, to which the representative of Nicaragua referred in his statement today. It was thus
trying to use that distinguished Movement, taking
advantage of being one of its members. We have had
an opportunity to read carefully the draft that Nicaragua submitted to the non-aligned countries and the
one that was finally adopted on 15 March. It should be
noted that, although that distinguished Movement did
give satisfaction to Nicaragua as a member, a number
of significant changes were made in the original draft
in order to include references to a number of matters
that Nicaragua had omitted-such as the great progress
made by a number of countries in Central America in
regard to elections, and the importance of using democratic procedures as tools for relaxation of regional
tension and for internal reconciliation. That is reflected
also in the Contadora communique of 28 February
[S/16394, annex].

trying to give priority to the solution of security problems which are of concern to itself alone. Nicaragua is
seeking to relegate to the background problems which
are of concern to other Central American countries,
such as weapons trafficking, support of all kinds for
sabotage, terrorism and destabilization against other
Central American Governments, the Nicaraguan arms
buildup, the large number of Nicaraguan troops, and
the growing presence in Nicaragua of Eastern-bloc
advisers. All those factors have made it necessary for
other countries to make preparations for adequate defence and for deterring Nicaragua from any direct
aggression, preparations which are all being made with
the full support of a free people, as is the case of
Honduras.
128. The 26 March communique to which I have referred also demonstrates that Nicaragua is trying to
stress the military presence in Central America of the
United States and to minimize the Soviet military presence, especially naval, and the Soviet-Cuban manoeuvres to be carried out in the Caribbean. Looking at the
communique in that light, it is clear that it isjust another
attempt by Nicaragua to justify in the eyes of the international community its acquisition of more weapons
and the buildup of its military personnel.

124. The Co-ordinating Bureau also recalled General
Assembly resolution 38/10, which reaffirms the overall
regional nature of the Central American conflict, condemns “the acts of aggression against the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of the States in
the region” -not just those cited by one of them-and
notes with satisfaction that the countries of the region
have agreed to establish or improve “democratic, representative and pluralist systems” through honest and
periodic electoral processes.

129. We hope that the Council, in its wisdom, will
continue to take a pragmatic approach to these problems and to play its proper role and that therefore it will
not allow itself to be used to interfere in action by
Central Americans and in the regional approach that we
have taken to resolve our problems. In that context, no
possible expression of opinion should disregard the
imperative need to encourage the Sandinist Govemment to behave with consistency, good faith and great
responsibility in what must be a serious position within
the Contadora process and a responsible position as a
member of the Security Council.

125. There is no doubt that there is now a keener
awareness of the facts of the situation in Central America, which is affecting a number of countries and which
the Sandinist Government has been trying to distort
with information prepared for that purpose, which
it disseminates through its participation in the NonAligned Movement. We welcome the effort at greater
realism in the analysis of the situation in Central America, and we hope that all countries will continue to be
objective so that we Central Americans will succeed in
solving our own problems in a propitious climate of
trust.

130. Nor should we forget the political expression of
the 26 Latin American &es which met at the highest
level in January of this year, stating in the Quito Declaration that

126. One of the most recent steps taken by the Nicaraguan Government in this overall context was the
release on 26 March of another communique [S/16440,
annex], in which it called on the Contadora Group to
withdraw its offer of good offices-good offices that
because of their neutrality have brought about noteworthy progress in the search for peace in Central
America-implicitly requesting the Group to take direct action and involve itself in the sub-regional conflict, to become a part of and to take sides in it. It would
be a serious mistake with disastrous consequences if
the valuable Contadora forum, with its five Central
American member countries, were to lose its objectivity and good will.

“Latin America and the Caribbean do not resign
themselves to being the arena of alien confrontation
and firmly believe that the region’s problems should
and can be resolved in our own sphere, thereby ensuring that the Latin America area will be a zone of
peace.“’
131. For its part, Honduras reiterates its unchanging
position: that of fostering and supporting the comprehensive, peaceful solution of regional disputes through
the Contadora peace process and within the framework
of the inter-American system.

127. These initiatives show us that Nicaragua is trying
to blame other countries for its own internal conflicts
and to relieve itself of all responsibility for the present crisis. The Sandinist Government is also obviously

132. The PRESIDENT [interpreration from Spanish]: The representative of Nicaragua has asked to
speak in right of reply.
14

133. Mr. CHAMORRO MORA (Nicaragua) [interfrom Spanish]: I shall try to be brief,
for I think I have already made a comprehensive and
lengthy statement about Nicaragua’s reasons for calling
for this meeting of the Security Council: the acts
of aggression, deaths and material damage which my
country is suffering. I believe that I have already set
before the Council and the international community the
valid points needed to corroborate our claims, points
consisting not merely of our own words, but of things
which in the normal course of events any United Nations delegation can read about in The New York Times,
in The Christian Science Monitor, in The Wall Street
Journal, or in the rest of the American press.

I wish here to confirm that we have been obliged to
request such meetings on six occasions, and not threewere prompted by childish motives on the part of our
leaders, since there really were no reasons to be fearful
or apprehensive about United States attitudes towards
Nicaragua. I should like to point out to her that the
United States Congress and various American politicians have on many occasions manifested their concern
at the policy conducted by the Reagan Administration
against Nicaragua and in respect of Central America in
general. To refer to only one case, I would mention the
statements we have read recently in the United States
press, now that the Democratic Party primaries are
under way, statements such as that by Senator Hart, in
which he condemned the war-mongering policy of the
United States and its presence in Central America.

pretation

134. Nevertheless, I should like to make some clarifications regarding the statement of the representative
of the United States. It seems to me that she made use
of a number of points which, aside from suggesting a
little confusion on her part, might tend-at the least-to
seek to confuse others.

139. The United States representative also said that
her interest had always been and continued to be the
democratic development of the Central American
countries. Again, we must refute her affirmations. In a
recent statement I made in the Council in respect of the
complaint of Sudan [252Zst meeting], I pointed out that
the economic crisis has had a significant impact on the
African countries and caused them great hardship and
that everyone knows where that crisis comes from and
how it has been brought about. The same applies to
Central America. I believe that what is a fact of history
is the abuse-I do not say the use-by the United States
Government of the natural resources of our countries,
our primary commodities, which they have always
bought from us extremely cheaply for their convenience only to sell them back to us later as processed
goods at extremely high rates of profit.

135. The representative of the United States presented an apologia for past, present and intended United
States support for the Central American region, for
each of the countries of our region. She spoke-at great
length-of United States support for the Contadora
Group, and she spoke of the interest of the United
States in promoting democracy in Central America.
I think it is fitting for me to refer very briefly to the fact
that the truth of the history of the United States in
Central America is the exact opposite of what she
stated today. It is not only my people which ever since
its independence has suffered acts of United States
intervention, although it has suffered such acts since
1854, following the first American intervention, when
a pro-slavery adventurer from the southern United
States proclaimed himself the President of Nicaragua
and introduced slavery to Nicaragua.

140. The United States renresentative also said that
now asin the past the United-States Administration was
interested in contributing to democratic development in
Central America;

136. It is not a case of Nicaragua alone; many Latin
American countries-not just in Central America-in
this century have suffered the grave consequences of
the United States military presence. In addition to
Nicaragua in 1912, 1925and 1926 we can cite, among
others, the case of the Dominican Republic and that
of Cuba. The United States still maintains a military
presence in the latter country, in spite of the opposition of the Cuban Government. There are the actions
taken against Guatemala in 1954and in Chile in 1973to
overthrow their legitimately constituted Governments
elected in a process which, by Western standards, was
democratic.

141. I do not know how one can consider contributing
to the development of democracy in Central America
when the whole world knows-all the members of the
Council and everyone present in this chamber, with the
exception of the United Statesrepresentative-that, on
the contrary, United States policy is characterized by
its support for dictatorial regimes, such as that of
Somoza in Nicaragua, which it not only created when it
was obliged to leave Nicaragua after Sandino’s war of
liberation but also maintained in power for more than
45 years. The case of Somoza in Nicaragua is not the
only case of dictatorship the United States has created
and fomented in various Central American countries.

137. History shows us clearly what has been the
United States attitude. If we look at what is happening
at present, we can also see the consequences of events
reported every day.

142. The United States representative said that the
Government of Nicaragua had a clear purpose in having
recourse to this forum on various occasions, that the
aim was not only to divert attention from its own problems but also to make sure that certain other problems
of the region would not be given serious consideration.
This is not the first time we have heard that assertion.
She herself made it in the Security Council, and we

138. The representative of the United States has on
various occasions in this Council said that Nicaragua’s
requests for meetings of the Security Council-and
15

have also heard it in the corridors of the United Nations, where, as everyone knows, many things are said;
All I can say about that is that Nicaragua’s requests
for Security Council meetings are the result of United
States acts of aggression and the policy of death and
destruction the American President is carrying out
against my country. If the United States Administration
were more mature and less inclined to war-mongering,
and if it did not seek military solutions to problems,
Nicaragua would never have been obliged to have recourse to the Security Council. Regrettably, this warmongering policy is sowing death among our population
and causing enormous damage to our economy. All we
can do in response to the blows of a great Power is
resort, in a responsible manner, to the organ entrusted
with the maintenance of international peace and security. Furthermore,
in my statement I indicated. that
Nicaragua sincerely believed that its frequent recourse
to the Council, the support of the Non-Aligned Movement and the various political manifestations of concern by European leaders and others tended to dissuade
the Reagan Administration
from implementing
its 1980
decision to overthrow my country’s Government by
force of arms.

tarization of Central America existed many years prior
the coming to power of the Sandinists in Nicaragua.
There was Somoza, who was created by the United
States and whom it set up as the guardian of United
States interests in Central America.
147. The problem for the United States now is that
there has been a change. For the first time in history,
Nicaragua under the Sandinists can claim to be a truly
non-aligned country, one which for the first time in its
history can determine its own future, and therefore the
United States had to have recourse to another guardian
in Central America, finding one in a general in Honduras named Alvarez. It is arming him to the teeth, as
I mentioned, and unfortunately it has turned that country into one more “aircraft carrier*’ of the United States
Navy.
148. I said I wanted to correct the representative
about the number of Nicaraguans under arms. I can
assure Mrs. Kirkpatrick
that the day when her Administration, directly or indirectly, seeks to intervene more
than it is already doing in Nicaragua, it will not be
107,000 Nicaraguans under arms; the entire people will
be under arms in responding to that aggression, and for
the second time in this century we will succeed in
driving them out.

143. Among other things, the United States representative accused us and spoke extensively in this regard,
that the problem of the United States is, from its point
of view, that Nicaragua wishes to interfere and is interfering in the internal affairs not only of the other Central American countries but also of Latin America. It
seems that various United States military strategists
have gone so far as to say on various occasions that
my country had the most powerful army from the Rio
Bravo to Patagonia.

149. We take pride in saying that the greatest arsenal
Nicaragua has is not made up of Soviet tanks or tanks of
any other national origin that we may have, nor the
French-built patrol boats, or boats of whatever other
nationality, nor is it cannons and small-arms; rather, it
is the popular support enjoyed by the Sandinist popular
revolution. That is our strength.

144. In this respect I should like to point out to
Mrs. Kirkpatrick
that my Government does not have a
policy of interference. Indeed, we cannot have such a
policy because we do not have the capacity to carry it
out; we do not have the means to send arms to other
countries, as does the United States, which supplies
El Salvador and Chile, for example. With its economic
and military might, the United States can and indeed
does do this.

150. They know better than anyone that we are the
only Central American Government that can give its
people arms to defend its sovereignty. Let me suggest
to the representative that she recommend to the present
Government of El Salvador that it give arms, the arms
which the United States itself is sending, to its people to
protect it from the intervention
by Nicaragua in El
Salvador. I believe that what would happen, apart from
the fact that it would not take very long, is obvious: the .
Government would be overthrown by its own people.

145. The example of our revolution is what we have
and what American warmongering policy-makers fear,
and that is why they seek to impede our consolidation.
They know that that example could be harmful for the
militaristic policy they are pursuing, not just in Central
America but also in Latin America and other regions of
the world.

151. . The representative said also that our Govem‘merit in its totalitarian
strivings chose to ignore the
efforts and concessions being made by Nicaraguans
friendly to the United States and proposed to us in
respect of our elections. I should just like to make a
point on this and perhaps she would like to reply. As a
good academician, she doubtless knows the difference
between a civil war, a national war and a war of aggression. I am not an expert in the military field; I will not
delve into this, but the most elementary logic inclines
me to believe that when a civil war is unleashed in a
country there has to be popular support. Among other
things, there is a need to have or to obtain in the course
of that war liberated territories which both factions
control, which, as we all know, is certainly the case in

146. The American representative
stated that my
Government was the one which started militarization
in
Central America, and if I remember correctly she said
that we have 107,000 persons under arms. Let me correct her on that; she was in error. First of all, it was not
my Government that started it. On 19 July we will have
the fifth anniversary of Nicaragua as an independent
Republic, ,and I think everyone realizes that the mili16

El Salvador. I would ask the representative-because
it
would help to shed light on the claims which she and her
Government and other Central American Governments
have made about Nicaragua’s problem being an internal
one-what
square inch of Nicaraguan territory have
the counter-revolutionary
CIA mercenaries come to
control?

to the Contadora Group, or trying to institutionalize
its
internal processes. We have been doing this because we
are serious, responsible, peace-loving people, unlike
the American Administration,
which has brought the
world to the brink of a nuclear holocaust. We are doing
this because we have a commitment
to our people and
to no one else.

152. If she wishes, I could bring a map of Nicaragua
right now and she could show everyone where that
piece of territory is that the counter-revolution
and the
CIA mercenaries have liberated, and in what part of
that territory they keep the high-speed patrol boats,
mines, arsenals and aircraft with which they have been
attacking and killing our people and the foreign shipping
that comes to our home. If she does not want a map
today, I can send one to her Mission tomorrow so that
she may consider it quietly and be able to pinpoint it at
another time, next week when we continue the debate.

157. Perhaps Mrs. Kirkpatrick
could be invited to
visit Nicaragua as an observer of the elections as we
intend to invite representatives of other Governments
of friendly countries with which we have relations. But
I say it would be to observe and not to supervise, as the
Americans did in 1928, when Sandino’s war of liberation started. I can promise her that these elections,
which will take place two days before the United States
elections, will be an example of elections in Latin
America. I am sure that Mrs. Kirkpatrick,
President
Reagan and his principal advisers are fully aware that
Sandinism will win the elections, and not through fraud.
We could put a United States Marine at each ballot box
to supervise, and the same thing would happen. They
know, because they have their own means of espionage-not just by aircraft and radar in the Gulf of Fonseca and on Honduran territory; they have CIA agents
inside Nicaragua and they know the majority feeling of
the Nicaraguan people. It is precisely because they do
know it that they are trying indirectly to prevent the
holding of elections in Nicaragua; that is why they are
trying to make sure that our Government will retreat
from its already announced commitment.
But I can
assure them that we shall not do so. We shall withstand
United States pressure.

153. There are many other things in her long speech to
which I could refer. I could refer to the apologia that she
presented for the Kissinger report. The only thing I will
say about that is that for Latin America Kissinger is an
unhappy memory. Moreover, I think there was a minority report submitted by one of the members of the
Commission concerning military and security aspects
of the report, and it seems to me that in Congress
certain politicians are not very contented with the militaristic contents in that report as a complement to the
economic offers made in it.
154. Before finishing, I wish to refer to two more
aspects. Mrs. Kirkpatrick
said that Sandinism had
failed to live up to its promises, including public promises, made in regional organs. It is not the first time
she has said that in this Council. I think she referred to
that when certain countries which are no longer members were in the Council. I remember the first time was
when the Co-ordinator of our Junta first addressed the
Council. She brought a letter sent by those who were
going to represent the Junta to the OAS.

158. Unfortunately,
we shall continue suffering the
loss of the best of our sons. It will be difficult for us to
continue providing our peasants with bread, because
the Americans have cut off the loans for wheat purchases which they granted us at one point. But they did
not realize that despite that cut-off, Sweden, the Netherlands, the Soviet Union, France and many other
countries of the international community would send us
the wheat that the United States cut off, and we were
able to give bread to our workers and peasants. What
we did then, we shall do again.

155. I merely wish to say to Mrs. Kirkpatrick
that in
order to guarantee elections we do not need to send
bullets, as President Reagan requested of Congress. We
all know that two weeks ago, when he was trying to
obtain the additional $93 million for military aid to El
Salvador, President Reagan was reported in the United
States press to have said that bullets ‘were needed
to guarantee the elections. That is a strange way to
guarantee elections, a curious way to support democracy*
-,

159, We shall continue our process of institutionalization. We shall hold elections, as people in the United
States are accustomed to doing. We intend nothing
‘else. We shall show them that in Nicaragua the President will not win with the support of only 25 or
27 per cent of the eligible voters.
160, Unfortunately,
I have gone on for too long, but
there is one last point I wish to make, with regard to
,Mrs.- Kirkpatrick’s
grave concern about the minorities
and the Miskitos in Nicaragua. I shall not refer to the
extermination of the American Indians, nor shall I point
out that her concern for the Miskitos is recent. I have
never heard her mention the percentage of unemployment among the Indian population in the United States
-that is, among the small number of them that man-

156. ’ I can assure Mrs:Kirkpatrick
that we will carry
out the process of democratic iristitutionalization
that
has begun in Nicaragua, though not because of United
States pressure. I can assure her alsc+-and it is necessary for .the American ,Administration
to understand
and analyse this fact-that
it is not as a result of American pressure that Nicaragua has been taking positions
in international forums, adopting policies with respect
17

aged to survive. I do not have the exact data here with
me, but I think that the figure exceeds 40 per cent. She
does not seem very concerned about that, or about the
Mexican labourers who are allowed in and then mercilessly exploited.

165. In 1982 my Government,
on the basis of article 48fof the American Convention on Human Rights,*
took steps so that the pertinent organ could assume its
functions for a friendly solution of difficulties between
the Government of Nicaragua and citizens of our country of Miskito origin. That was an agreement for an
amicable solution, signed in August 1982 with the InterAmerican Commission on Human Rights.

161. Regarding the Miskitos, I wish to point out to
Mrs. Kirkpatrick
that in December 1982 my Govemment discovered-and
publicized, because some of
those involved were captured-a
plan which the CIA
had sought to carry out on the Nicaraguan Atlantic
Coast. The plan, called “Red Christmas”,
sought to
use the Miskitos-in
other words, to manipulate the
historic ignorance of the settlers on the Atlantic Coast,
for which the Americans are responsible, because Somoza was responsible internally in my country and they
supported him. Somoza was not at all concerned for the
indigenous inhabitants of the eastern sector of Nicaragua. Logically, the blame lies with those-perhaps
Mrs. Kirkpatrick,
or some in the other Administrations
in the United States over the 45 years of Somoza’s
rule-who could have brought in roads and telephones,
improved literacy and provided health centres. But
they did not advocate those things, or Somoza ignored
them; In fact, they obviously did not, because Somoza
certainly listened to his American advisers. Through
this “Red Christmas”
plan’ they even tried to take
possession of this isolated and under-developed.area.
“Under-developed”
is not the right description for
it, because Nicaragua is under-developed
generally.
Mr. Treiki said earlier that he had been astonished by
the levels of poverty in Nicaragua. It is true, and those
to blame are right here in front of us.

166. I think it was in December of last year moreover,
that we announced broad amnesty without exceptions
for Miskito citizens. On instructions from my Government, I personally requested the Secretary-General
to
ensure that the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR)
participate in repatriation efforts
-repatriation
being one of the objectives pursued
by Contadora-and
facilitate the measures needed to
carry out the repatriation of the Miskitos. Unfortunately the CIA mercenaries have been preventing that
repatriation from being carried out totally and satisfactorily, although I can assure the Council that quite a
number of Miskito Indians in Honduras have started
returning to my country, thanks to UNHCR. That can
be corroborated by UNHCR. Certainly the Nicaraguan
Government is not removing them, and we have not
asked it of the American representative, because she
has confirmed that they are leaving. Itjust could be that
her Government is moving them.
167. I have already taken up too much of the time of
the Council, and I apologize to members. If the need
arises I may wish to speak again to supplement my
replies to some of the observations made by Mrs. Kirkpatrick.

162. But within the poverty existing in Nicaragua the
poverty on the Atlantic Coast is really astonishing and
disturbing. It is with the revolution starting in 1979 that
something has been done to try to improve the minimal,
subsistence living standards of the 270,000 inhabitants
of that Atlantic Coast. That figure includes the Miskitos, blacks and persons of mixed ancestry. In a television programme a year or so ago on which Mrs. Kirkpatrick appeared with the Nicaraguan Minister for
External Relations-I
do not know whether it was in
good faith or for some other purpose-she
charged the
violation of Miskito rights in Nicaragua, saying that
there were 270,000 Miskitos.

168. The PRESIDENT
[interprektion
from Spanish]: I call on the representative of the United States,
who has asked to speak in exercise of the right of reply.
169. Mrs. KIRKPATRICK
(United States of America): First, in the interest of accuracy, I may say that
I never suggested that Nicaragua had the most powerful
army in South America; I only suggested that Nicaragua had the most powerful army in Central America,
which of course includes, conventionally,
the five small
nations of Central America that are well known, presumably, to members of the Council.
170. Secondly, with regard to the Miskitos, who I do
think long to return to Nicaragua, if only they could live
in peace on the north Atlantic coast, as they have for
centuries, with just decent respect for their right to
freedom and self-determination.
Unfortunately,
they
continue to flee. It is normally estimated that there are
today approximately
one half million Nicaraguans who
have already fled the beneficent ministrations
of the
new dictatorship.
Some 25,000 of those are Miskitos
now in Honduras. More than 1,000 Miskitos are, as
I have already said, fleeing Nicaragua this very day
towards the Honduran border, suggesting that the practices that have made these very peaceable people, who
seekonly to be left alone to live their lives, flee have not
in fact improved.

163. Actually, there are 90,000 Miskitos in Nicaragua,
of whom perhaps 15,000 have left for Honduran territory. We cannot deny, nor do I seek to deny, that we
may have made certain mistakes in our treatment of the
Miskito minority. We are an honest and revolutionary
Government. We are proud of our achievements, but
we are aware of our shortcomings, and we try to overcome them.
164. The 15,000 Miskitos in Honduran territory are
people who have been manipulated
by the United
States and are being used now. Some of them are
involved in military activities against my country. They
are even being prevented from returning to Nicaragua.
18

.

171. Thirdly, I find it verv difficult to listen to the
repeated accusations in this-Council of the Nicaraguan
representative and some of his associatesconcerning a
United States penchant for dictatorship in Central
America. It may come as a surprise to members of the
Council, having heard so many interventions by the
Nicaraguan representative for so,long, to know that
Somoza was a Nicaraguan. He was not a North American. He was not only a Nicaraguan, but he was head of
a Government which consisted entirely of Nicaraguans
and the son of another Somoza who was also a Nitaraguan who headed a Government which was comprised entirely of Nicaraguans. During this whole
period the United States expressed its own preference
for and commitment to democracy by living within
democratic institutions and respecting democratic liberties in our own society.

constraining conditions, citizens with a senseof selfesteem will be neither candidates nor. voters, . .
“Our erstwhile liberators, the Sandinistas, are be-coming addicted to power. Having gallantly faced
bullets in battle, they are now resorting to phony
balloting-just as our right-wing dictators did in the
past.?
.,
174. The PRESIDENT [interpretation from Spunish]: I call,on the.representative of Nicaragua, who has
asked to be allowed to speak in exercise of the right of
reply.
175. Mr. CHAMORRO MORA (Nicaragua) [interfrom Spanish]: I see that you are concerned,
Sir, perhaps fearing that I will consume more time than
I already have. I mentioned a moment ago that there
would be another opportunity to expand on’what I have
already -said; therefore I shallnot even refer to how an
American President-Mr. Roosevelt, I think it was,
during~ the 1930s+described Somoza. The representative of the United States said Somoza too was a
Nicaraguan. On the next occasion. I have to speak
I shall tell the Council what Roosevelt said-will all due
apologies’ to the ladies in the chamber.

pretation

172. I do not deny in this Council that my country has
from time to time made mistakes in our policy vi.s-d-vis
Central America or the world, or Nicaragua quite specifically. It may even be argued that we have from time
to time been material accomplices to the rise of a dictatorship in Central America, or even in Nicaragua.
I fear in fact that a close examination of the record
would suggest that in 1978 and 1979 the United States
Government, acting in the best of faith, did in fact assist
in the rise to power in Nicaragua of a new military
dictatorship which has consolidated a new and highly
repressive power in that society and governs today,
creating hundreds of thousands of refugees among Nicaraguans, who flee their country still seeking the freedom they were seeking when they overthrew Somoza.

176. What I do wish to d-since it would perhaps be
obsolete by next.week-is to make one point about the
United States Administration’s fear in the face of the
triumph’of the Sandinist revolution. It fears not only
.our internal actions in Nicaragua but also,our presence
in the United States.

173. Finallv. conceminr! those elections in Nicaragua
which we heard about f&m colleague who likes to &ad
The New York Times. I too would like to read a piece
from The New York Times, written by one of his former
colleagues, Arturo Cruz, who was-as I am sure many
members of the Council know-a member of the Governing Junta of the Nicaraguan revolutionary Govemment and its Ambassador to the United States until he
resigned out of dismay, disillusionment and disappointment with their Govemment..He has since lived in exile
and works for the establishment of democracy in Nicaragua, as indeed ,he .did before he left. He wrote a
column in The New York Times titled “Sandinista
Democracy? Unlikely” about the proposed elections in
Nicaragua, which appears on page A 27 of the issue of
27 January 1984, and in it he said:

177. Renresentatives know full well that on various
occasions Nicaraguan leaders have been denied visas
to come here at the invitation.of institutes. I shall not go
into details. I just want to say that a’trip scheduled by a
member of the Governing Junta-not an official tour,
obviously-could not be made because the United
States Governtitent .was not interested; The trip was
planned to begin on 23 April. Mr. Sergio Ramirez
Mercado was to travel to Kansas City, Washington,
New York, California, Boston and I am not sure to what
other cities. He had been invited by various American
‘intellectual organizations, universities and the like.
In addition to being a memberof the Governing Junta,
Mr.” Ramfrez Mercado is a ,distinguished Nicaraguan
intellectual, who lived many years in ‘West Germany
and many. of .whose books -have been translated into
German.

“the revolutionary commanders’ statements about
the voting process foreshadow a mockery of elections. The Sandinistas are determined to exclude
leading dissident personalities like the former guerrilla leader Eden Pastora Gomez and former junta
member Alfonso Robelo Callejas, who is also the
leader of an important political party. Under these

178. Following democratic procedures, and because
of fear of the Sandinist revolution, whether inside or
outside Nicaragua,’ the State Department decided to
give Mr. Mercado an eight-day visa only, allowing him
to go just to Kansas City, between 29 March and
6 April. That is just one example of the United States
Government’s fear of the words of the Sandinists. It is

L

19

an example of how they are trying to manipulate the
truth to their own people.

meeting of the Council to continue consideration of this
item will be held on Monday, 2 April 1984, at 3.30 p.m.
The meeting

179. The PRESIDENT [intetpretatiun fram Spanish]: There are no other names on the list of speakers
for this meeting. ,With the consent of the President of
the Security Council for the month of April, the next

rose ,at 7.30 p.m.
NOTES

’ See A/39/1 18-E/1984/85, annex, para. 3.
z United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1144, No. 17955.

,

.

r

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLlCATTONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstorcsand distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS UNIES

Les publications des Nations U&s sont en vente darts la libtairia et les agenm depositaims du
mondecnticr. Informcz-vous aupr& de votre libraire ouadressez-vous P : Nations Unies. Section
da vmtes. New York ou Gentve.
HAK
Wwtanm

lIO.lYiH?h
OpranrC3aunn

H3JXAHHII

OPl-AHHZAI&HH

06sc~micn~b~s

OG-J.E;tHHEHHJ*JX
Haut@

YO~~KHO Icynarb

JJAJWH
B twwwib~x
xara06 n3AaHHRX
a
06’heAHHeHHblX

antia% n arenrcraax ao aeex panouax rapa. Hasonure cnpaean
aaurcw KHB~HOY Yaraanne aan nntunre no anpecy: Oprauxaauaa
HattaR. CeattHR no npoAaxe HJIaHnR. ?ibM-HOpK
H.W %SIeBa.
COMO CONSECUIR PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACLONES UNIDAS

Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas cstan en venta en libretias y casas distribuiddms en
todas partes de1 mundo. Con&he a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas. Secci6n de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.
.

Lhho in United Nations, New York

oo400

90-61313-Jaaurty 1993-2.050
