United Nations

A/RES/71/198

General Assembly

Distr.: General
25 January 2017

Seventy-first session
Agenda item 68 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 19 December 2016
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/71/484/Add.2)]

71/198. Extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1 which guarantees the
right to life, liberty and security of person, the relevant provisions of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 2 and other relevant human
rights conventions,
Reaffirming the mandate of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights
Council on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, as set out in Council
resolution 26/12 of 26 June 2014, 3
Welcoming the universal ratification of the Geneva Conventions of 12 August
1949, 4 which, alongside international human rights law, provide important legal
frameworks of accountability in relation to extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary
executions during armed conflict,
Recalling all its resolutions on the subject of extrajudicial, sum mary or
arbitrary executions as well as the resolutions of the Commission on Human Rights
and the Human Rights Council on the subject, and emphasizing the importance of
their full and effective implementation,
Recognizing the positive role that regional human rights systems can play in
the global protection against arbitrary deprivation of life,
Acknowledging the importance of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development 5 and its implementation for the promotion and protection of the
enjoyment by all persons of human rights, gender equality, access to justice for all
and effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels,
Noting with deep concern that impunity continues to be a major cause of the
perpetuation of violations of human rights, including extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary executions,
_______________
1

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/69/53),
chap. V, sect. A.
4
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970–973.
5
Resolution 70/1.
2

16-22571 (E)

*1622571*

Please recycle

A/RES/71/198

Extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions

Noting that enforced disappearances can end up in extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary executions, recalling the importance in this regard of the International
Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, 6 and
calling upon all States which have not yet done so to consider signing and ratifying
or acceding to the Convention,
Acknowledging that international human rights law and international
humanitarian law are complementary and mutually reinforcing,
Noting with deep concern the growing number of civilians and persons hors de
combat killed in situations of armed conflict and internal strife, and that women and
girls are disproportionately affected by conflict, as reco gnized in Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) of 31 October 2000 on women and peace and security and
subsequent resolutions on the matter,
Noting with deep concern also the continuing instances of the arbitrary
deprivation of life, resulting from, inter alia, the imposition and implementation of
capital punishment when carried out in a manner that violates international law,
Recalling the United Nations Rules for the Treatment of Women Prisoners and
Non-custodial Measures for Women Offenders (the Bangkok Rules) 7 and the
adoption of the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of
Prisoners (the Nelson Mandela Rules), 8
Deeply concerned about acts that can amount to extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary executions committed against persons exercising their rights of peaceful
assembly and freedom of expression in all regions of the world,
Deeply concerned also about killings committed by non-State actors, including
terrorist groups and criminal organizations, which may amount to abuses of
international human rights law and violations of international humanitarian law,
Acknowledging that extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions may
under certain circumstances amount to genocide, crimes against humanity or war
crimes, as defined in international law, including in the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court, 9 and recalling in this regard that each individual
State has the responsibility to protect its populations from such crimes, as set out
by the General Assembly in its resolutions 60/1 of 16 September 2005 and 63/308
of 14 September 2009,
Convinced of the need for effective action to prevent, combat and eliminate the
abhorrent practice of extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, which
represent flagrant violations of international human rights law, particularly the right
to life, as well as of international humanitarian law,
1.
Reiterates its strong condemnation of all the extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary executions that continue to occur throughout the world;
2.
Demands that all States ensure that the practice of extrajudicial, summary
or arbitrary executions is brought to an end and that they take effective action to
prevent, combat and eliminate the phenomenon in all its forms and manifestations;
_______________
6

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2716, No. 48088.
Resolution 65/229, annex.
8
Resolution 70/175, annex.
9
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2187, No. 38544.
7

2/6

Extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions

A/RES/71/198

3.
Reiterates that all States must conduct prompt, exhaustive and impartial
investigations into all suspected cases of extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary
executions, identify and bring to justice those responsible, while ensuring the right
of every person to a fair hearing by a competent, independent and impartial tribunal
established by law, grant adequate compensation within a reasonable time to the
victims or their families and adopt all necessary measures, including legal and
judicial measures, also bearing in mind gender equality in access to justice, to put an
end to impunity and prevent the further occurrence of such executions, as
recommended in the Principles on the Effective Prevention and Investigation of
Extralegal, Arbitrary and Summary Executions, 10 fully consistent with their
obligations under international law;
4.
Calls upon Governments, and invites intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations, to pay greater attention to the work of
national-level commissions of inquiry into extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary
executions, with a view to ensuring the effective contribu tion of these commissions
to accountability and to combating impunity;
5.
Calls upon all States, in order to prevent extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary executions, to comply with their obligations under the relevant provisions
of international human rights instruments, and also calls upon States which retain
the death penalty to pay particular regard to the provisions contained in articles 6,
14 and 15 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 2 and articles 37
and 40 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, 11 bearing in mind the
safeguards and guarantees set out in Economic and Social Council resolutions
1984/50 of 25 May 1984 and 1989/64 of 24 May 1989 and taking into account the
recommendations of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on
extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions in his reports to the Council and the
General Assembly, including the report submitted to the Assembly at its sixtyseventh session, 12 regarding the need to respect all safeguards and restrictions,
including limitation to the most serious crimes, stringent respect of due process and
fair trial safeguards and the right to seek pardon or commutation of sentence;
6.

Urges all States:

(a) To take all measures required by international human rights law and
international humanitarian law to prevent loss of life, in particular that of children,
during detention, arrest, public demonstrations, internal and communal violence,
civil unrest, public emergencies or armed conflicts and to ensure that the police, law
enforcement agents, armed forces and other agents acting on behalf of or with the
consent or acquiescence of the State act with restraint and in conformity with
international human rights law and international humanitarian law, including the
principles of proportionality and necessity, and in this regard to ensure that police
and law enforcement officials are guided by the Code of Conduct for Law
Enforcement Officials 13 and the Basic Principles on the Use of Force and Firearms
by Law Enforcement Officials; 14
_______________
10

Economic and Social Council resolution 1989/65, annex.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
12
A/67/275.
13
Resolution 34/169, annex.
14
See Eighth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders,
Havana, 27 August–7 September 1990: report prepared by the Secretariat (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.91.IV.2), chap. I, sect. B.
11

3/6

A/RES/71/198

Extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions

(b) To ensure the effective protection of the right to life of all persons, to
conduct, when required by obligations under internatio nal law, prompt, exhaustive
and impartial investigations into all killings, including those targeted at specific
groups of persons, such as racially motivated violence leading to the death of the
victim, killings of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic
minorities or because of their sexual orientation or gender identity, killings of
persons affected by terrorism or hostage-taking or living under foreign occupation,
killings of refugees, internally displaced persons, migrants, street children or
members of indigenous communities, killings of persons for reasons related to their
activities as human rights defenders, lawyers, journalists or demonstrators, killings
committed in the name of passion or in the name of honour and killing s committed
for discriminatory reasons on any basis, to bring those responsible to justice before
a competent, independent and impartial judiciary at the national or, where
appropriate, international level and to ensure that such killings, including those
committed by security forces, police and law enforcement agents, paramilitary
groups or private forces, are neither condoned nor sanctioned by State officials or
personnel;
7.
Affirms the obligation of States, in order to prevent extrajudicial,
summary or arbitrary executions, to protect the lives of all persons deprived of their
liberty in all circumstances and to investigate and respond to deaths in custody;
8.
Encourages States, taking into account the relevant recommendations of
the United Nations and of regional human rights systems, to review, where
necessary, their domestic laws and practices with regard to the use of force in law
enforcement in order to ensure that these laws and practices are in conformity with
their international obligations and commitments;
9.
Also encourages States to accelerate the work on fulfilling the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, 5 bearing in mind the importance of the full
enjoyment of human rights and access to justice for all and effective, accountable
and inclusive institutions at all levels, as well as the systematic mainstreaming of a
gender perspective;
10. Urges all States to ensure that all persons deprived of their liberty are
treated humanely and with full respect for international law and that their treatment,
including judicial guarantees and conditions, conforms to, as appropriate, the United
Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (the Nelson
Mandela Rules), 8 as well as the United Nations Rules for the Treatment of Women
Prisoners and Non-custodial Measures for Women Offenders (the Bangkok Rules) 7
and, where applicable, the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949 4 and the
Additional Protocols thereto of 8 June 1977, 15 as well as other pertinent
international instruments;
11. Welcomes the International Criminal Court as an important contribution
to ending impunity concerning extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, and,
noting the growing awareness of the Court worldwide, calls upon those States that
are under an obligation to cooperate with the Court to provide such cooperation and
assistance in the future, in particular with regard to arrest and surrender, the
provision of evidence, the protection and relocation of victims and witnesses and the
enforcement of sentences, also welcomes the fact that 124 States have already
ratified or acceded to and 139 States have signed the Rome Statute of the Court, 9
_______________
15

4/6

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1125, Nos. 17512 and 17513.

Extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions

A/RES/71/198

and calls upon all those States that have not ratified or acceded to the Rome Statute
and the Agreement on the Privileges and Immunities of the International Criminal
Court 16 to give serious consideration to doing so;
12. Acknowledges the importance of ensuring the protection of witnesses for
the prosecution of those suspected of extrajudicial, summary or arbitrar y executions,
urges States to intensify efforts to establish and implement effective witness
protection programmes or other measures, and in this regard encourages the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to develop practical
tools designed to encourage and facilitate greater attention to the protection of
witnesses;
13. Encourages Governments and intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations to organize training programmes and to support projects with a view
to training or educating military forces, law enforcement officers and government
officials in international humanitarian and human rights law connected with their
work and to include a gender and child rights perspective in such training, and
appeals to the international community and requests the Office of the High
Commissioner to support endeavours to that end;
14. Takes note with appreciation of the reports of the Special Rapporteur to
the General Assembly 17 and the Human Rights Council, and invites States to take
due consideration of the recommendations contained therein;
15. Commends the important role that the Special Rapporteur plays towards
the elimination of extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, and encourages
the Special Rapporteur to continue, within his or her mandate, to collect
information, including data disaggregated by sex, from all concerned, to respond
effectively to reliable information that comes before him or her, to follow up on
communications and country visits and to seek the views and comments of
Governments and to reflect them, as appropriate, in his or her reports;
16. Acknowledges the important role of the Special Rapporteur in identifying
cases where extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions could amount to
genocide and crimes against humanity or war crimes, and urges the Special
Rapporteur to collaborate with the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights and, as appropriate, the Special Adviser to the Secretary -General on the
Prevention of Genocide in addressing situations of extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary executions that are of particularly serious concern or in which early action
might prevent further deterioration;
17. Welcomes the cooperation established between the Special Rapporteur
and other United Nations mechanisms and procedures in the field of human rights,
and encourages the Special Rapporteur to continue his or her efforts in that regard;
18. Urges all States, in particular those that have not done so, to cooperate
with the Special Rapporteur so that his or her mandate can be carried out effectively,
including by favourably and rapidly responding to requests for visits, mindful that
country visits are one of the essential tools for the fulfilment of his or her mandate,
and by responding in a timely manner to communications and other requests
transmitted to them by the Special Rapporteur;

_______________
16
17

Ibid., vol. 2271, No. 40446.
See A/70/304 and A/71/372.

5/6

A/RES/71/198

Extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions

19. Expresses its appreciation to those States that have received the Special
Rapporteur, asks them to examine his recommendations carefully, invites them to
inform the Special Rapporteur of the actions taken on those recommendations, and
requests other States to cooperate in a similar way;
20. Once again requests the Secretary-General to continue to use his best
endeavours in cases where the minimum standards of legal safeguards provided for
in articles 6, 9, 14 and 15 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
appear not to have been respected;
21. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the Special Rapporteur with
adequate human, financial and material resources to enable him or her to carry out
his or her mandate effectively, including through country visits;
22. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue, in close collaboration
with the High Commissioner and in conformity with the mandate of the High
Commissioner, established by the General Assembly in its resolution 48/141 of
20 December 1993, to ensure that personnel specialized in international
humanitarian and human rights law, including in provisions related to gender
equality, form part of United Nations missions, where appropriate, in order to deal
with serious violations of human rights, such as extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary
executions;
23. Requests the Special Rapporteur to submit to the General Assembly, at its
seventy-second and seventy-third sessions, a report on the situation worldwide with
regard to extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions and his or her
recommendations for more effective action to combat thi s phenomenon;
24.
session.

Decides to continue its consideration of the question at its seventy -third
65th plenary meeting
19 December 2016

6/6
