UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
PROVISIONAL
S/PV.3312
11 November 1993
ENGLISH

PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE THREE THOUSAND
THREE HUNDRED AND TWELFTH MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York,
on Thursday, 11 November 1993, at 11.30 a.m.

President:

(Cape Verde)

Brazil
China
Djibouti
France
Hungary
Japan
Morocco
New Zealand
Pakistan
Russian Federation
Spain
United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland
United States of America
Venezuela

Mr. SARDENBERG
Mr. LI Zhaoxing
Mr. OLHAYE
Mr. MERIMEE
Mr. ERDÖS
Mr. MARUYAMA
Mr. SNOUSSI
Mr. KEATING
Mr. MARKER
Mr. VORONTSOV
Mr. YAÑEZ BARNUEVO

Members:

Mr. JESUS

Sir David HANNAY
Mrs. ALBRIGHT
Mr. TAYLHARDAT

________________________________________________________________________________
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and
interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be
printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be
sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one
week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Office of Conference
Services, room DC2-794, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of
the record.
93-87159 (E)

S/PV.3312
2
The meeting was called to order at 12.10 p.m.
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
The agenda was adopted.
LETTERS DATED 20 AND 23 DECEMBER 1991, FROM FRANCE, THE UNITED
KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND AND THE UNITED STATES
OF AMERICA (S/23306, S/23307, S/23308, S/23309 and S/23317)
The PRESIDENT:

As agreed in the Council’s prior

consultations, I should like to state, in connection with the
agenda just adopted, that the current formulation overtakes the
earlier two formulations under which this item has been discussed,
namely, items 168 and 173 of the list of matters of which the
Security Council is seized; that list is contained in document
S/25070.

Since those items have been subsumed under the present

item, they will accordingly be deleted from the list of matters
contained in document S/25070.
I should like to inform the Council that I have received
letters from the representatives of Egypt, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya and Sudan, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda.
In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent
of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

S/PV.3312
3
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Elhouderi (Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya) took a place at the Council table; Mr. Elaraby (Egypt)
and Mr. Yasin (Sudan) took the places reserved for them at the side
of the Council Chamber.
The PRESIDENT:

The Security Council will now resume its

consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them document S/26701,
which contains the text of a draft resolution submitted by France,
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America.
I should like to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to the following other documents:

S/26304, letter dated

13 August 1993 from the representatives of France, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States
of America to the United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral; S/26500, S/26523, S/26604 and S/26629, letters dated
22 September and 1, 18 and 22 October 1993, respectively, from the
Permanent Representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General.
The first speaker is the representative of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, on whom I now call.
Mr. ELHOUDERI (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (interpretation
from Arabic):

I congratulate you on your assumption of the

presidency of the Security Council this month and commend the
efforts made by your predecessor.

I do hope that the Security

Council will be able to really and truly discharge its functions in
line with the purposes and principles of the United Nations

S/PV.3312
4
(Mr. Elhouderi, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya)
Charter, and to conduct itself in a manner that is compatible with
the law and the public interest of the international community.

I

do hope that bias and special interests will not be given the upper
hand and that the Council will steer clear of selectivity and
double standard.
The Security Council meets today not to consider a matter that
threatens international peace and security but to consider a draft
resolution that seeks the intensification of the sanctions which
have been imposed on the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya by the Council’s
resolution 748 (1992).

Prior to this meeting, the Council had

automatically renewed those sanctions four times over a period of
15 months.

So, why intensify the sanctions now?

The pretext which

the three countries have repeated ad infinitum is the allegation
that the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya has not complied with Security
Council resolution 731 (1992).

However, the truth of the matter is

that the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya has fully responded to Security
Council resolution 731 (1992).

The only point that remains

outstanding is the problem that arose from the demand by the United
States of America and the United Kingdom that the two alleged
suspects be extradited.

This is a problem that remains unsolved

because of a legal wrangle over which country has the competence in
law to try the two persons accused of involvement in the bombing of
Pan Am flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland.
Essentially, this is a question that is definitively settled
by the provisions of the Montreal 1971 Convention for the
Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Civil Aviation.
The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, the United States and the United
Kingdom are all parties to that Convention, which, from the start,
stipulates jurisdiction regarding the trial of the accused to the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.

That was the view of the Libyan Arab

S/PV.3312
5
(Mr. Elhouderi, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya)
Jamahiriya from the very beginning.

Accordingly, it acted within

that competence as soon as it received the indictments issued by
the three countries, which have been circulated as official
documents of the General Assembly and the Security Council.

Libya

announced at the time that it would deal with the indictments
constructively and, forthwith, referred them to the Libyan judicial
authorities.

A judge was appointed to investigate the matter and

he started his preliminary investigation by placing the two accused
under preventive custody.

The United States and the United Kingdom

were accordingly notified and were requested to cooperate with the
Libyan judicial authorities either by allowing the Libyan judge
access to the records of their investigations or by fixing a date
for carrying out the necessary investigation.

In order to create

an atmosphere of trust, to ensure that the proper procedures be
followed during the investigation and the trial and to underscore
fairness and neutrality, Libya proposed to Mr. Vasiliy Safronchuck,
the personal envoy of the Secretary-General, during his visit to
Tripoli on 26 January 1992, that the two countries send their own
judges, or that the Secretary-General call on judges from certain
countries, as well as representatives from the League of Arab
States, the Organization of African Unity and the Organization of
the Islamic Conference, to observe the trial.

However, the

American and British authorities refused to cooperate with the
Libyan authorities.
The intransigence of the two countries, their refusal to apply
the provisions of the 1971 Montreal Convention and their insistence
on the extradition of the two persons to either one of them
hampered the proper procedure of the trial of the two accused.

The

two countries also refused to submit the case to arbitration, as
the Convention stipulates for disputes arising over the

S/PV.3312
6
(Mr. Elhouderi, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya)
interpretation or application of its provisions.

As a result, the

Libyan Arab Jamahiriya took the question of the application of the
Convention’s rules to the International Court of Justice.

The

matter is still pending before the Court.
Notwithstanding my country’s repair to the International Court
of Justice and the natural need to await its verdict, we have
spared no effort in seriously seeking a solution that would be in
consonance with the provisions of the law.

My country had proposed

to request the International Court of Justice to ascertain the
validity of the accusations levelled at the two Libyan nationals
and suggested that they be surrendered to the office of the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) in Tripoli for investigation.
Libya also proposed that the Secretary-General form a legal
committee composed of fair and neutral judges to investigate the
facts of the case, make sure that the allegations against the
accused were serious ones and conduct a comprehensive
investigation.

S/PV.3312
7
(Mr. Elhouderi, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya)
Libya declared that if the Secretary-General concluded that
the accusations were justified, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya would
not object to the extradition of the two accused, under the
personal supervision of the Secretary-General, to a third party, on
condition that they may not be re-extradited to any other party.
All these proposals fell on deaf ears and were met by insistence on
extraditing the two accused - without any legitimate justification,
be it in law or in treaty provision - to either the United States
of America or Scotland.
We did not extradite the two accused because that is against
our laws.

The laws of most countries, if not all countries,

prohibit such extradition unless there is a treaty or convention
regulating such matters between the countries concerned.

There are

no bilateral treaties between the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and either
the United States or the United Kingdom.

There is, however, a

multilateral convention that clearly and accurately regulates
actions related to attacks against international civil aviation,
namely the 1971 Montreal Convention.
convention.

All of us are parties to that

Regrettably, the United States and the United Kingdom

declined to comply with the provisions of the said convention and
insisted, merely on the basis of their own personal wishes, on the
extradition of the two accused to either one of the two countries.
We wish to draw attention here to the gravity of involving the
Security Council in this game whereby States are forced to
surrender their own citizens to other States.
The pretext used by the two countries to circumvent the 1971
Montreal Convention is that they have no faith in Libya’s ability
to try its own citizens.

This claim gives the impression that only

their judicial systems are trustworthy, despite events and evidence
which suggest the contrary.

Suffice it to recall areas of

S/PV.3312
8
(Mr. Elhouderi, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya)
deficiency in the American judicial system which were revealed by
the Rodney King trial in Los Angeles.

Furthermore, a report issued

by the Gallup Institute and published by a European newspaper
reveals that 61 per cent of Britons do not think they could get a
fair trial in Britain.

A recent trial in Old Bailey, in Britain,

also disclosed another aspect of the British judicial system when a
judge suspended the trial of three detectives because of the amount
and intensity of publicity surrounding the case, and because the
media had portrayed the defendants as the perpetrators of the
crimes for which they were being tried.

This prompted the British

newspaper The Guardian to ask on 12 October 1993, in an editorial
entitled "Fair Trial, Fair Sense",
"Why do the Libyan suspects in the Lockerbie incident fear
trial in Scotland, although British ministers and officials
confirm that they would receive a fair trial?"
The paper called on the ministers to look into the ruling of the
Old Bailey judge and said that the two conditions related to the
Old Bailey case apply to the two Libyans.

Indeed the Libyans

receive even more publicity than the Old Bailey defendants whenever
the politicians and journalists rehash the Pan Am incident over
Lockerbie.

The paper went on to say that the Libyans have indeed

compelling reasons to complain.
Moreover, the information gathered by the two countries should
not be accepted at face value as irrefutable facts.

The United

States had previously claimed, on the strength of its own
information gathering, that the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya was
responsible for the Berlin nightclub incident.

On the strength of

that information, the United States sent its state-of-the-art
planes, at night and carrying the most advanced weapons of
destruction, to bomb the cities of Tripoli and Benghazi and the

S/PV.3312
9
(Mr. Elhouderi, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya)
home of the Leader, killing dozens of innocent people.

A trial

later proved that the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya had nothing to do with
the incident and completely exonerated it.

You may also recall

that the General Assembly of the United Nations condemned that
aggression in its resolution 41/38 (1986), which acknowledged the
right of the families of the victims to receive compensation,
something which the United States has thus far refused to do.

This

was an instance of blatant aggression in which military force was
used and which jeopardized international peace and security.
such, the Security Council should have considered it.

As

The Council

failed to do so because the three States, sponsors of the draft
resolution before you today, resorted to the power of veto.
Another example of the fallibility of the information gathered
by the agencies of those countries can be found in United Nations
General Assembly document (A/48/477) concerning the United States
insistence on inspecting the Chinese ship "Yin He" in order to look
for two chemicals used in the manufacture of chemical weapons.

The

document states that
"The ’Yin He’ incident is the sole making of the United States
side as a result of its erroneous act based on its false
intelligence." (A/48/477, annex I, para. 2)
China’s insistence that the ship did not carry the two chemicals
was to no avail.

The United States insisted on inspecting the ship

and China insisted that that should be done only in a neutral
country.

A careful inspection of all containers on the ship proved

categorically that the two chemicals were not in the ship’s cargo.
Is it strange then, in light of the obvious legal nature of this
issue, that the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya refuses to surrender the two
suspects?

And in view of the clear evidence and the definitive

S/PV.3312
10
(Mr. Elhouderi, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya)
facts, is it strange for Libya to call for the trial to be held in
a neutral country?
Despite all of this, Libya submitted the question to the
People’s Basic Congresses (which has the power to take decisions)
in their second session for 1992.

Following detailed discussions,

the People’s Congresses adopted the following decision in relation
to the extradition of the two suspects:
"The Basic People’s Congresses affirm their adherence to the
Libyan Criminal Code and the Libyan code of Criminal
Procedure.

They raise no objection to the conduct of the

investigation and the trial through the seven-member Committee
established by the League of Arab States or through the United
Nations before a just and impartial court to be agreed upon."
On this basis, my country declared its readiness to enter into
negotiations, under the supervision of the Secretary-General of the
United Nations, with the countries concerned, with a view to
holding the trial in a neutral country which could be agreed upon
by the parties to the dispute and which could provide all the
necessary guarantees.

The Secretary-General of the United Nations

was notified of this step on 8 December 1992, but, like previous
attempts, this one was rejected by the parties concerned.

In its

letter to the Secretary-General of the United Nations on
28 July 1993, my country confirmed that it was willing to discuss
the procedures and arrangements relating to the trial of the two
accused, with the mission the Secretary-General was about to send
to Libya.

It thus becomes clear that out of our desire to reach a

reasonable solution and despite the fact that the 1971 Montreal
Convention gives Libya the right to try the two suspects before
Libyan courts - a question that is still pending before the
International Court of Justice - the Libyan position has been

S/PV.3312
11
(Mr. Elhouderi, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya)
extremely flexible.

On the other side, there is the rigid and

intransigent position based on nothing more than the logic of
force.

S/PV.3312
12
(Mr. Elhouderi, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya)
The extradition of the two accused was one of the demands made
by the three countries.

It was demanded also that Libya should

take full responsibility for the acts of the two Libyan officials,
submit all information it has on the crime and pay appropriate
compensation.

Do these demands conform to the principles included

in various human-rights instruments?

Could these two countries

treat their own citizens in the same manner they want Libya to
treat the Libyans?

What logic and what legal system would call on

a defendant to submit self-incriminating evidence, bear the
responsibility for an allegation made against him and pay
compensation, all before any investigation or trial had been
undertaken?

Then we are told that the sanctions will not be lifted

unless the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya fully and effectively complies
with these demands.

This begs the question:

who would decide that

such effective and full compliance has taken place?
no one other than the two countries themselves.
or legal process.

The answer:

There is no logic

It is clear that force, and force alone, is the

logic and the process.
Added to this are the Draconian demands aimed at portraying
Libya as a country that does not comply with Security Council
resolutions and that violates international laws.

Consequently,

sanctions may be imposed and tightened against Libya.
Notwithstanding the strange character of these demands, my country
has shown extreme flexibility and has declared its readiness to pay
proper compensation if it is proven responsible for this incident.
In its search for a satisfactory solution, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya did not stop at invoking the law and calling for
recourse to judicial authorities.

It unilaterally resorted to the

International Court of Justice, which is the principal judicial
organ of the United Nations.

It also talked to the

S/PV.3312
13
(Mr. Elhouderi, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya)
Secretary-General of the United Nations, confirming to him its full
readiness to cooperate with him and asking that he play a bigger
role in helping all the parties to find a reasonable and
satisfactory solution.
Libya also contacted other countries and other organizations
to which it belongs.

All of them expressed their deep concern at

the escalation of the crisis between Libya and the United States of
America, the United Kingdom and France, as well as at the threat of
the imposition of additional sanctions and the use of force in
relations between countries.

They called for a peaceful settlement

of the crisis and appealed to the Security Council to review
resolution 748 (1992) and, in recognition of Libya’s initiatives
aimed at settling the crisis, to lift the embargo imposed on Libya.
In this respect, I should like to recall the resolution
adopted by the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African
Unity (OAU) at its fifty-eighth ordinary session, which was held in
Cairo.

That resolution expresses appreciation for the efforts and

initiatives taken by Libya in order to settle the crisis
peacefully.

The third operative paragraph of the resolution reads:

"Expresses its grave concern at the escalation of the
crisis and the threats of additional sanctions and the use
of force as a pattern of relations among states, in
violation of the Charters of the Organization of African
Unity and the United Nations as well as international laws
and norms".

(A/48/322, annex I, p. 47)

In paragraph 5 of the same resolution, the OAU Council of Ministers
urges the Security Council to reconsider its resolution and lift
the embargo imposed on Libya, in recognition of the positive
initiatives Libya has taken in handling the crisis.

S/PV.3312
14
(Mr. Elhouderi, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya)
Within the context of our efforts to address this problem, my
country submitted to the Secretary-General, on ll September 1993,
a memorandum that contained points relating to its legal position
vis-à-vis resolutions 731 (1992) and 748 (1992).

In that

memorandum, Libya asked questions based on the assumption that the
two accused would challenge the charges levelled at them and
voluntarily agree to stand trial before a foreign court.

The

memorandum also asked for clarifications and safeguards relating to
the foreign country concerned.

On 24 September 1993, my country

received the Secretary-General’s answers to the questions
concerning the two accused.
Although we have not received all the answers, the
Secretary-General was notified on 29 September 1993 that we had
given the two suspects the answers to the questions about them.

We

confirmed to him that the safeguards he offered were sufficient and
acceptable, and that the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, following the
receipt of those guarantees, would not object to the appearance of
the two suspects before the Scottish judiciary and would even urge
them to appear.

We expressed to the Secretary-General our belief

that only one step remained in order to resolve this crisis that
has gone on for several years:

the acceptance by the two suspects,

their families and their attorneys of the necessity of appearing
before the court.

In those two letters, contained in document

S/26523, we emphasized that we would deal with the French demands
with the same determination with which we had been dealing with the
American and British demands.
As the Council knows, the defence team, which includes legal
counsellors of several different nationalities, including British
and American attorneys, held several meetings in Tripoli on 8 and
9 October 1993.

The two accused themselves attended some of those

S/PV.3312
15
(Mr. Elhouderi, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya)
meetings and confirmed their intention to appear before a fair
court based on valid legal procedures and a comprehensive
investigation, notwithstanding their right, under national and
international law, to remain in Libya.

The counsellors discussed

the inalienable rights of any defendant:

the right to a fair trial

before an unbiased court, the right to be presumed innocent and the
right to have sufficient time to prepare a defense after being
notified of the charges and the evidence the prosecution intends to
present in support of those charges.

These are rights included in

the legislation of all countries and contained in the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.

All of us are parties to

this Covenant, which entered into force on 23 March 1976.
The defence attorneys were deeply concerned over the possible
prejudicial effect the publicity in the United States and Scotland
would have on the prospective jurors and about the absence of the
usual arrangements for extradition because of the prosecution’s
refusal to reveal the evidence it intends to use in the trial.

The

defence attorneys believe that this refusal greatly limits their
ability to defend the case properly.
On the basis of a request made by the defence counsel, my
country contacted Switzerland for permission to hold the trial
there, and contacts between Libya and Switzerland are continuing to
that end.
The negative impact of media publicity surrounding the case is
not limited to prospective jurors but has also been extended to
defence attorneys.

We have witnessed a ferocious attack against an

American lawyer when it was thought that he might participate in
giving council to the two accused.

Obstacles were also put in the

way of another American lawyer who participated in the Tripoli

S/PV.3312
16
(Mr. Elhouderi, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya)
meeting of the defense counsellors.

It thus becomes clear that the

concerns of the defence attorneys are rational and justified.

S/PV.3312
17
(Mr. Elhouderi, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya)
The Secretary-General of the United Nations and members of the
Security Council have been informed of the results of these
meetings.
In addition, the Secretary of the General People’s Committee
for Foreign Liaison and International Cooperation - the Foreign
Minister of Libya - during his stay in New York, conducted wide
consultations involving most members of the Security Council and
the Secretary-General of the United Nations.

Our Foreign Minister

explained the developments of the crisis and confirmed our
determination to implement Security Council resolution 731 (1992).
All of this demonstrates that serious efforts are being made
in relation to the trial of the two accused.

It also proves that

we are not procrastinating or marking time, as the two countries
claim.

Marking time is not in our interests, as it is our people

who are suffering the adverse effects of the sanctions.

We are

interested in seeing this trial held as soon as possible.

No one

should forget that we received answers to some of our questions on
24 September 1993 and that the defence lawyers for the suspects met
on 8 and 9 October 1993.
As for the French demands, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya did not
see in them anything that runs counter to the law.

Intensive

contacts and talks between the judicial authorities of both the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and France were held with a view to reaching
a determination of responsibility for the explosion of the aircraft
on UTA flight 772.

The Libyan and French investigative judges met

several times, and the French judge saw the minutes of the
investigation undertaken by the Libyan judge.

It was agreed that

the French judge would come to Libya to continue his investigation.
Contacts between the two countries are already under way with a
view to enabling the French judge to complete this endeavour.

I

S/PV.3312
18
(Mr. Elhouderi, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya)
believe that had the French judge not chosen a military destroyer
as a means of transport to Libya our response to the French demands
would have led to encouraging results.
Only three months and a few days after the adoption of
Security Council resolution 731 (1992), the three countries managed
to get the Security Council to adopt its resolution 748 (1992), in
which the question of terrorism was widely and artificially
included.

It contained an exceptional accusation, on which was

based an unprecedented air and diplomatic embargo.

All of this was

done with unprecedented speed and decisiveness, and in violation of
many provisions of the United Nations Charter.
It is obvious that the three countries succeeded in making the
Council compress the whole phenomenon of international terrorism
into the Lockerbie and UTA incidents.

The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya

has been linked intentionally with the phenomenon of international
terrorism so that the three countries may be able to achieve their
goals.

If it is claimed that the Security Council wants to devote

special attention to civil-aviation incidents, the Council should
also have looked into the incidents involving the Korean, Iranian,
Libyan and Cuban civil aircraft, to avoid appearing selective in
its work or being accused of applying double standards.
However, let us look at the position of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya on this matter.

My country, which has endured terrorism

in the recent past and still suffers today, declared, in a letter
to the Secretary-General of the United Nations on ll May 1992
(S/23918), its unequivocal condemnation of international terrorism
in all its forms, regardless of its source.

Libya confirmed that

there are no terrorist training camps, terrorist organizations or
terrorist groups on its soil.

We called for the dispatch of a

committee of the Security Council, the United Nations Secretariat

S/PV.3312
19
(Mr. Elhouderi, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya)
or any other competent United Nations body, to verify this at any
time.

My country also declared that it will never permit the

direct or indirect use of its territory, citizens or institutions
in the perpetration of any terrorist acts and that it is ready to
punish severely those who are proved to have been involved in such
acts.
The Libyan Ministry of Foreign Affairs issued a statement
confirming the contents of this letter, and the statement was
circulated as an official Security Council document (S/23917).

My

country reaffirmed its position in its letter dated 8 December 1992
(S/24961) to the Secretary-General.

In a letter dated 28 July 1993

to the Secretary-General, Libya stated its readiness to receive a
mission of the Secretary-General’s choice to verify the
non-existence of alleged terrorist training camps on its soil.

In

addition, my country actively cooperated with Britain in respect of
that country’s special requests.
However, none of this has been sufficient for the three
countries, which have refused to send a mission to verify the
non-existence of camps and other facilities.

Thus they hope to

keep the terrorism charge hanging over Libya like the sword of
Damocles and to justify the continuation and intensification of the
sanctions.

They base their case on the pretext that Libya has not

complied with Security Council resolutions, and they rely on an
enigmatic phrase to the effect that Libya knows what is required of
it.
What more can Libya do?

What should Libya do to persuade the

three countries to stop levelling such allegations and accusations?
Will the three countries respond to Libya’s request for a mission
to verify that there is no basis for such allegations?

S/PV.3312
20
(Mr. Elhouderi, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya)
The sanctions, which have been imposed because of a legal
dispute, into which the question of terrorism was deftly inserted
have severely hurt our people in all aspects of their lives and
have had a negative impact on our development plans.

We have

submitted to the Security Council 14 documents detailing the harm
caused to various sectors.

I shall not repeat the contents of

those documents, but I should like to refer specifically to the
adverse effects of the prohibition on the export to Libya of spare
parts, engineering services and maintenance required for Libyan
aircraft and their components.

These adverse effects impact on a

vital sector that is indispensable to a vast country that depends
largely on air transport.
The United States of America and the United Kingdom are not
satisfied with the sanctions contained in resolution 748 (1992).
They have been trying, under the auspices of the Committee
established by that resolution, to widen the scope of the
sanctions, using transparent pretexts and rigid positions.

This

includes the success of the two countries in widening the scope of
the sanctions through the Committee’s rejection of cooperation
between the International Atomic Anergy Agency and Libya for the
establishment of a laboratory at the Centre for Agricultural
Research in Tripoli to analyze the effects of agricultural
insecticides on the health of human beings, animals and plants.

It

includes also the Committee’s refusal, without explanation, of the
humanitarian request concerning the transport of Libyan citizens to
locations abroad - using Libyan aircraft - for medical treatment.
These patients included cases of coma, quadruple paralysis, brain
concussion resulting from traffic accidents and sudden health
deterioration necessitating advanced medical treatment.

One of

them was a young girl of six, named Safaa Ali Abdel Rasoul, who

S/PV.3312
21
(Mr. Elhouderi, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya)
died at Tripoli Central Hospital as a result of complications
arising from her illness.
In view of the Committee’s abuse of its mandate, the competent
authorities had to move other emergency cases, using various modes
of conveyance, including land, sea and air transport.

This

resulted in patients’ having to endure long, hard journeys, as is
outlined in the memorandum sent to the Committee by the Libyan
mission on 18 August 1993.
One of the Council’s main reasons for the establishment of
this Committee was to facilitate consideration of the requests
submitted by countries for approval of flights for essential
humanitarian purposes.

The repeated refusal of requests for

permission to move seriously ill persons - arbitrary refusals, with
no reasons given to justify them - nullifies the resolution’s only
humanitarian gesture.

Furthermore, these repeated refusals

continue to severely harm innocent people.

This can be neither the

intention nor the objective of the United Nations.

The three

countries have not limited themselves to expanding the scope of the
sanctions, but have extended this behaviour to include the
Committee’s methods of work, putting it on a consensus basis that
runs counter to the provisions of the Charter and the Security
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.

S/PV.3312
22
(Mr. Elhouderi, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya)
Selection of the harshest sanctions, which are not
commensurate with a legal dispute, attempts by the three countries
to expand them, and to exert continuous pressure on the Security
Council to impose yet more sanctions, prompt us to wonder about the
real reasons behind this ferocious campaign against the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya.

The three Governments, while closing every door that

could lead to a solution to the crisis either in regard to the
trial of the two accused or to the verification of the allegations
that the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya supports international terrorism,
declared, in their tripartite statement of 12 August 1993, that
they had no "hidden agenda".

The United States of America and the

United Kingdom intentionally refused to answer Libya’s specific
questions related to international terrorism and the lifting of the
sanctions.

Even when one of the two countries hinted at the

possibility of suspending or lifting the sanctions, the answers
have been vague and conducive to suspicion rather than to
confidence.

The bottom line is that the whole issue remains the

preserve of the two countries.
The draft resolution now before the Council, document S/26701,
repeats the very same grave legal mistake of both resolutions
731 (1992) and 748 (1992) in that it links Libya to international
terrorism on no other basis but the suspicions that have been
created regarding two Libyan nationals on the basis of reports by
intelligence agencies.

This constitutes an a priori judgement that

has not been substantiated by any evidence up to this point.

They

want the draft resolution to be adopted under Chapter VII of the
Charter on a matter which should have been dealt with by the
Council under Chapter VI, due to the fact that the issue in
question is a legal dispute over which country has competence to

S/PV.3312
23
(Mr. Elhouderi, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya)
try the two accused, a dispute which is essentially settled by the
provisions of the 1971 Montreal Convention.
This draft resolution has no justification whatsoever,
especially since we are approaching the final phase in the
settlement of the dispute.
unprecedented sanctions.

Moreover, it contains more
It is an attempt to destroy the Libyan

economy by adversely impacting on our people’s only source of
income, as well as on the civil aviation structure on which my
country depends for transportation.

The paragraphs of the draft

resolution include provisions which prove beyond doubt that its
sponsors do have a hidden agenda.

Otherwise, what is the meaning

of operative paragraph 4, which calls for depositing the financial
revenues from the sale of oil and agricultural produce in separate
bank accounts?

And what is the meaning of operative paragraph 16

which refers to the suspension of sanctions and their reimposition
within 90 days?
The sponsors of the draft resolution insist on ignoring the
decisions of regional and other organizations on the matter and
turn a deaf ear to their points of view by stating in operative
paragraph 15 that all Member States should encourage Libya to
respond fully and effectively to these requests.

The States we

refer to have already expressed their views in the resolutions
adopted by the Arab Maghreb Union, the League of Arab States, the
Organization of African Unity, the Organization of the Islamic
Conference, and the Non-Aligned group.

None the less, there is an

insistence on ignoring all these decisions and resolutions.

We

would like to know the relationship between the maintenance of
international peace and security and the contents of operative
paragraphs 8, ll and 12.

Does this not constitute an interference

in the minute internal affairs of States and does it not,

S/PV.3312
24
(Mr. Elhouderi, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya)
therefore, constitute an obstruction of justice in those States in
addition to being an imposition of a strange kind of tutelage over
them, all because of a dispute over the venue where two accused
persons should stand trial?

In operative paragraph 16 what then is

the meaning of the phrase:
"... the Libyan Government has ensured the appearance of those
charged with the bombing of Pan Am 103 for trial before the
appropriate United Kingdom or United States court ..."?
Once again we should like to draw attention to the dangers of
involving the Security Council in the question of extradition,
which is a sensitive and complicated legal issue that requires the
conclusion of bilateral or multilateral agreements following
negotiations between the States concerned.

To involve the Council

in questions such as these would set a dangerous precedent.

The

harm caused by this draft will not be limited to the Libyan people
alone, but will extend to neighbouring and European countries whose
interests are linked to ours.

It will have adverse effects on the

overall process of foreign investment.

These harmful effects will

undermine the security and stability of our region, which, at this
time, is in dire need of security and stability.
The draft resolution constitutes a blatant violation of the
provisions of the United Nations Charter and the norms of
international law.

Should it be adopted as it stands and in this

manner, it will represent a dangerous turning point in the work of
the Council, and constitute clear proof that the Council does not
work on behalf of all the Members of the United Nations, but in
accordance with the wishes of one or two countries.
The continuance and intensification of sanctions will not
solve the problem.

It will even complicate it.

What we have here

is a dispute that could have been easily resolved had the three

S/PV.3312
25
(Mr. Elhouderi, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya)
countries complied with the provisions of the 1971 Montreal
Convention.

Now we have two positions:

the position of the Libyan

Arab Jamahiriya, which is supported by law and the provisions of
international conventions, and the position of the three countries,
which is based only on their claims and allegations.

While the

position of the former is characterized by great flexibility, the
position of the latter is rigid and intransigent, based only on
allegations and undisclosed reasons linking Libya to the
international terrorism phenomenon which has been under
consideration by the United Nations for many, many years.

As a

result, the Security Council has been hastily pushed into action
under Chapter VII instead of Chapter VI of the Charter, imposing
harsh sanctions which are not commensurate with the dispute at
hand.
We do not want to underestimate the seriousness of the two
incidents which caused the loss of innocent lives, because we too
have been burned by the fire of international terrorism, but we
want to put things in the right context and perspective, using an
objective approach and avoiding the use of exaggeration and excess
as others do.

We do not want to cover up anything related to the

two accused or to procrastinate in order to waste time.
disagreed as to the principle of the trial.

We never

The disagreement has

been, and still is, on the venue of the trial.

The two suspects

and their attorneys do not disagree as to the principle of the
trial, but want a place where neutrality and fairness can be
guaranteed and where the proper procedures and arrangements for
such a trial can be made.

The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya will continue

its sincere efforts to find a solution to this problem within the
framework of respect for the principles of international law and
the provisions of the relevant international instruments.

S/PV.3312
26
(Mr. Elhouderi, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya)
Furthermore, Libya considers that its efforts will achieve
this end if the three countries abandon their policies of pressure
and threats and respond to the language of dialogue and
understanding which my country advocates and pursues.

If the

Security Council plays a positive role in a collective spirit,
lifts the sanctions that only complicate this matter further, and
assists the parties concerned to follow the right, peaceful path,
it will have made an important contribution towards the achievement
of that goal.
My country will continue to do its utmost to cooperate with
the Secretary-General of the United Nations in order to reach a
final solution of this problem.

S/PV.3312
27
The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of the Libyan

Arab Jamahiriya for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Egypt.

I invite him

to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. ELARABY (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):

Allow

me at the outset to extend to you, Sir, my congratulations on
presiding over the Security Council for this month.

I am confident

that your great diplomatic skills and personal qualities, which are
well known to all, will benefit the Council’s work.

I should also

like to extend to your predecessor, Ambassador Sardenberg, our
thanks for the skill with which he steered the Council’s work last
month.
Egypt has followed with great interest and concern the
developments relating to the two criminal acts that resulted in the
loss of hundreds of lives, namely Pan Am flight 103 over Lockerbie,
and the bombing of UTA 772.

There can be no doubt that

safeguarding the safety and security of civil aviation are
prerequisites of today’s world.

Egypt supports fully all

international efforts designed to eradicate the destructive
phenomenon of terrorism completely.

Egypt has expressed its deep

concern over the incidents and condoled with the families of the
victims of those two incidents.
According to the provisions of international law, all who
perpetrate such crimes must be identified and brought to justice.
When the crime is proved, the penalty must follow, again according
to the provisions and principles of international law.

Equal

rights and duties under the law and equal application of
international law form the basis for the criteria upon which the
contemporary international legal system rests.
The international community has condemned all acts of
terrorism in all its forms on more than one occasion.

The

S/PV.3312
28
(Mr. Elaraby, Egypt)
principal objective of the Council’s adoption of resolutions
731 (1992) and 748 (1992) was to attempt to obtain the facts
underlying those two incidents and to determine where the
responsibility lies with regard to the terroristic acts against Pan
American flight 103 and UTA flight 772.
My delegation, therefore, regrets that the truth and the facts
with regard to those two acts have not yet been clarified and that
no progress has been made in arriving at the truth clearly and
unambiguously, despite the resolutions adopted by the Security
Council and the unremitting efforts made by the United Nations
Secretary-General, which my Government greatly appreciates, and in
spite of the intensive bilateral contacts Egypt has made to find a
suitable formula that would allow for implementation of the two
resolutions.
Egypt has scrupulously abided by the resolutions adopted by
the Security Council because we are fully convinced of the need to
respect all resolutions adopted by the Council in line with the
Charter.

We call upon all the members of the international

community to abide by that fundamental principle without exception
and without resort to double standards when confronting the various
issues with which the Security Council addresses.
Egypt, in the active role it has continued to play in
attempting to contain the crisis arising from the Lockerbie
incident and prevent the escalation of tension has never lost sight
of any of the vital elements that might lead to a breakthrough in
the situation, foremost among which is the opportunity for justice
to take its course and for an unambiguous decision to be reached
with regard to the responsibility of the perpetrators of such acts.
At the same time, Egypt has sought to spare the region any further
escalation of tension in a manner that would have deleterious
effects on the interests of the fraternal people of Libya and on

S/PV.3312
29
(Mr. Elaraby, Egypt)
their aspirations after prosperity and development, in the first
instance, and on the stability and prosperity of the peoples of
neighbouring countries at a time when ever-greater hopes for peace,
justice and stability in the region seem about to be realized after
long years of struggle, tension and armed conflict.
The Security Council is to vote today on a draft resolution
aimed at finding a solution to the problem created by the two
incidents, the Lockerbie flight and UTA 772, by intensifying
economic sanctions against Libya.

Here, we have a question:

the tightening of sanctions lead to the truth?

Will

Egypt would have

preferred further efforts and further contacts in an attempt to
implement the resolutions adopted by the Council, for the
intensification of sanctions will surely have a negative impact on
the innocent and not necessarily lead to the truth regarding those
two incidents.

S/PV.3312
30
(Mr. Elaraby, Egypt)
For this reason, Egypt calls upon the Security Council to keep
in sight all the consequences that will impact negatively on the
people of Libya and on the neighbouring peoples of the region.
Article 50 of the Charter stipulates that any State which finds
itself confronted with special economic problems arising from the
carrying out of enforcement measures against any State shall have
the right to consult the Security Council.

This means that the

Council should today consider alleviating the economic suffering
of Libya and of its neighbours that would arise from the adoption
of the draft resolution under consideration.
Despite the expected adoption of the draft resolution on
today’s agenda, Egypt will continue to deploy its efforts, in
cooperation with all the parties concerned, in order to reach as
soon as possible a solution to this crisis that would safeguard the
interests of all and provide for the full implementation of the
Security Council’s resolutions, which should be respected and
implemented.
The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of Egypt for

his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Sudan, who wishes to
make a statement in his capacity as Chairman of the Group of Arab
States for the month of November.

I invite him to take a place at

the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. YASIN (Sudan) (interpretation from Arabic):

I wish

to thank you, Sir, and through you the members of the Security
Council, for giving me the opportunity to speak, on behalf of the
Sudan and the States members of the League of Arab States, on the
important issue before the Council today.

I seize this opportunity

to congratulate you most sincerely on your accession to the
presidency of the Security Council for this month, the work of
which is replete with highly significant issues.

S/PV.3312
31
(Mr. Yasin, Sudan)
I also wish to congratulate your predecessor, Ambassador
Sardenberg, the permanent representative of Brazil, who discharged
his duties as President last month in an able and commendable
manner.
The crisis between the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya on the one hand
and the United States of America, France and the United Kingdom on
the other, concerning the downing of Pan Am 103 and UTA 772, has
been dealt with by the Council for three full years.

This crisis

figured prominently in the news media in a manner that qualifies it
to be considered as one of the most important legal disputes
between States both in terms of the principles involved and of its
position within the framework of international law.

It is also an

important case in terms of the requirements of justice, such as the
availability of evidence, neutrality and the removal of any
extraneous factors that might affect the case and consequently the
course of justice and, concomitantly, the nature of the verdict.
The Council is today dealing with an item that has become
established on its agenda.
must be addressed.

This is an inescapable reality that

However, this should be done in consonance with

the spirit of the Charter and especially on the basis of Article 33
of Chapter VI of the Charter.

It is relevant to point out here,

from the outset, that we appreciate the fact that this dispute is
legal in nature and belongs in the courts and institutions directly
concerned, and not in the Security Council, which is not mandated
by the Charter to exercise such a function.

Now that the Council

is seized of this matter, the matter has, of necessity, become a
political dispute which we are uncertain as to whether it could be
addressed properly in its correct context.

Here we should think of

similar conflict situations which could arise in the future and for
dealing with which the international community should establish
appropriate rules.

S/PV.3312
32
(Mr. Yasin, Sudan)
The entire international community has been saddened by these
two tragedies.

We condole with the families of the victims and we

associate ourselves with those who condemn the perpetrators of
these two hideous crimes.

We also unconditionally condemn

terrorism in all its aspects.

In this context, let us review the

course of events and positions since the Council first began its
consideration of this case.
The Council adopted resolution 731 (1992), which imposed
specific sanctions against the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.

It

periodically reviews these sanctions, on the basis of cooperation
or non-cooperation of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya with the Council.
It is curious that this resolution is based on Chapter VII of the
Charter, which addresses situations of aggression that threaten
international peace and security.

This does not apply to the

current dispute between Libya and the three aforementioned States
which is a legal dispute that has to do with the extradition of two
accused Libyan nationals.

Such a dispute should be dealt with in a

court of law, and specifically by the International Court of
Justice.

Alternatively, it should be addressed in conformity with

Chapter VI of the Charter.
Having found itself caught up in these events, how did Libya
respond?

It responded comprehensively, with the aim of arriving at

the truth concerning these two regrettable incidents.

It called

for a legal, objective and neutral investigation regarding the
accusations levelled at its two Libyan nationals.

It expressed its

full willingness to accept the judgment of the International Court
of Justice in the relevant case of competence now before the World
Court.

It declared itself ready to consider any other proposals

made in conformity with the principles of law and Libyan
sovereignty.

It expressed its eagerness to respond to

international efforts aimed at resolving the conflict through

S/PV.3312
33
(Mr. Yasin, Sudan)
negotiations mediation and legal settlement, in accordance with
Article 33 of the United Nations Charter.

S/PV.3312
34
(Mr. Yasin, Sudan)
It expressly condemned terrorism and stated its willingness to
cooperate with any party or with any international effort to
eliminate that phenomenon.
It declared its willingness for the two accused Libyan
nationals to surrender themselves voluntarily to the
Secretary-General of the League of Arab States.

It stated that in

the meantime it would be willing to find a practicable way of
implementing resolution 731 (1992) in the context of international
law and justice and national sovereignty.
Libya also reaffirmed its commitment to implement the findings
of the International Court of Justice and its acceptance of
Security Council resolution 731 (1992) in all its aspects.

It

expressed its willingness to cooperate with the Secretary-General
of the United Nations with respect to the legal aspects of the
resolutions in question and with respect to conducting a neutral
investigation or having recourse to a neutral court or
international court.

Moreover, Libya took steps to implement that

undertaking; it called upon the United Nations to send a
fact-finding mission and solemnly undertook to pay compensation in
the event that it was found responsible for the incident.
It accepted all the demands calling for the trial of the two
accused and undertook to do all it could in the event that they
refused to place themselves before the court they are required to
submit to, and that despite the objection of the defence counsel of
the accused and despite the fact that that would not conform with
national and international laws applicable in such cases.
As a regional forum, the Arab League Council includes the Arab
States located in a sensitive area.

By its mandate, it deals with

all issues of importance to the States of the region.

It

S/PV.3312
35
(Mr. Yasin, Sudan)
pronounces itself on those issues and on the aspirations of those
States and is committed to acting in the interests of its members.
The Arab League Council reacts to events in the region and
expresses its views on them.

The matter before the Security

Council today directly concerns a State member of the League of
Arab States.
In conformity with its responsibilities and its commitment to
peace and security in the region, the Arab League Council has
stated its increasing interest in this conflict and its willingness
to provide its good offices and cooperate with the
Secretary-General of the United Nations and the Security Council in
resolving this deteriorating conflict.
In that context, the Arab League Council has formed a
seven-member committee under the chairmanship of the
Secretary-General of the League of Arab States; the members are the
Foreign Ministers of Mauritania, Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia, Libya,
Egypt and Syria.

The committee was charged with following

developments and making the necessary contacts; it was to spare no
effort to stop the escalation of the crisis and find just and
peaceful solutions in conformity with the rules of international
law, justice and the relevant international treaties.
The Middle East stands at the threshold of new prospects.
Everyone hopes to see the culmination of new steps to achieve a
just, lasting and comprehensive peace; this demands self-restraint
and the avoidance of any action that could escalate or multiply
tensions.

In dealing with the crisis, the League of Arab States

was therefore careful to base itself on the United Nations Charter,
which stipulates that all international disputes should be settled

S/PV.3312
36
(Mr. Yasin, Sudan)
by peaceful means and without endangering international peace and
security, and especially on Article 52 of the Charter.
The seven-member League of Arab States committee has submitted
its report to the Secretary-General of the League; this was
approved by the Arab League Council at its one-hundredth session,
held in September 1993 in Cairo.

In its report the committee

attached importance to the positive proposals included in Libya’s
memorandum dated 11 September 1992 addressed to the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, which contained new
elements that would help find a settlement through dialogue and
negotiation.

The committee voiced its concern at and its rejection

of a policy of escalating threats and denials pursued by the three
parties, and called for a response to the positive initiatives and
efforts, including the important Libyan memorandum submitted to the
Secretary-General.
The committee expressed its determination to continue its
efforts and its contacts with the Secretary-General and the members
of the Security Council with a view to preventing an escalation of
the crisis and to fostering constructive, positive dialogue towards
an appropriate settlement.
The committee charged the Secretary-General of the League of
Arab States with intensifying his efforts and his contacts with all
parties to the crisis and with the Secretary-General of the United
Nations with a view to reaching a fair settlement based on the
principles of international law and the need to safeguard Libyan
sovereignty.
I have gone into such detail with a view to stressing the good
intentions of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and the efforts of the
League of Arab States and its Secretary-General,

S/PV.3312
37
(Mr. Yasin, Sudan)
Mr. Ahmed Esmat Abdel Meguid, and to underscore our sincere wish to
resolve this conflict within the framework of law and the
sovereignty of States.

The Arab countries have always sought

justice and equality in all their dealings, and have refrained from
applying double standards in dealing with issues.

The Non-Aligned

Movement and regional groupings including the Organization of the
Islamic Conference and the Organization of African Unity have
expressed their concern with respect to the difficulties faced by
the Libyan people as a result of the implementation of resolutions
731 (1992) of 21 January 1992 and 748 (1992).

The people of Libya

have been subjected to actions that have crippled its economic
growth; these have assailed vulnerable groups such as children, the
ill and the aged.

They have deprived the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya of

its legitimate right to contact the outside world by means of
available communication channels; this has hurled it back to a time
when communications were extremely difficult.
The impact of the siege has gone beyond the people of Libya to
affect neighbouring countries with social and cultural links to
that people.

Article 50 of the Charter can be of only minimal help

to those who are suffering as a result of the implementation of
these resolutions.
All of this occurs as a result of the implementation of
resolutions that appear to uphold the rules and to apply justice
but that are not based on the legal justifications that are
traditional for fairness.

S/PV.3312
38
(Mr. Yasin, Sudan)
The draft resolution before this distinguished gathering, in
our opinion, is not the best way to end the dispute.
to negative results:

It will lead

it could shake the confidence of the smaller

countries in this Council’s neutrality when dealing with
controversial matters and because of overlapping competence of the
mechanisms engaged in the settlement of international disputes, it
could pave the way for international and regional conflicts through
the prevention of action by the mechanisms that are closely related
to the issues.
The invariable principles and rules of justice and public law
are violated when an adversary is judge and jury and when the
accused is not presumed innocent until proven guilty.

The

interpretation of legal texts and especially of the Charter is the
duty and competence of the courts, and there is no way for any
other body to arrogate that competence to itself except by force.
The mechanisms for the settlement of disputes and the
preservation of international peace and security constantly can
fall victim to the impact of negative information by the media.
This leads to the absence of any guarantee for a fair trial that
would guarantee for the accused the right to appear before a
neutral court, to be presumed innocent until proven guilty as well
as the right to thoroughly and sufficiently prepare their defence
after being informed of the charges levelled at them and of the
evidence presented by the prosecution.
We leave this meeting with a feeling of immense sorrow at the
lack of a clear vision regarding an important issue such as this
one, an issue which relates to the application of the norms of
justice and to respect for the sovereignty and sacredness of the
law and respect for the Charter which we have all accepted.

The

Charter is binding because it stands for reconciliation between

S/PV.3312
39
(Mr. Yasin, Sudan)
nations and is a voluntary contract between those who are parties
to it.

It is upheld and its provisions are enforced so long as it

is used for the purposes it was formulated for.
The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of the Sudan

for his kind words addressed to me.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to proceed to
the vote on the draft resolution before it.

Unless I hear no

objection, I shall take it that that is the case.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I therefore put to the vote the draft resolution in document
S/26701.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:

Brazil, Cape Verde, France, Hungary, Japan, New
Zealand, Russian Federation, Spain, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Venezuela

Against:

None

Abstaining:

China, Djibouti, Morocco, Pakistan

The PRESIDENT:

The result of the voting is as follows:

11 votes in favour, none against, and 4 abstentions.

The draft

resolution has been adopted as resolution 883 (1993).
In view of the lateness of the hour, I intend to suspend the
meeting now.

With the concurrence of the members of the Council,

the meeting will resume at 3.30 this afternoon.

S/PV.3312
40
The meeting was suspended at 1.35 p.m. and resumed at
3.50 p.m.
The PRESIDENT:

I shall now call on those members of the

Council who wish to make statements following the vote.
Mrs. ALBRIGHT (United States of America):

The resolution

we have adopted today demonstrates for all to see that this Council
is steadfast in its opposition to international terrorism.
journey to this resolution has not been easy.

The

But the path of

justice rarely is.
Citizens of 30 nations fell victim to the terrorist attacks
that destroyed flights Pan Am 103 and UTA 772.

Nearly two years

ago, the Council adopted resolution 731 (1992).

Put simply, the

Libyan Government has refused to heed that resolution.

Since then,

Libya has spared no effort to break this Council’s resolve.

It has

sought through intermediaries, surreptitious offers, and spurious
promises to compromise the will of the international community and to stave off today’s action.
The Council can be proud that Libya’s efforts to stop this
resolution have failed.
in the world.
justice.

Terrorism is a challenge to every nation

My Government, in response, is determined to pursue

And the pursuit of justice must, when necessary, include

mandatory sanctions of the Security Council.
The fight against international terrorism must be a collective
effort.

In working with the Governments of the United Kingdom and

France, the United States has led that effort.
closely with every member of the Council.
balanced and precisely targeted.

We have worked

The resolution is

Its hallmarks are an assets

freeze, a limited equipment embargo against the Libyan oil industry
and the tightening of earlier sanctions imposed under resolution
748 (1992).

To those who say it is not strong enough, I ask this:

Why did Libya try so hard to stop this resolution if the sting of
its new sanctions is so mild?

S/PV.3312
41
(Mrs. Albright, United States)
Libya knows what it must do to comply.

We await the turnover

of those indicted for the bombing of Pan Am 103.

We await the

Libyan Government’s cooperation with the French judiciary.
await compensation for the victims of Libyan terrorism.

We

And we

await the Libyan Government’s clear and confirmed renunciation of
terrorism.

S/PV.3312
42
(Mrs. Albright,
United States)
The United States has long imposed national sanctions against
Libya that go far beyond those adopted by the Council.

Still, the

United States has committed itself to proceeding fairly and
equitably in the process leading to our vote today.

We have

considered and respected the views of those countries whose
economic interests at stake might exceed our own.
is directed at Libya, and Libya alone.

This resolution

For each day that passes

without the Libyan Government’s compliance, the Libyan people will
pay a greater price.
Let me emphasize a broader point.

By strengthening sanctions

today, the Security Council has again shown the flexibility of
sanctions as a diplomatic tool; and the more we demonstrate that
this Council can impose, lift, suspend or strengthen sanctions at
will, the better the sanctions stick can serve our diplomacy.
The tragic attacks against Pan Am 103 and UTA 772 struck at
innocent victims.

Their families have awaited our response.

the Council is responding.

Today

We must now await Libyan compliance,

but we shall do so determined to persevere until justice is done.
Mr. MERIMEE (France) (interpretation from French):

It is

regrettable that today our Council has had to adopt a resolution
tightening sanctions against Libya.
It is almost 20 months since the Security Council requested,
in resolutions 731 (1992) and 748 (1992), that that State commit
itself concretely and definitively to cease all forms of terrorism
and all assistance to terrorist groups; that it hand over the two
suspects in the attack on Pan Am 103; that it fully meet the
requests of the French magistrate in charge of the investigation
into the attack on UTA 772; and, finally, that it provide all the
evidence and all the information available to it regarding these
two crimes.

S/PV.3312
43
(Mr. Mérimée, France)
Our three Governments had thought they could expect a swift
settlement of this very painful matter, thus making it possible for
the families of the 441 victims of the attacks against the Pan Am
and UTA flights to obtain justice at last.
My delegation would like to express its great appreciation to
the Secretary-General, whose considerable efforts have been
thwarted by the evident bad faith of the Libyan authorities.

They

have repeatedly made declarations of intent and have systematically
been evasive when the time came to act.
In their desire to reach a successful outcome, my Government
and the Governments of the United Kingdom and the United States,
despite everything, decided to give that country a final chance to
prove its good will by complying with its obligations before
1 October 1993.

Unfortunately, the Libyan authorities have shown

yet again that they only desire to play for time, and they continue
their delaying tactics and their obstruction.
We consider that the Libyan Government has sought literally to
take advantage of our Council.

There is a clear contradiction

between the letters dated 29 September and 1 October 1993 to the
Secretary-General from Libya’s Foreign Minister and
Colonel Qaddafi’s latest positions, which close the door to any
solution.

Libya may still hope to have it believed that it is

prepared to do what the Security Council expects of it, but no one
can be duped any longer.
It was essential to respond.

That is why we calmly but

resolutely consulted the other members of the Council about
strengthening the sanctions.
We are now, much to our regret, caught up in the logic of
escalation.

My Government hopes that this reinforcement of the

sanctions, albeit moderate, will make the authorities in Tripoli
understand that the resolve of the international community and

S/PV.3312
44
(Mr. Mérimée, France)
the Security Council is unflagging and that they will not be
satisfied by the indefinite continuation of the status quo.
The three sponsors of the resolution have been accused of
having a hidden agenda against the Libyan regime.

The text of the

resolution that our Council has just adopted shows that that is not
so, and it paves the way for a speedy solution.

If the Libyan

Government cooperates effectively with my country’s judicial
authorities in the UTA 772 case, and if it hands over to the
competent courts the two suspects in the attack on Pan Am 103, the
Council will immediately be able to adopt a resolution suspending
the implementation of all the sanctions.
This is no empty offer.

The entire mechanism set up by

resolution 731 (1992), resolution 748 (1992) and today’s resolution
would cease to apply in those circumstances, and only a Security
Council resolution would reactivate it, if necessary.
We hope, however, that after this first decisive step Libya
will be anxious to achieve full reintegration into the
international community.

All it would have to do would be to

comply with its other obligations.

The report then submitted by

the Secretary-General would allow the Security Council to take a
decision on the formal and final lifting of the sanctions regime.
Finally, I express the hope that the Libyan authorities will
heed our Council’s message and will take the just measures expected
of them by the families of the victims.
Sir David HANNAY (United Kingdom):

It is now some 20

months since the adoption of Security Council resolution 748 (1992)
and nearly five years since the destruction of Pan Am 103 over
Lockerbie.

The Libyan Government is still failing to comply with

Security Council resolutions and to recognize the determination of
the international community to fight international terrorism.
has left no alternative to further sanctions.

That

S/PV.3312
45
(Sir David Hannay,
United Kingdom)
The objectives of the sponsors remain strictly limited.

They

are to secure justice for the victims of Pan Am 103 and UTA 772 and
to ensure that such atrocities do not happen again. Central to
these objectives is that the two men accused of the Lockerbie
bombing should stand trial in Scotland or the United States and
that the demands of French justice regarding the UTA case be met.
My Prime Minister and Foreign Secretary have repeatedly given
assurances that if the two Lockerbie suspects went to Scotland they
would receive a fair trial, with the full protection afforded by
Scottish legal procedures.

I now reiterate those assurances.

My

Ministers have also made it clear that we are pursuing no hidden
agenda.

Our agenda is set out in Security Council resolutions

731 (1992), 748 (1992) and the present resolution - no more and no
less.
The new resolution adopts a carefully balanced approach.
Thus, in addition to the stick of further sanctions, there is also
a carrot:

if the Secretary-General reports to the Council that the

Libyan Government has ensured the appearance of those charged with
the Lockerbie bombing before the appropriate United States or
Scottish court and has satisfied the French judicial authorities
with respect to the bombing of UTA 772, then the Security Council
will review the sanctions with a view to suspending them
immediately.

We see this suspension of sanctions as a preliminary

to their being lifted immediately Libya has complied fully with
resolutions 731 (1992) and 748 (1992).

This new element, which was

not present in resolution 748 (1992), is designed to make it clear
that sanctions are not intended to punish; they are intended to
bring Libya to compliance, and no more than that.
The resolution contains a grace period before the sanctions
come into effect.

There has already, in our view, been too much

S/PV.3312
46
(Sir David Hannay,
United Kingdom)
delay and prevarication by the Government of Libya.

But, since our

sole aim is to resolve this issue, and not to impose sanctions for
the sake of sanctions, we have agreed to the grace period.

We hope

Libya will take advantage of this extra time to hand over the two
Lockerbie suspects and satisfy the demands of French justice.

Then

the new sanctions would never need to go into effect and the
existing ones could be suspended.
We are particularly grateful to members of the Council, to the
Secretary-General and to a number of other Members of the United
Nations for supporting these resolutions and for seeking to
persuade the Libyan Government to comply with them.
will continue their efforts.

We hope they

It is important not only to secure

justice for the victims of Pan Am 103 and UTA 772, but also to send
a clear message to current and would-be terrorists and sponsors of
terrorism:

terrorism is a blight that the international community

will neither condone nor tolerate, and it is not cost-free.

S/PV.3312
47
Mr. SARDENBERG (Brazil):

The action taken today by the

Security Council involves determination of the existence of a
threat to international peace and security as a result of two
incidents of the utmost gravity, as it involves a number of legal
questions that have been the subject of controversial debate within
and outside this Council.
The terrorist attacks against Pan Am flight 103 on
21 December 1988, which caused the deaths of 270 people, and
against UTA flight 772 on 19 September 1989, in which 171 people
were killed, caused the deepest outrage and sadness in Brazil.
Those abominable, senseless, criminal acts have received the
strongest moral and political condemnation.

And it could not have

been otherwise.
Indeed, such crimes call for resolute and effective action so
that the persons responsible for them may be appropriately
prosecuted and punished.

This demand for justice is not only that

of the families and friends of the victims of those crimes; it is
widely shared by the whole international community and is very much
the wholehearted sentiment of the Brazilian Government.
Brazil’s support for the resolution that has just been adopted
is an expression, in specific and clearly exceptional
circumstances, of our unswerving commitment to international
cooperation to eradicate the scourge of international terrorism.
That is, in our assessment, the political thrust of this
resolution, and that is what has received our support.
It is our view that all resolutions of the Security Council
must be complied with.

Resolutions 731 (1992) and 748 (1992) -

both adopted at a time when Brazil was not a member of the Security
Council - are no different.

The fact that those resolutions deal

S/PV.3312
48
(Mr. Sardenberg, Brazil)
with a uniquely serious and complex case of international terrorism
makes it all the more important and urgent for this Council to
enforce compliance with its previous decisions on the matter.

The

resolution now adopted is directly linked to those previous
decisions, whose implementation it is intended to promote.
It is also our view that the strong measures of sanction that
this Council is empowered to impose under Chapter VII of the
Charter constitute a last resort, to be used only in exceptionally
grave circumstances that involve a clear and direct threat to
international peace and security.

It was thus only after carefully

pondering the extremely serious nature of the case before us, as
well as the negative consequences that would ensue should the
Council be unable to act, that we decided to cast a positive vote
on this resolution.
Having explained the reasons for our political support for the
resolution, I wish to stress that our positive vote was cast
without prejudice to our position on various aspects of a legal
nature that are involved in the actions taken by the Council in
relation to this case.

In this connection, I wish to place several

points on record.
It is our considered view that efforts to combat and prevent
acts of international terrorism must be based on strong and
effective international cooperation on the basis of the relevant
principles of international law and the existing international
Conventions relating to the various aspects of the problem of
international terrorism.

The basic imperative in the prevention of

terrorist acts of an international nature - as expressed, for
example, in resolution 44/29 of the United Nations General
Assembly - is that States must invariably fulfil their obligations

S/PV.3312
49
(Mr. Sardenberg, Brazil)
under international law and take effective and resolute measures to
prevent such acts, in particular by ensuring the apprehension and
prosecution or extradition of the perpetrators of terrorist acts.
The need to strengthen international cooperation in accordance
with those principles remains unchanged.

As provided for in

Article 24 (2) of the Charter, the Security Council is bound to
discharge its responsibilities in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the United Nations.

That means also that decisions

taken by the Council, including decisions under Chapter VII, have
to be construed in the light of those purposes and principles,
which, inter alia, require respect for the principles of justice
and international law.
As was noted by some delegations in statements made in this
Council on 21 January 1992, upon the adoption of resolution
731 (1992), the exceptional circumstances on which this case is
based make it clear that the action taken by the Council seeks to
address a specific political situation and is clearly not intended
to establish any legal precedent - especially not a precedent that
would question the validity of time-honoured rules and principles
of international law or the appropriateness of different domestic
legislations with respect to the prevention and elimination of
international terrorism.
We are convinced that the imposition of sanctions must always
be linked to the performance of limited, concrete and very specific
acts that are made mandatory by decisions of the Security Council.
Such acts must be specifically set out by the Council so that the
State on which sanctions are imposed may be able to know in
advance, and beyond all doubt, that the sanctions will be lifted as
soon as those specific requirements are met.

This was the view we

expressed, in connection with operative paragraph 16 of the

S/PV.3312
50
(Mr. Sardenberg, Brazil)
resolution, in the consultations undertaken by the sponsors, and it
is the view we shall take when it comes to the practical
application of that paragraph.
Since this is the first time Brazil is addressing this
question in a formal meeting of the Security Council, we believe we
should refer to our position in relation to the results of the
investigations that provide the basis for the requests referred to
in resolutions 731 (1992) and 748 (1992), as well as in the
resolution we have just adopted.

The Brazilian Government has

studied carefully the documents submitted to the Security Council
by the States that have conducted those investigations.

As the

Security Council cannot pass judgement on the merits of a criminal
case, we understand that the action taken by the Council is aimed
exclusively at addressing a political problem involving a threat to
international peace and security.

It cannot be construed in a

manner inconsistent with the presumption of innocence.
We note that operative paragraphs 3, 5 and 6 of the resolution
set forth decisions requiring measures by States to prohibit
certain acts by their nationals or from their territory.

It is the

understanding of the Brazilian Government that the words "their
nationals", in that context, are to be interpreted as meaning
persons under their jurisdiction.

It is clear that the decisions

set out in those paragraphs do not require or authorize States to
take any measures beyond their respective jurisdictions.
We understand that the initiatives that Members States are
called upon to take to encourage the Libyan Government to respond
effectively to Council resolutions, as expressed in operative
paragraph 15, are initiatives such as those that have been carried
out by States so far, in the manner of good offices, to facilitate

S/PV.3312
51
(Mr. Sardenberg, Brazil)
talks and diplomatic contacts leading to a peaceful solution of
this problem.
I also wish to indicate that my delegation is fully aware of
the need to address the consequences that may arise for third
countries from the measures provided for in this resolution should
the sanctions come into force.

We therefore attach great

importance to operative paragraph 10 of the resolution, which
entrusts to the Committee established by resolution 748 (1992) the
task of examining possible requests for assistance under Article 50
of the Charter.

As a member of the Security Council and of that

Committee, Brazil will be attentive to this problem and will be
ready to work with other delegations to seek effective ways of
dealing with this problem.
The question of ways and means of giving effect to the
provisions of Article 50 goes well beyond this particular case.

As

there is an increasing number of cases in which sanctions are
applied, there is also a proportionate need to examine ways in
which the United Nations can ensure more effective application of
Article 50.
Brazil voted in favour of this resolution in the hope that it
will not be necessary for the sanctions to come into force.

It is

indeed our hope that the period between now and 1 December, when
the new sanctions are to come into effect, will be profitably
utilized by the States involved - in particular, by Libya - to
achieve an early negotiated solution in full conformity with
Security Council resolutions.

We encourage the Secretary-General

to continue his efforts to facilitate such a solution.

S/PV.3312
52
Mr. LI Zhaoxing (China) (interpretation from Chinese):
Peace is the common aspiration of people all over the world, and
terrorist activities in any form are a great threat to people’s
peaceful lives.

Since the tragic crashing of the Pan Am 103 and

UTA 772 flights, the Chinese Government has on many occasions
strongly condemned these terrorist acts and expressed its profound
sympathy to the bereaved families and the victim countries.

We

have always held that comprehensive, fair and objective
investigations should be conducted and that convicted criminals
should be duly punished in accordance with the principles and
provisions of the United Nations Charter and relevant international
conventions.

S/PV.3312
53
(Mr. Li Zhoaxing, China)
The disputes between States, no matter how complicated they
are, should be settled peacefully by diplomatic and political
means.

We are opposed to the indiscriminate imposition of

sanctions on a country in the name of the United Nations.

We made

our position clear, when resolution 748 (1992) was adopted by the
Council, that in principle China was not in favour of imposing
sanctions on Libya.

Under the current changing circumstances we

are still not in favour of maintaining, let alone intensifying,
sanctions against Libya.

In our view, the only effective means

that can lead to a solution of this question is negotiation and
consultation.

To intensify sanctions against Libya will not help

to settle the question; on the contrary, it may further complicate
the matter, make the Libyan people suffer more, and create even
greater economic difficulties for the neighbouring and other
countries concerned.

Therefore, the Chinese delegation was unable

to support the resolution adopted by the Council today.
Recently, the Libyan side has shown certain flexibility and is
willing to encourage the suspects to appear before the Scottish
courts.

It has also expressed its intention to negotiate with the

parties concerned to settle some specific issues.

This positive

gesture demonstrates that as long as the parties concerned show
sincerity and are able to negotiate in a calm manner there will
always be hope for a peaceful solution to the dispute.
Organizations such as the Organization of African Unity, the
League of Arab States and the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
have also expressed their willingness to contribute to the
settlement of the crisis that resulted from the above-mentioned air
crashes, and they have already made unremitting efforts and
achieved certain results.

Therefore, more time should be given for

their continuing efforts.

We believe that these organizations,

S/PV.3312
54
(Mr. Li Zhoaxing, China)
with their more frequent contacts and exchanges with the party
concerned, are in a better position to promote the settlement of
this question and will be able to play a more positive role.
In order to bring an end to the crisis and ease the tension,
the Secretary-General has overcome many difficulties and has been
tireless in his mediating efforts.

These efforts should also

continue so as to help the parties concerned remove their
differences and settle the remaining issues at an early date.
At the present stage, while recognizing the difficulties we
are facing in solving the problems, we should also be aware of the
existing opportunities.

As long as we allow sufficient time for

diplomatic efforts and have enough patience there is hope for a
compromise acceptable to all, thus avoiding the imposition of
upgraded sanctions and their adverse consequences.

We therefore

strongly urge the parties concerned to adopt an attitude of
flexibility and compromise in order to create the necessary
conditions for a final settlement.
Mr. VORONTSOV (Russian Federation) (interpretation from
Russian):

The Russian delegation supported the draft resolution

adopted by the Council, which was sponsored by the United Kingdom,
the United States and France, since it fully concurs with its
reiteration of the resolve of the Security Council to eradicate
international terrorism.
In combating this evil, which has become the real blight or
leprosy of the twentieth century, there can be no vacillation.
Combating international terrorism and violence is for us a key
tenet deriving, not only from the moral underpinnings of the policy
of a new Russia, but unfortunately from the realities of the
contemporary world.

We are therefore anxious to work and to

cooperate with the world community in putting an end to acts of

S/PV.3312
55
(Mr. Vorontsov, Russian Federation)
international terrorism which, as appropriately emphasized in the
resolution just adopted, is essential for the maintenance of
international peace and security.
We are deeply convinced that Security Council resolutions
731 (1992) and 748 (1992), adopted with a view to bringing to
justice those accused of planting an explosive device on board
Pan Am flight 103 and UTA flight 772, must be implemented.

The

suspects must be brought to trial, and until that happens the
sanctions mechanism should continue in effect.
As far as the nature of the sanctions is concerned, the
Russian Federation attaches particular importance to that provision
in the resolution which affirms:
"... that nothing in this resolution affects Libya’s duty
scrupulously to adhere to all of its obligations concerning
servicing and repayment of its foreign debt;" (resolution
883 (1993), para. 11)
We believe that this is an extremely important provision, the
purpose of which is to ensure that as a result of the additional
sanctions imposed on Libya, the interests of other States would be
harmed as little as possible.
We hope that Tripoli will treat the resolution we have adopted
with all due seriousness, will draw the necessary conclusions, and
shortly - it has until 1 December - take steps to comply with the
legitimate demands of the Security Council.

That will, initially,

make it possible immediately to suspend the sanctions and then to
consider the question of lifting them completely.

It is our belief

that that is in the interests of both Libya and the entire
international community.

S/PV.3312
56
Mr. YAÑEZ BARNUEVO (Spain) (interpretation from Spanish):
The Security Council has just adopted a resolution which we had
hoped would not have become necessary.

Unfortunately, a year and a

half after their adoption, resolutions 731 (1992) and 748 (1992)
have still not been properly complied with.

Despite the determined

efforts of the Secretary-General, to whom we wish to express our
special appreciation, and the efforts of States and organizations,
particularly the League of Arab States, which are interested in a
speedy solution of the crisis, we must note that Libya has not
fully complied with the demands set forth in Security Council
resolutions 731 (1992) and 748 (1992).
In those circumstances, the adoption of a new resolution was
inevitable.

First, it is necessary to ensure respect for the

obligation imposed by the United Nations Charter on all Member
States to comply with decisions of the Security Council.

Secondly,

the events that led to resolutions 731 (1992) and 748 (1992) are
particularly serious.

The attacks against commercial flights of

Pan Am and UTA are horrendous crimes, which caused numerous
innocent victims, and their presumed perpetrators must be brought
to justice.
As the representative of Brazil has pointed out, the Security
Council is taking action in order to deal with a decision that
affects international peace and security, without prejudice to the
principle of the presumption of innocence as regards the persons
concerned.

These are the reasons that prompted my delegation to

vote in favour of resolution 883 (1993), which has just been
adopted by the Council.

This resolution, though as firm and

vigorous as is necessary to attain its objective - namely to ensure
compliance with the Council’s requirements - nevertheless contains
an element of flexibility providing an appropriate way out of the

S/PV.3312
57
(Mr. Yañez Barnuevo, Spain)
crisis if there is sufficient will on the part of the Libyan
authorities to do so.
It is true that through this resolution new sanctions are
imposed upon Libya, but it is also true that mechanisms are
provided to suspend them and also to lift all the sanctions
established immediately, once there is compliance with the
requirements of the Council.

Moreover, a time period is

established which would make it possible to avoid the entry into
force of the new measures if Libya fulfils its obligations by
1 December next.

S/PV.3312
58
(Mr. Yañez Barnuevo, Spain)
We would now encourage the Secretary-General to redouble his
efforts, which were so close to bearing fruit, until it does so.
We also encourage the States and organizations that can contribute
to finding a solution to the crisis to lend the Secretary-General
their cooperation.
At the same time, we would urge the Libyan Government to
pursue the course set forth in its letters of 29 September and
1 October 1993.

We were encouraged by the assurance given the

Council today by the Permanent Representative of Libya that his
Government will continue to cooperate with the Secretary-General in
seeking a definitive solution to the problem.
To that end, the Libyan authorities must comply with the
provisions of paragraph 16 of resolution 883 (1993), just adopted,
and in particular must do everything necessary to ensure that the
two persons charged with the bombing of Pan Am flight 103 do indeed
appear before the Scottish courts, as well as to satisfy the
requests of French judicial authorities with respect to the bombing
of UTA flight 772.
In the unfortunate event that that does not take place by
1 December and the new measures therefore enter into force, the
Council undertakes in the resolution just adopted to consider the
economic problems that may confront States particularly affected by
the implementation of those measures.

Similarly, under the

resolution the Council instructs the Committee established by
resolution 748 (1992) to examine possible requests for assistance
that may be submitted by such States under the provisions of
Article 50 of the Charter and to make recommendations to the
President of the Security Council for appropriate action.

The

Council thus continues a practice followed in other cases in which

S/PV.3312
59
(Mr. Yañez Barnuevo, Spain)
enforcement measures were adopted that could have a negative effect
on the economies of Member States, a practice that will undoubtedly
facilitate cooperation by those States in implementing such
measures and that my country wholeheartedly supports.
Spain sincerely hopes that we will not reach that point.

We

hope that Libya will comply with the Council’s requirements,
thereby resolving a crisis that is causing considerable harm not
only to the Libyan people but to other peoples, including my own,
in the Mediterranean region, which is not exempt from problems that
need to be approached through international cooperation in a NorthSouth context.

Some very hopeful initiatives that have been

launched in recent years have been affected by this crisis.

We

would hope that the situation will be resolved as soon as possible
for the sake of the full development of that much-needed
cooperation between the two shores of the Mediterranean for the
benefit of their peoples and of the international community.
Mr. ERDÖS (Hungary) (interpretation from French):

Hungary

vigorously and unreservedly condemns all forms of international
terrorism.

We are deeply convinced that the international

community must do everything, within the framework of global and
regional cooperation, to combat and eradicate that serious
phenomenon, which knows no borders.

This position of principle

determines Hungary’s attitude towards the problem with which we are
dealing today:

the terrorist acts perpetrated against the Pan Am

and UTA flights.

We regret that, because of delaying tactics and

unkept promises and the growing gap between verbal statements and
concrete actions, this item is still on the Council’s agenda.
regret that for the third time the Council has had to meet to
review the situation.

The reason for this is Libya’s failure,

despite persistent efforts by the Secretary-

We

S/PV.3312
60
(Mr. Erdös, Hungary)
General, the countries members of the Arab League, and other States
concerned, to comply with Security Council resolutions 731 (1992)
and 748 (1992), adopted, respectively, in January and March last
year.
It is clear that the Council had no choice but to adopt new
measures to ensure respect for its two earlier resolutions.

At the

same time, as in other similar cases, we cannot conceal our regret
that we have had to have recourse to Chapter VII of the Charter to
tighten the sanctions imposed on a Member State of the
Organization, particularly since that State is a country with which
Hungary has long had mutually advantageous economic cooperation.
We would hope that the Libyan Government will make use of the
period between now and 1 December, the date on which the resolution
we have just adopted will enter into force, to comply with the
relevant Security Council resolutions, which might make it
unnecessary to implement today’s resolution.

We should also like

to draw attention to paragraph 16 of the resolution, under which
the Council expresses its readiness to review the sanction measures
with a view to suspending and, possibly, lifting them.

We are

confident that Libya will make use of all available possibilities
to extricate itself from the present situation and thereby enable
the Security Council to determine that the circumstances that
caused the imposition of such measures against that country have
ceased to exist.
In that spirit, and for those reasons, Hungary decided to vote
in favour of resolution 883 (1993), in the hope that the day is not
too far off when it will be possible to restore normal relations
with Libya in every sphere.

S/PV.3312
61
Mr. TAYLHARDAT (Venezuela) (interpretation from Spanish):
Venezuela condemns terrorism in all its forms, regardless of its
sponsors or the causes that are alleged to justify it, be they
political, economic, social, religious or of any other kind.

That

is a position my country has consistently upheld in all
international forums.
Accordingly, we have supported international measures and
initiatives aimed at combating and eradicating that hateful form of
struggle.

Terrorism is a cowardly act, one that cloaks itself in

anonymity, sacrifices human life and wreaks destruction to achieve
its goals, with total contempt for the most basic individual
rights.
As is pointed out in General Assembly resolution 44/29, acts
of international terrorism not only result in irreparable loss of
human life and in material damage but also have a deleterious
effect on international relations because of the harm they do to
international peace and security.

This is reflected in the

resolution we have just adopted, which has its roots in deplorable
acts of terrorism whose scope has led the international community,
represented in the Security Council, to adopt measures to ensure
that those charged with such abominable actions are brought to
justice and punished to the full extent of the law.
My delegation would have preferred that the situation referred
to in the resolution just adopted be resolved without the need to
resort to the application of such severe measures as those set
forth in it.
Venezuela was heartened when, as noted in the seventh
preambular paragraph of resolution 883 (1993), the Government of
Libya stated its intention to encourage those charged with the
bombing of Pan Am flight 103 to appear for trial and its
willingness to cooperate with the French authorities in elucidating
the case of the bombing of UTA flight 772.

S/PV.3312
62
(Mr. Taylhardat, Venezuela)
Unfortunately, those charged did not appear.

This fact,

together with the lack of a full and effective response to the
requests and decisions contained in Security Council resolutions
731 (1992) and 748 (1992), has led the Council to adopt today’s
resolution, which provides for new and more drastic measures.

The

purpose of these measures is to demonstrate the international
community’s firm resolve to punish those guilty of committing acts
of terrorism.
In voting in favour of resolution 883 (1993), my delegation
hopes and trusts that the alleged perpetrators of these acts will
appear before the competent court before the expiration of the
deadline set for the entry into force of the measures provided for
in the resolution.
We appeal to all the parties involved in this problem to
continue to demonstrate the spirit of compromise they have shown so
far in the quest for a solution in harmony with the spirit and
purpose of the various resolutions adopted by the Council on this
subject.
In conclusion, we express to the Secretary-General our
gratitude for the important role he has played in regard to this
problem.

We believe that he has not yet exhausted all his

possibilities for action and we trust that he will continue to
exert efforts to secure the cooperation of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya in the quest for a solution that will render unnecessary
the implementation of the measures provided for in this resolution
and lead to the lifting of the measures imposed by previous
resolutions of the Council.
Mr. MARUYAMA (Japan):

Since last year, many Governments

and organizations, including the League of Arab States, as well as
the Secretary-General of the United Nations, have been trying to

S/PV.3312
63
(Mr. Maruyama, Japan)
gain the cooperation of Libya in an effort to clarify the facts
surrounding the downing of Pan Am flight 103 and UTA flight 772,
among whose victims was a Japanese national.
Japan, which is strongly opposed to terrorism in all its
forms, has appealed repeatedly to the Libyan Government to comply
with Security Council resolutions 731 (1992) and 748 (1992).

It is

indeed regrettable that, despite such endeavours, Libya has failed
to comply with the Security Council’s requirements and has
continuously tried to avoid its international obligations through
equivocation and delay.
Last year, at the time that resolutions 731 (1992) and
748 (1992) were adopted, it was understood that the Security
Council would be compelled to take further measures if Libya did
not comply with them.

Now, unfortunately, the Council has had no

choice but to adopt further measures to gain Libya’s compliance.
Japan urges the Libyan Government to comply fully with the
relevant Security Council resolutions without further delay.

It is

in the hope of gaining this compliance that my delegation supported
the adoption of this new resolution.

In the meantime, Japan

remains committed to efforts to find a solution to this difficult
situation and, indeed, to eliminate all forms of international
terrorism.
Mr. MARKER (Pakistan):

Pakistan has consistently and

vigourously condemned terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations.

This includes the abominable acts perpetrated

against Pan Am flight 103 and UTA flight 772.
Pakistan has always also upheld the sanctity of the
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council and
has consistently supported complete and faithful adherence to them.

S/PV.3312
64
(Mr. Marker, Pakistan)
We have therefore scrupulously abided by the terms of Security
Council resolution 748 (1992).
We regret that the sincere and dedicated efforts that were
undertaken by the Secretary-General of the United Nations and a
number of well-intentioned Governments to find an amicable solution
to the problem of meeting the requirements of Security Council
resolution 731 (1992) appear to have been unsuccessful.

However,

we have not lost hope and feel that these endeavours should
continue.
The PRESIDENT:
speakers.

There are no further names on the list of

The Security Council has thus concluded the present

stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 4.45 p.m.
