S/2020/541

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 June 2020
Original: English and French

Letter dated 15 June 2020 from the President of the Security Council
addressed to the Secretary-General and the Permanent Representatives
of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by
the Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres, and Mr. Pierre Buyoya, African
Union High Representative for Mali and the Sahel, as well as the statements
delivered by Mr. Jean-Yves Le Drian, Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs of
France; Mr. Philippe Goffin, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Defence of Belgium;
Mr. Kalla Ankourao, Minister for Foreign Affairs, Cooperation, African Integration
and Nigeriens Abroad of the Niger; Mr. Miguel Vargas Maldonado, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Dominican Republic; Mr. Noureddine Erray, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Tunisia; Mr. Jüri Luik, Minister of Defence of Estonia;
Ms. Candith Mashego-Dlamini, Deputy Minister of International Relations and
Cooperation of South Africa; Lord Tariq Ahmad of Wimbledon, Minister of State for
the Commonwealth, the United Nations and South Asia of the United Kingdom and
Northern Ireland; and by the representatives of China, Indonesia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, the United States of America and Viet Nam in connection with the
video-teleconference on the situation in Mali, convened on Thursday, 11 June 2020.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 by
the President of the Security Council addressed to Permanent Representatives of
the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of
the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, these
briefing and statements will be issued as an official document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Nicolas de Rivière
President of the Security Council

20-07962 (E) 230620 220720

*2007962*

S/2020/541

Annex I
Statement by the Secretary-General
[Original: English and French]
I thank you, Sir, for this opportunity to brief the Council. I apologize that at
10 a.m. I will need to leave to attend the start of a General Assembly meeting.
The multifaceted crises in Mali and the Sahel continue to take a heavy toll on
people across the subregion. Terrorist and criminal groups continue to expand their
activities and exploit long-standing tensions along community lines.
I express my sincere condolences on recent killings in central Mali where,
over the past few days, at least 100 civilians have been killed in attacks in the Mopti
region. I also extend my condolences to neighbouring Burkina Faso, where more
than 80 people died in the north in separate attacks attributed to terrorist groups.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has added another layer of complexity
to an already extremely challenging situation, with attempts by terrorist and other
armed groups to capitalize on the pandemic.
Mali has not been spared by the virus, and neither has the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), our
peacekeeping Mission on the ground. More than 100 United Nations personnel have
been affected. While many of them have recovered, two peacekeepers lost their lives
and we mourn that loss.
I am encouraged by the swift action taken by the Government to respond to the
pandemic, in close cooperation with the MINUSMA and other international partners.
MINUSMA also took early measures, which have been further strengthened, in
order to prevent the spread of the virus while ensuring the continued implementation
of the mandate.
It has been five years since the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in
Mali was signed by the Malian parties in Algiers. In spite of protracted delays in its
implementation, important progress has been made over the past year. An inclusive
national dialogue was held in Mali, with the participation of Malians of the diaspora.
That provided an opportunity for Malian men and women to express their concerns
and discuss solutions. It also yielded a number of resolutions and enabled the parties
to refocus on the implementation of the Bamako Agreement.
Following the integration of 1,330 former combatants of the armed movements
into the national defence and security forces, more than 1,100 personnel were
redeployed to Kidal, Gao, Timbuktu and Ménaka as part of the reconstituted units
of the national armed forces. Action will resume soon to integrate 510 additional
combatants and another batch of 1,160 fighters in order to reach the objective of
3,000 newly integrated soldiers by mid-2020.
The arrival of the first reconstituted unit in February marked the first formal
presence of the national armed forces in Kidal since rebel forces took control of
the main cities in northern Mali in 2012. Once fully operational, the reconstituted
units will strengthen the national armed forces in northern Mali. A more robust
presence of the national defence and security forces is key to combating terrorism
and restoring State authority.
It will also pave the way for a more significant deployment of State
administration and justice. It is now paramount for all redeployed units to become
operational while creating the conditions to gradually assume their mandated
security responsibilities. To that end, we need urgent measures, including continued
2/32

20-07962

S/2020/541

efforts by all parties concerned to live up to their commitment to provide additional
infrastructure, equipment, training and appropriate measures to strengthen cohesion.
An effective community-oriented police force is equally important to stabilize
Mali and fight terrorism. Steps were taken to put in place the legislative framework
for the creation and deployment of a territorial police force, a key aspect of the
decentralization process.
The good offices of MINUSMA have been crucial to helping the parties
overcome mistrust, resolve numerous problems and reach an agreement on the
modalities for the redeployment. That is just one of many examples illustrating the
pivotal role that MINUSMA continues to play in supporting the parties and creating
a space for the peace process to unfold. In that connection, I would like to take this
opportunity to commend the outstanding leadership of my Special Representative,
Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif.
Steps have also been taken to operationalize the Northern Development
Zone with a view to improving people’s daily lives and helping them address the
underlying drivers of instability, including poverty, underdevelopment and the lack
of opportunities for young people.
Legislative elections were held in March and April, with the support of the
Mission. Although there is still a long way to go, the number of elected women is
three times higher than during the previous legislature and represents the highest
percentage ever recorded. Nevertheless, the low voter turnout, just as we have seen
in previous polls, calls for continued efforts from all political actors to enhance the
population’s trust in national institutions.
Furthermore, I call for the immediate release of opposition leader Soumaïla
Cissé, who was abducted during the electoral campaign.
The new Parliament, currently in session, is expected to play a key role in
enacting institutional reforms envisaged in the peace agreement, including through
the holding of a constitutional referendum.
These mostly positive developments are promising. I encourage the signatory
parties to strengthen mutual trust and to work together to keep up the momentum in
the peace process, which remains the only pathway to a politically stable and more
secure Mali. My Special Representative stands ready to further extend his good
offices to help create conditions for progress.
I remain very concerned about the situation in central Mali, where terrorist
activity continues to fuel violence among communities, thus taking a heavy toll on
the local population. I am encouraged by the Government’s efforts and the Prime
Minister’s personal engagement, particularly community dialogue initiatives. These
have yielded some positive results but there is a very long way to go.
Efforts to combat impunity remain essential to curbing the violence in the
centre, and more needs to be done by the authorities to demonstrate their commitment
in that regard. MINUSMA’s adaptation plan seeks to enable the Mission to deliver on
its mandated strategic objectives, particularly its second objective concerning Mali’s
central region.
I would also like to highlight the need to bring to justice the perpetrators of
crimes against peacekeepers. A total of 128 peacekeepers have been killed as a result
of malicious acts and not a single perpetrator has been held accountable.
I am appalled by the allegations of summary killings and executions of at
least 38 civilians by the Malian armed forces in two villages in the Mopti region
last weekend, in one case with the support of traditional hunters. I welcome the
20-079623/32

S/2020/541

Government’s announcement to investigate these serious violations and I call on
the authorities to do everything possible to hold the perpetrators of these heinous
crimes accountable.
The humanitarian situation is equally concerning. The number of people in
need of assistance is expected to increase to 5 million over the next months. I call for
swift and determined international action to address the most urgent humanitarian
needs and mitigate the destabilizing effects of COVID-19.
The conclusions of the 2019 inclusive national dialogue have raised hopes
among the Malian people and deserve diligent implementation. The growing calls
for civil society to improve governance and fight insecurity, as heard during last
weekend’s demonstrations in Bamako, must be answered accordingly. I welcome the
President’s openness to dialogue in that regard.
MINUSMA and the Secretariat have taken important steps to enhance our
presence and activities in central Mali and to better protect civilians. The Mission’s
adaptation plan remains a viable proposal for a more agile, mobile and flexible
operation, with tailored units and enhanced capabilities — most important among
them additional air mobility. I am encouraged by the pledges made during the recent
MINUSMA force generation conference by troop-contributing countries in early
May to deploy additional specialized capabilities to the Mission.
In an increasingly challenging security environment, additional air assets are
urgently needed to enable the Mission to continue ensuring the implementation of its
mandate. I reiterate my call upon Member States to support the plan when considering
contributions and the Mission’s budget, in keeping with their commitments under
the Action for Peacekeeping framework.
Fighting terrorism is a joint responsibility. I commend the Malian army, the
Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) and the French forces for
stepping up their operations and improving their coordination in the Liptako-Gourma
region with the aim of defeating terrorist groups operating in that critical area.
An exclusively military solution does not exist. Security responses must go
hand in hand with the restoration of State authority and sustainable development.
Respect for human rights in the conduct of operations is also essential. Success in
the fight against terrorism in Mali and the Sahel region will depend on the ability of
the international community to remain united and to adhere to a comprehensive and
joint approach.
In that regard, I am encouraged by the continued commitment of our key
partners. I commend France, Germany and the European Union for spearheading the
Sahel coalition established at the Pau summit in January. The coalition provides a
broader framework to coordinate security, development and governance initiatives
in the region.
Support for the G-5 Sahel remains vital. In that connection, I reiterate my
call for a comprehensive support package, funded by assessed contributions, to
allow for predictable and sustainable support to the Joint Force. I also call on the
international community to continue to support regional initiatives, including those
of the Economic Community of West African States and the African Union.
Building a politically stable and more secure Mali requires our collective
and sustained commitment and MINUSMA’s continued support. We owe that to the
people of Mali and the Sahel region, who deserve a better future.

4/32

20-07962

S/2020/541

Annex II
Statement by the African Union High Representative for Mali and
the Sahel, Pierre Buyoya
[Original: French]
On behalf of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission, His Excellency
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, I would like to congratulate France on presiding over
this Security Council meeting and I thank all the members of the Council for having
invited the African Union to participate in this important debate on the SecretaryGeneral’s report on the situation in Mali and on the prospect of renewing the mandate
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
(MINUSMA).
Today’s debate is taking place amid a difficult context in Mali and throughout
the Sahel region. That part of Africa is currently going through a triple crisis —
health, economic and security — due to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Given
the long-standing prevailing political and security situation in the region, we must
bolster the system put in place to ensure security in Mali and in the Sahel, with
MINUSMA at its core.
The security situation has deteriorated drastically, especially since the second
half of 2019 in the Liptako-Gourma area, known as the three-borders area. The actions
of armed terrorist groups have increased in number and intensity. Intercommunal
violence in central Mali continues despite the various strategies implemented by the
Government. The persistence of such clashes has resulted in a significant number of
civilian casualties in recent weeks.
The difficult security situation has exacerbated the humanitarian situation and
weakened respect for human rights, in the form of a growing number of displaced
persons and the lack of basic social services, such as education and health care.
In response, Mali has launched a new military initiative, Operation Maliko,
with tangible results. The Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel)
has grown in strength and the cooperation and coordination mechanism set up in Pau
seems to be working properly. Other initiatives have been under way since the second
half of 2019, notably that of the Economic Community of West African States, which
has provided significant financial support to the G-5 Sahel. Similarly, at its February
summit, the African Union expressed its solidarity with the countries of the region
by deploying a force of 3,000. That force is being assembled. Of course, to that
security dimension we must add multiple interventions in the area of development
within the framework of the Priority Investment Programme of the Group of Five for
the Sahel and the Alliance for the Sahel.
On the political plan, the holding of an inclusive national dialogue in
Mali raised many hopes. We congratulate Mali, which, following the dialogue’s
conclusions, successfully organized legislative elections that helped establish the new
National Assembly. That important step can facilitate even more important reforms,
especially constitutional reforms. We also take this opportunity to encourage the
Malian authorities to organize partial elections in the districts where they could not
be held.
With regard to the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation
in Mali, progress has been made on the deployment of the reconstituted Malian
army. We encourage the Malian authorities to pursue their efforts to complete the
accelerated disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process, as only the total
disarmament of the armed movements and militias can help restore peace in Mali.
20-079625/32

S/2020/541

We also welcome the installation of interim authorities in the regions of
Taoudénit and Ménaka and we encourage the Government of Mali to complete
that process this year. We also welcome the transfer of skills and resources to local
authorities and the operationalization of the territorial police.
Finally, today’s debate comes at a time when a new Government is expected
to be formed in Mali. Our hope is that the next Government will be able to create
new momentum in the implementation of the peace agreement by adopting a new
timetable for completing the priority actions that have already been identified.
In conclusion, the political and security situation in Mali and in the Sahel
region as a whole remains difficult and requires sustained efforts by the entire
international community, particularly for the optimal implementation of the Mali
peace agreement, which is the guiding framework and means for the resolution of
the multidimensional crisis that the country is experiencing. MINUSMA’s role in the
implementation of the agreement and in the stabilization of the country is essential.
Accordingly, the African Union supports the proposed renewal of the mandate of
MINUSMA with its current staffing.

6/32

20-07962

S/2020/541

Annex III
Statement by the Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs of France,
Jean-Yves Le Drian
[Original: English and French]
As France has assumed the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
June, it is a great pleasure to preside over today’s Security Council meeting on Mali.
France thanks the Secretary-General for honouring us with his participation
in today’s meeting. I also welcome the presence at this meeting of the High
Representative of the African Union for the Sahel and Mali and of numerous
Ministers. It is a sign of our collective interest in the situation in Mali and, beyond
that, in the Sahel.
First of all, I would like to discuss the progress made over the last eight years,
for we must remember where we are coming from. In 2012, the north of Mali was
occupied by terrorists, and a political vacuum had set in. In 2013, at the request of
the Malian authorities, France intervened to stop the advance of jihadists towards
Bamako. The African force, the International Mission of Support in Mali, and then
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
(MINUSMA) were deployed to secure the territory, and elections were held.
Under the auspices of Algeria, the Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
in Mali was reached. Since then, significant progress has been made in the
implementation of that agreement. This year, for the first time in five years, a thousand
soldiers of the reconstituted Malian army, which includes former rebels, returned to
the northern cities, including the symbolic city of Kidal. Progress on other aspects of
the peace agreement is still ongoing, whether it be on decentralization, development
of the north or the participation of women in the peace process.
However, despite these sometimes-hard-won gains, the situation in Mali
and the Sahel remains extremely fragile. Terrorist groups are continuing their acts
of harassment. The civilian populations and armies of the countries of the Sahel,
whose courage and commitment I salute, are paying a heavy price. The humanitarian
situation, aggravated by the coronavirus disease pandemic, continues to deteriorate,
leading to an increase in the number of internally displaced persons and refugees.
Reconciliation between different communities remains a challenge. Finally, climate
change has made Mali and the whole region particularly vulnerable.
But France is confident. We are working with the States of the Sahel, some of
which are weakened but committed, and the international community has increased
its support with the launch this year of the Coalition for the Sahel, which will hold
its first ministerial meeting tomorrow. On the ground, this dynamic has resulted in
the establishment of a joint command mechanism between the 5,100-strong French
force, Operation Barkhane, and the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5) Joint Force.
The results are in, with victories in the fight against terrorism, including
the neutralization last week of Abdelmalek Droukdel, leader of the Organization
of Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb. Task Force Takuba, which brings together
various European special forces, has also been launched. Finally, we have continued
our efforts on governance and the return of State authority with the Partnership
for Security and Stability in the Sahel, launched together with Germany, and
development actions, all within the framework of the Sahel Alliance.
The month of June is of major importance for Mali, as it is the month of
MINUSMA’s mandate renewal. Against the backdrop of persistent challenges
facing the country, MINUSMA remains the best tool available for the international
20-079627/32

S/2020/541

community to support the Malians on their path to peace and security. MINUSMA’s
adaptation plan, which I invite all Member States to support, should further improve
the Mission’s capabilities.
In the negotiation of the new mandate, which will begin in the coming days,
our priorities will be to confirm MINUSMA in its priority tasks: implementation of
the peace agreement, support for the redeployment of the State, and the protection
of civilians in the centre of the country. But we will also seek to set out in the new
mandate the expectations we have for the Malian parties, both the Government and
the armed groups.
Five years after the signing of the peace agreement, the international
community is still waiting to see significant progress from them. The actions of
certain actors in blatant substitution of State authority in the north are not acceptable.
They must continue to disarm under conditions agreed by the parties. Furthermore,
we are still waiting to see the political and institutional reforms provided for in the
agreement come to pass. In this context, let me reiterate that the peace agreement
resulting from the Algiers process must remain our compass, and we must strive for
its full and complete implementation. Those who oppose it, on whatever side, will
face sanctions.
The renewal of the MINUSMA mandate must also be an opportunity to recall
our demands with regard to the protection of civilians, respect for international
humanitarian law, humanitarian access, the upholding of human rights, and the
fight against impunity. The Malian Government has announced investigations into
several allegations of serious human rights violations, some of which have been
alleged against members of the defence and security forces. It is essential that
those responsible for these unacceptable acts be brought to justice, as the Malian
Government has pledged to do. As we celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the
women and peace and security agenda this year, I also recall the importance of the
full, effective and meaningful participation of women, without whom there can be
no lasting peace.
Because MINUSMA acts in conjunction with other security entities on the
ground, it is also important that adequate synergies be established. For the sake of
the unity of the Security Council, we will advocate the extension of MINUSMA’s
support for the G-5 Sahel Joint Force, as well as a clarification of how that support
is provided beyond Malian territory.
MINUSMA is doing an excellent job in one of the most challenging
environments. I commend the commitment of the Secretary-General and that
of his Special Representative, Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, as well as that of
the peacekeepers.
Aware of its responsibility in this matter, France is eager to work closely
with each member of the Security Council to reach a consensus on the renewal of
the mandate.

8/32

20-07962

S/2020/541

Annex IV
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Defence of
Belgium, Philippe Goffin
I would first like to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing and presence
at today’s meeting and, through him, express gratitude to the entire United Nations
staff in Mali. I also salute President Buyoya and the African Union’s commitment to
peace, stability and development in Mali.
We again deplore the deaths in recent months and even in recent days of too
many civilians and soldiers in Mali. On behalf of Belgium, I would like to express
our condolences to their loved ones, as well as to the people and the Government
of Mali.
The fifth anniversary of the signing in 2015 of the Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali will be in a few days. I wish to emphasize that, even though
progress has been much slower than hoped, there is no alternative to peace and no
alternative to the 2015 peace agreement.
Some progress has been made on the agreement: the timid redeployment of
parts of the reconstituted army in the north, the establishment of a decentralized
administrative structure with a gradual transfer of responsibilities and resources,
the establishment of a development zone for the northern regions and the beginning
of the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process, which is a crucial
process designed to prevent the resumption of violence.
I also salute the work of the International Commission of Inquiry for Mali,
as provided for in the peace agreement, whose final report will be presented in a
few days. It is imperative that there be follow-up on the report and that the work
accomplished by the International Commission is acknowledged. Nevertheless, it
must be noted that since the signing of the 2015 agreement, progress has been too
weak to guarantee a return to lasting peace. I regret that the benchmarks identified
by the Security Council in June 2019 have, for the most part, not really been met.
Challenges remain, and I will point out two in particular. First, security
sector reform must be a priority in order to professionalize the sector and restore the
confidence of all Malians in those whose mission it is to protect them. Secondly, the
representation of all Malians — that is, of men and women — in State institutions,
which has yet to see progress in terms of balance, for both elective and administrative
functions, needs attention. After five years of modest progress, there is an urgent
need for the parties to show a renewed sense of responsibility in the search for
compromise in the implementation of the peace agreement.
We can all see it — the situation in central Mali remains very worrying,
despite the establishment of the crisis management political framework. We call
on the reformed State to redeploy as soon as possible and fulfil its sovereign role of
protecting citizens, starting with the most vulnerable.
Security, justice and education are three basic services that could help
undermine the recruitment of community militias and terrorists. I am convinced
that the end of intercommunal conflicts and the fight against terrorism involve
strengthening the legitimacy of the State.
I would like to take this opportunity to salute the work of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) in support
of the Government’s efforts. The MINUSMA adaptation plan is an important
initiative in this regard, even if we all know that the work of the Mission, in which

20-079629/32

S/2020/541

more than 80 Belgian soldiers are deployed, can be framed only as support for a
political process.
Let me mention another important topic: the fight against impunity. The
feeling of injustice, which is one of the most powerful, has already provoked
revolts. I encourage Mali to respond to the perception of injustice by adopting and
implementing a national crime policy. In this regard, I regret that no investigations
into the allegations of abuse by the defence and security forces have led to accused
persons being brought to trial. Equally regrettable is that no trial has been held against
alleged perpetrators of crimes against MINUSMA peacekeepers. Accordingly, I
would like to reiterate that Belgium will carefully monitor the implementation of the
recommendations of the International Commission of Inquiry.
The crisis that put Mali on the agenda of the Security Council has been
slow to resolve. Of course, some questions, including the global health crisis we
are experiencing, climate change, the regional terrorist threat and transnational
organized crime, all go beyond the Malian crisis in the strictest sense. But there are
also major internal challenges. Rather than trying to put them into perspective or
looking to find scapegoats, I call on all Malian political actors of goodwill to take
on those challenges and overcome them. They should know that they can count on
Belgium to assist and support them on the path that they themselves will have traced.

10/32

20-07962

S/2020/541

Annex V
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Cooperation, African
Integration and Nigeriens Abroad of the Niger, Kalla Ankourao
Allow me at the outset to welcome Mr. António Guterres, Secretary-General
of the United Nations, and Mr. Pierre Buyoya, High Representative of the African
Union for the Sahel and Mali, for their excellent briefings and for their personal
efforts aimed at stabilizing Mali in particular and the Sahel in general.
I would most sincerely like to thank Mr. Jean-Yves Le Drian, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of France, for having chosen to organize today’s session on United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
during his country’s presidency of the Security Council this month.
I would also like to welcome the participation of my ministerial counterparts
at this very important meeting for the Sahel. Their presence is testimony of their
interest in MINUSMA.
It is undeniable that MINUSMA’s efforts have made a major contribution to
the gradual stabilization of Mali. Unfortunately, however, they have been made at
the high cost of the loss in human lives of its personnel, mostly because of cowardly
attacks by armed terrorist groups, which have not observed the international
humanitarian truce called by the Secretary-General in response to the coronavirus
disease pandemic. Accordingly, I would like both to pay a heartfelt tribute to the
troop-contributing countries for their generosity and offer my deepest condolences
to the grieving families for their losses.
Despite the violence resulting from the ongoing attacks by terrorist armed
groups and from the intercommunal conflicts, tangible progress has been made in
the peace process in Mali, in particular since the holding of the inclusive national
dialogue in December 2019, which was a milestone for the people of Mali in
establishing a national consensus on the main political and institutional reforms.
Moreover, the holding of legislative elections on 29 March, against the backdrop
of rising threats, has clearly shown the world the Malian people’s dedication to
democratic values and their desire to return to peace and stability in the country.
Progress was also achieved in the promotion of gender equity, with 30 per cent of the
legislative seats being won by women.
Among the further examples of progress made, we welcome the transfer to
local authorities, albeit gradual, of responsibility for delivery of services. However,
we notice that other crucial reforms are lagging, for example, the setting up of local
police, administrative and territorial restructuring, and the redeployment of the
reconstituted army units to the north. These reforms, the delay of which constitutes
an important obstacle in the implementation of the 2015 peace agreement, should be
given the required attention.
The Niger welcomes the determined support provided by MINUSMA in the
context of stabilizing and gradually restoring State authority in central Mali. We
are also encouraged by the MINUSMA adaptation plan for central Mali, pursuant to
resolution 2480 (2019). However, we note with concern the lack of adequate resources
for the implementation of the plan. In this regard, we urge the Council to favourably
consider the allocation of additional financial resources, which is indispensable for
the effective implementation of the plan.
At the subregional level, we commend the continued efforts deployed by the
Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) in collaboration with
international forces, including the forces of Operation Barkhane. We are pleased
to note, as recognized by the Security Council last week, that the pace of Joint
20-0796211/32

S/2020/541

Force operations has improved, with important victories against terrorists. Since
its creation, in 2017, the Joint Force has conducted several major operations in
accordance with its mandate. That is recognition of the need for adequate, predictable
and sustained support to the Joint Force so that it may fulfil its important mission.
The Niger welcomes the Joint Force’s change in position and its current format.
The harmonization of actions through the joint command mechanism for
operations in the Sahel, based in Niamey, is undoubtedly an excellent option. It will
support the forthcoming deployment by the African Union of 3,000 troops to support
the Sahel countries in their fight against terrorism.
The situation in the Sahel, in particular in Mali, is an argument in favour
of continuing the work of MINUSMA. In that regard, the Niger would like to see
consensus among Council members on MINUSMA’s mandate, budget, size and
operational capacity.
The Niger continues to believe that the force should be stronger and more
robust in the face of terrorist attacks of rare cruelty, which spare neither our defence
and security forces nor the forces of our partners in Operation Barkhane, and even
less the civilian population, including women and children. The Niger calls on all
Member States to provide the required capacity and to mobilize adequate resources
for MINUSMA, in accordance with their commitments under the Secretary-General’s
Action for Peacekeeping initiative. Furthermore, we believe that the creation of a
rapid intervention brigade under MINUSMA, similar to the one created under the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, could increase its effectiveness. In the Niger’s view, it is necessary for all
to mobilize in order to ensure the survival of the G-5 Sahel States and of the region’s
80 million inhabitants. Equally necessary is for MINUSMA to continue providing
critical support to the G-5 Sahel Joint Force.
We believe that, with the commitment of the international community, more
can be achieved and better in the name of the global public good that is peace.
At this stage of my remarks, allow me to reiterate our request, which has been
made many times, to see the G-5 Sahel Joint Force established under Chapter VII
of the Charter of the United Nations. This would give it more legitimacy and ensure
predictable funding.
On the eve of the renewal of MINUSMA’s mandate, we thank the SecretaryGeneral for submitting to the Council options for strengthening its support to the
G5-Sahel Joint Force. In my delegation’s view, the best option would be one that,
while protecting current achievements, would allow for predictable financing,
multifaceted support as close as possible to the battalions and the development of
local capacities in the area of service delivery, among other things.
The Sahel region today faces many challenges that entail risks that could
jeopardize international peace and security. It is therefore the appropriate time for
the Security Council, through the renewal of MINUSMA’s mandate, to send a strong
signal of solidarity with the people of the Sahel and to issue a firm warning to
terrorists that the world will not fail to act in the face of their criminal designs.

12/32

20-07962

S/2020/541

Annex VI
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Dominican
Republic, Miguel Vargas Maldonado
At the outset, we extend our deepest condolences to the families, the
Governments and the peoples of Cambodia and El Salvador for the recent death of
two peacekeepers of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) from coronavirus disease (COVID-19). The pandemic
adds an element to the eminent danger that these heroes of peace face every day.
Similarly, we strongly condemn the cowardly attacks on MINUSMA
peacekeepers, including the most recent attack in northern Mali, in which three
members from Chad were killed. Our deepest condolences go to the families of the
victims, the Government and the people of Chad.
Attacks such as those, which are increasingly frequent and deadly,
indiscriminately claim the lives not only of MINUSMA personnel and members
of national and international forces, but also of hundreds of innocent civilians,
including women and children. In every period assessed, the latter have been the
main victims of endemic terrorist groups and intercommunal violence.
The latest period has not been an exception, with a worrisome deterioration
of the security situation in Mali and the Sahel region, including Burkina Faso and
the Niger, where terrorist groups continued their wave of violence against security
forces and civilians, as well as among themselves, competing for control over areas
of influence with limited State presence. Furthermore, the impact of the COVID-19
pandemic on Mali and the Sahel, which the terrorist groups are using to increase
their attacks and challenge authority, is also worrisome, as an additional element of
the complex prevailing security situation that exacerbates the existing humanitarian
crisis to alarming levels.
At a time when humankind is facing one of its greatest threats resulting from
the COVID-19 pandemic, we understood and supported, based on principle and
logic, the call for a ceasefire in all conflicts during the pandemic in order to focus
resources and attention on the populations in need. However, the sad reality is that
Mali and the Sahel continue to be destabilized and hijacked by violence generated
by terrorist groups and intercommunal conflict, thus calling on us to reaffirm our
commitment and strengthen our support, given the complexity of the challenges and
the corresponding need for comprehensive solutions to achieve peace and security.
We reiterate the importance of maintaining momentum and consolidating
the achievements made thus far in Mali and the Sahel with the essential support of
MINUSMA, with a view to effectively implementing, without delay, the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali as the most viable path towards the country’s
political stability and security. We recognize and commend the Government and
the parties for the progress achieved in critical areas since the conclusion of the
inclusive national dialogue.
Regarding the empowerment of women, it was encouraging to see the election
of 41 women to the National Assembly in the May elections, three times more than
in the last legislature, thanks to their significant and broad participation in the peace
process and political life in Mali. We urge that progress continue to be made to
increase the participation, training and acceptance of women in the various decisionmaking bodies.
Similarly, the progress in the redistribution of the reconstituted units of the
Malian army to the north of the country, with the essential support of MINUSMA,
20-0796213/32

S/2020/541

is also encouraging, as is the operationalization of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force towards
Mali’s greater independence in the defence of its territory.
In the light of the renewal of MINUSMA’s mandate, we should be aware of
the fact that the political, security and humanitarian situation in Mali and the Sahel
remains precarious, of the progress achieved so far and of the adjustments needed to
make the support provided more efficient. We call for greater collaboration among
the various actors.
Finally, we emphasize the importance of establishing responsibility and
respect for human rights and international humanitarian law, especially in the context
of the fight against terrorism, thus strengthening the credibility and acceptance of
the efforts to achieve peace and security.

14/32

20-07962

S/2020/541

Annex VII
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Tunisia,
Noureddine Erray
Let me start by congratulating France on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of June and reiterating our support to its efforts
towards making this vital organ more effective and responsive to the numerous
challenges we are facing.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General, António Guterres, and the
African Union High Representative for Mali and the Sahel, Pierre Buyoya, for
their informative briefings on the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), and to assure them of Tunisia’s full
support for their vision of a peaceful and prosperous Mali and, more generally,
Sahel region.
I also wish to take this opportunity to thank all MINUSMA personnel and
commend them for their efforts and dedication in the fulfilment of the Mission’s
mandate, despite the difficult and challenging conditions, and to present my
condolences to the families of the fallen soldiers who died in service.
The situation in the Sahel is still characterized by a deteriorating security
environment owing to persistent terrorist attacks targeting security forces and
civilians, which is exacerbated by intercommunal violence, the effects of climate
change and, more recently, by the impact of the coronavirus disease pandemic.
Meanwhile, the region remains crippled by cross-border trafficking and organized
crime on a massive scale.
Despite those challenges, the Malian authorities and people remain committed
to implementing the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, signed in
Algiers in 2015, which remains the only viable process conducive to stability, security,
and State-building in Mali. In that regard, we welcome the recent progress in the
transition process, as reflected in the conclusion of the inclusive national dialogue,
as well as the successful second round of legislative elections that witnessed, to our
great satisfaction, the candidacy and election of a significant number of women.
We strongly believe that the more women, civil society and community leaders are
involved in the implementation of the Agreement, the better the chances of achieving
peace, stability and development in Mali.
While operating in a highly challenging security environment and trying
to adapt to the evolving situation in Mali, MINUSMA has shown its ability to
carry out its mandate and deal with multiple tasks, ranging from facilitating the
implementation of the Agreement to protecting civilians and helping the Malian
authorities exercise their full operational control over areas previously under the
control of terrorist and extremist groups, especially in the north of the country.
The disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process and the redeployment
of reconstituted units are crucial in that regard. Tunisia is proud to contribute to
MINUSMA’s operations through an air transport unit, which has been instrumental
in achieving recent progress on various fronts.
We also appreciate MINUSMA’s support to the Joint Force of the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) in countering terrorism and violent extremism in the
Sahel region. The provision of life support consumables by MINUSMA is crucial
for the operationalization of the Joint Force, and we thank the European Union for
its funding. Nevertheless, as outlined in the reports of the Secretary-General, the
current support model has its limits. Beyond options identified by the Secretariat
to overcome transportation challenges, Tunisia believes that the G-5 Sahel Joint
20-0796215/32

S/2020/541

Force deserves a comprehensive support package funded through United Nations
assessed contributions in order to fully and effectively operate across the region.
That would secure sustainable and predictable funding for the Force and, at the same
time, would release MINUSMA from a heavy burden, thus allowing it to dedicate its
efforts entirely to supporting the peace process in Mali.
Peace and security in Mali and the Sahel are vital, not only to the region
but also to the entire African continent and even beyond. The Pau summit, held in
France in January, as well as other international and regional initiatives testify to
an increasing awareness of the multiple challenges in the Sahel and the need for
the international community to assist countries of the region in strengthening their
stabilization efforts to deal with emerging threats and development challenges.
Fighting terrorism and violent extremism is a global responsibility and requires
a broader approach that goes beyond security. It should integrate development,
poverty reduction and good governance, as well as secure the full implementation
of the African Union vision on silencing the guns in Africa. Hence the need for the
international community to support all bilateral and multilateral initiatives aiming at
mobilizing political will and resources to address the challenges in the region, such
as the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, which was endorsed by the
Council in 2013 and crucially needs to be implemented.
We believe that the region has the capacity to extract itself from the present
crisis by working on such an integrated road map, with the support of the international
community and the engagement and ownership of its youth and communities, to lay
the foundation of a prosperous future.

16/32

20-07962

S/2020/541

Annex VIII
Statement by the Minister of Defence of Estonia, Jüri Luik
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive briefing
on the developments in Mali. I would also like to thank Mr. Pierre Buyoya, African
Union High Representative for Mali and the Sahel, for his insightful remarks.
The situation in the Sahel region, including in Mali, is highly complex in terms
of both security as well as political developments. The rapidly evolving dynamic
situation in the region needs our constant attention. In addition to the active presence
of terrorist groups, tensions are escalating within communities. The lines between
jihad terror and ethnic violence are becoming increasingly blurred.
Further to the already fragile situation, the global coronavirus disease
pandemic has added another layer of insecurity. Estonia appreciates the efforts of
the Malian authorities and the United Nations agencies on the ground for taking
immediate measures to halt the spread of the virus.
Estonia is a troop-contributing country to United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), and we participate in the
European Union training and capacity-building missions. We are currently doubling
our contribution to counter-terrorism Operation Barkhane, and in particular to its
special operations Task Force Takuba. It is therefore with great concern that we are
following the negative trends in the security situation of the entire region.
We commend MINUSMA for its constant efforts to support the implementation
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali and implement its mandate
on the protection of civilians in central Mali. We also commend MINUSMA
for the support that it provided to the Malian authorities in carrying out the
legislative elections.
The Peace Agreement remains the basis for a political solution to the conflict
in Mali. To that end, we support the leadership and efforts of the Malian Government
in the implementation of the Peace Agreement. Recent efforts to re-establish the
presence of the central Government in parts of central Mali are necessary and
welcome. We are also encouraged by the positive steps towards the redeployment
of the reconstituted units of the Malian armed forces to the north. We must take
into account that progress and, at the same time, keep in mind that any local power
vacuum can be used by extremist groups trying to fill it with instability. The
presence of national security forces and institutions acts as a deterrent, and their
role in protecting civilians is vital. Furthermore, that presence will make room for
functioning State services that are urgently needed.
Long-lasting peace in Mali can come about only through an inclusive political
process. In that connection, the efforts to increase women’s full and meaningful
participation need to continue. That includes implementing the recommendations
made during the high-level workshop on the participation of women in the decisionmaking process in January. We are encouraged by the fact that the parliamentary
elections in Mali resulted in a nearly threefold increase in the elected female
representatives in the National Assembly. We stress the importance of practical
measures to support and facilitate women’s political participation, building on the
experience gained.
An integral part of restoring the State presence is the fight against impunity.
We need to ensure that all counter-terrorist activities are conducted with full
respect for international human rights and humanitarian law. We must address all
grave violations and abuses of human rights and hold all perpetrators accountable
regardless of their status. The attack on two villages in Mopti region last week,
20-0796217/32

S/2020/541

which killed more than 30 civilians, requires a transparent investigation. Without
accountability for crimes committed and justice for victims, community grievances
will continue to erupt and perpetuate the cycle of violence.
I would like to stress the critical importance of the protection of the civilian
population, especially in the worsening situation in central Mali. All attacks against
civilians, as well as the national and international forces, are unacceptable and must be
stopped. In that regard, the Malian authorities have a main role in protecting civilians,
reducing violence and restoring peaceful relations among local communities. To
increase MINUSMA’s ability to provide security and protect the local population,
MINUSMA’s adaptation plan should focus on increasing the mobility and flexibility
of the Mission. MINUSMA’s early-warning systems should also be strengthened in
order to be better prepared for the protection of both civilians and the peacekeepers
themselves. But the key to success is the responsibility and willingness of the troopcontributing countries to ensure that their troops have adequate training, equipment
and capabilities specific to the operating environment in Mali.
Allow me to express Estonia’s full support for the work of MINUSMA, as
well as the other United Nations agencies in Mali, in supporting the Government
of Mali to achieve a lasting peace in the country. We share the Secretary-General’s
assessment that the eventual exit of the Mission needs careful planning and must not
take place prematurely. Estonia fully supports the Security Council’s extension of
the mandate.

18/32

20-07962

S/2020/541

Annex IX
Statement by the Deputy Minister of International Relations and
Cooperation of South Africa, Candith Mashego-Dlamini
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of France, Jean-Yves Le Drian, for convening this meeting. Its scheduling is timely
as the Security Council prepares to renew the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) later this
month. I also wish to extend my thanks to Secretary-General António Guterres
and the African Union High Representative for Mali and the Sahel, His Excellency
former President Pierre Buyoya, for their informative briefings.
We are meeting today as the global community continues to mitigate the
devastating impact of the novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. This
pandemic has affected all of us in numerous ways, including the efforts of the
various stakeholders responsible for promoting international peace and security. We
were saddened to learn about the recent demise of two MINUSMA peacekeepers to
this pandemic. Peacekeepers are on the front lines of our efforts to maintain peace
and security, and our condolences go to their families during these trying times.
There have been a number of developments in Mali and the wider Sahel region
in recent months. South Africa therefore wishes to share some observations on the
security, political and humanitarian situations in Mali, as well as on the Joint Force
the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) and on MINUSMA.
First, South Africa remains deeply concerned about the security situation
in Mali and the Sahel due to the increased terrorist attacks and intercommunal
violence, particularly in central Mali. It is also disturbing that terrorist groups have
taken advantage of the COVID-19 pandemic to expand their reach and intensify
their activities.
We regret that this continued violence has claimed far too many human
lives, including those of peacekeepers, the Malian Defence and Security Forces and
civilians. These developments surely compel the Council to continue to provide
support to the people of Mali so as to achieve peace and stability.
Secondly, the prevailing humanitarian situation is cause for concern.
Increased efforts must be made to mitigate the deteriorating humanitarian situation
as a result of the persistent violence, particularly during this COVID-19 pandemic.
We recognize that the pandemic has had adverse effects on the most vulnerable,
the internally displaced and refugees, in particular women and girls. We call upon
the international community to continue to provide humanitarian aid to the people
in need and contribute to the Mali humanitarian response plan, which remains
underfunded. It is also important that access to people in need of humanitarian aid
be unhindered.
Thirdly, progress towards the restoration of State authority and sustained
peace depends on progress in the political processes guided by the 2015 Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. In that context, we welcome the inclusive Major
National Dialogue that concluded in December 2019, which laid the foundation for
the recently held national legislative elections. We hope that the installation of the
newly elected National Assembly will pave the way for the envisaged institutional
and political reforms.
Most reforms require the collective commitment of all the relevant parties.
We are encouraged by the progress made in the deployment of the reconstituted and
reformed Malian forces as an essential step towards the restoration of State authority
20-0796219/32

S/2020/541

in northern Mali. This is indicative that Malians are capable of rebuilding their own
State. As is said, where there is a will, there is a way.
We therefore encourage the Malian parties to ensure the full operationalization
of those deployed forces and to redouble their efforts towards further deployments
in other parts of the country. This will enhance the preservation of the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Mali and serve as a measure to build trust and confidence
among the signatory parties. We commend MINUSMA for providing the necessary
assistance for that process.
Throughout the process, it remains imperative that the signatory parties refrain
from reneging on their commitments, in particular with regard to the recruitment
and use of children in the conflict, as well as other international human rights and
humanitarian law violations.
As a country and as part of a continent that firmly support women’s
empowerment and gender equality, South Africa commends the significant
strides that the Malian authorities have made in advancing the participation and
representation of women in political and peace processes, as evidenced by an
increase in women’s representation in the National Assembly and their inclusion in
the Agreement Monitoring Committee. This is indeed a positive development that
should be cultivated in order to strengthen inclusive, meaningful participation in,
and national ownership of, the peace processes in Mali.
We also agree that to eliminate the challenges of instability and insecurity,
their drivers and root causes must be identified and adequately addressed. A
comprehensive and holistic approach based on political, economic and security
interventions is necessary to address the challenges facing Mali. In that regard, the
Northern Development Zone is an important initiative, which must be supported and
fully operationalized to aid development in the northern regions. Equally, we urge
the support and implementation of the 2019 Bamako declaration on access to natural
resources and conflicts between communities.
Fourthly, South Africa would like to address the vital role played by the
G-5 Sahel Joint Force and MINUSMA. The efforts of the G-5 Sahel countries and
the region require international support in order to succeed. In that regard, we are
grateful for the generous contributions made thus far, and we urge the Security
Council and the international community to provide the necessary support to the
G-5 Sahel countries. We are of the view that predictable and sustainable logistical
and operational support coordinated by the United Nations is urgent and necessary.
The roles of the African Union and the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) in support of the Joint Force are also important.
In that regard, the initiative taken by the African Union to deploy 3,000 forces
to support the G-5 Sahel Joint Force, in addition to ECOWAS adopting an action
plan and making financial resources available to combat terrorism in West Africa,
complements the collective efforts needed not only by Mali but by the region.
MINUSMA has made a valuable contribution towards the stabilization of
Mali. We therefore support the extension of the MINUSMA mandate in order to
continue to provide assistance to Mali, particularly for the protection of civilians,
the implementation of the peace agreement and the restoration of State authority in
northern and central Mali.
In conclusion, we would like to take this moment to pay tribute to the fallen
peacekeepers, and we wish a speedy recovery to the injured and those battling
COVID-19. We also express our solidarity with the women and men who form part
of United Nations peacekeeping and continue to forge ahead despite working in a
complex and dangerous environment.
20/32

20-07962

S/2020/541

Annex X
Statement by the Special Representative of the Prime Minister of
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland on
Preventing Sexual Violence in Conflict and Minister of State for
the Commonwealth and the United Nations, Lord Ahmad
I thank Minister Le Drian and the French presidency of the Security Council
for the opportunity to discuss the important topic of the situation in Mali. I am
delighted that we have been joined by His Excellency Foreign Minister Dramé of
Mali today. Let me also extend our thanks to their Excellencies Secretary-General
Guterres and African Union High Representative for the Sahel and Mali Mr. Buyoya
for reinforcing the importance of a coordinated international response. We further
welcome the commitment of the African Union to Mali and the region, including
to deploying African Union forces. Let me assure all colleagues that the United
Kingdom remains committed to working with all members of the Council, through
the United Nations and the new Coalition for the Sahel, as well as bilaterally, to
support progress in Mali.
As the Security Council meets this month to look at the progress of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
and indeed to renew its mandate, we, like others, wish to join those recognizing
the immense sacrifices made by United Nations peacekeepers working for peace
in Mali. In seven years, more than 200 personnel have lost their lives serving in
MINUSMA. The scourge of the coronavirus disease now presents an added challenge
for those who serve on the front line in this Mission. I wish to join with others and
the Secretary-General in paying tribute to all our incredible peacekeepers who have
lost their lives, including the two who tragically died recently in Mali due to this
global pandemic.
The work of peacekeepers saves lives. As we have heard today, MINUSMA
continues to have an absolutely direct impact on the ground through its work to
support the Malian Government and the signatory parties in implementing the
2015 Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, emanating from the Algiers
process. The recent legislative elections, coupled with the partial deployment of the
reconstituted army in the north and the inclusive national political dialogue, including,
most important, women’s participation, are indeed strong signs of progress.
I therefore welcome the Secretary-General’s recent report (S/2020/476). As we
move forward, we should continue to support MINUSMA and call on the Government
of Mali to spare absolutely no effort in fully implementing all the requirements of
the peace agreement. In that regard, as we reflect on the twentieth anniversary year
of resolution 1325 (2000), it is highly incumbent on each and every one of us to be
absolutely committed to women playing a full, integrated, effective and meaningful
role at every single stage of this important process.
To succeed, revised goals for the north, as set out in the mandate, must be
both ambitious and, indeed, achievable. New benchmarks must help to restore
State authority and tackle impunity in the centre. Recent reports and allegations of
human rights violations must rally MINUSMA to protect civilians and encourage
accountability — a point that was well made by Minister Heiko Maas.
We will significantly increase our contribution this year through the
deployment of 250 United Kingdom troops in a long-range mechanized infantry
reconnaissance task patrol group. It is my hope and our belief that this three-year
commitment will multiply our success; it will enhance the security and safety of all
peacekeepers and embed peacekeeping reform. Lastly, the United Kingdom commits
20-0796221/32

S/2020/541

itself to supporting improved mission performance through its bilateral support and
training offer to troop-contributing countries.
To conclude, although MINUSMA’s mandate is complex and the scale of
the challenge makes it the most expensive United Nations peacekeeping operation,
nevertheless we must positively recognize that we are making progress. As we
review that progress and agree the way ahead together, we must remind ourselves
that MINUSMA is not itself a permanent solution but a route to a means to an end
and to a more sustainable and long-standing solution.
The United Kingdom fully supports the efforts to adapt and improve the
Mission as we seek to bring lasting peace and stability to Mali. Therefore, despite
the volatility in the environment that we have seen through the continued presence of
armed groups affiliated to Al-Qaida and the Islamic State, the United Kingdom will
continue to support the Mission adaptation plan so as to deliver a more agile, responsive
and adaptable force to meet these challenges. The United Kingdom is proud to play
its part. At a system-wide level, we will continue to fund the implementation of the
peacekeeping intelligence policy, which supports the non-clandestine collection of
intelligence. This informs a whole-of-mission approach to planning, which improves
both the safety of the Mission personnel and the protection of civilians. Let me assure
all Member States that we will continue to fund the Comprehensive Performance
Assessment System, which informs decision-makers as part of an integrated policy
performance framework. Like others, we remain committed to playing our part in
Mali through the United Nations.

22/32

20-07962

S/2020/541

Annex XI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Zhang Jun
I thank you, Sir, for presiding over this meeting. I also thank Secretary-General
António Guterres and Mr. Pierre Buyoya, African Union High Representative for
Mali and the Sahel, for their briefings.
We are happy to see the continued positive developments in the political
situation in Mali. As an important outcome of the national inclusive dialogue, the
legislative elections were successfully held early this year, the reconstituted units of
national armed forces were redeployed to northern Mali and the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali was further implemented. We are encouraged to see such
progress, and commend the efforts made by the Malian Government and its people
in this regard.
At the same time, we also noticed that the security situation in northern and
central Mali faced increasing challenges arising from frequent terrorist activities and
intercommunal violence, which made the humanitarian situation more severe. Such
a situation seriously hinders the peace and development process in Mali. Having
read the Secretary-General’s report (S/2020/476) and listened to the briefings, I wish
to share the following points.
First, the current positive political momentum should be consolidated. We
hope all parties in Mali will take the progress in national dialogue and legislative
elections as an opportunity to consolidate the positive momentum, strengthen
mutual trust and work together for peace and development in Mali. China welcomes
the redeployment of reconstituted units of the national armed forces to northern
Mali and notes that the process is facing some difficulties. We hope relevant parties
can resolve their differences through dialogue and continue to implement the Peace
Agreement. The international community should assist Mali in enhancing its ability
for independent development and governance, while respecting its independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Secondly, greater effort and investment should be made in countering terrorism
in the region. Terrorism is a serious challenge facing Mali and other countries in
the Sahel. It is for this reason that the Security Council in March held a debate
(see S/PV.8743) and adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2020/5) on countering
terrorism in Africa. The outcome should be implemented. We hope the international
community will continue to support the Malian Government in improving its counterterrorism capacity, advancing regional cooperation, promoting poverty-reduction
and combating terrorism through an integrated approach. In this regard, it is essential
to provide support to the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel. China has
provided ¥300 million to the Joint Force and counter-terrorism operations in the
Sahel. We commend the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) for providing important logistical support to the Joint
Force and thank the Secretary-General for recommending three options for further
improving the support model. We will actively participate in the discussions of the
Security Council in this regard.
Thirdly, continued efforts should be made to eliminate the root causes
of instability through sustainable development. The international community
should continue to help Mali improve its economic foundation and swiftly achieve
sustainable development on its own. Such efforts will help eliminate the root causes
of many problems in Mali. We welcome the announcement by the Prime Minister of
Mali, during his visit to northern Mali in March, of a series of infrastructure projects
aiming to promote the Northern Development Zone. We hope further efforts will be
20-0796223/32

S/2020/541

made to follow through on those projects and provide basic services to the people in
the north and improve their livelihoods.
Fourthly, MINUSMA should continue to be provided the support it needs.
MINUSMA has played an important role in maintaining peace and stability and
promoting the reconciliation process in Mali. China supports the extension of
MINUSMA’s mandate for one year, as recommended by the Secretary-General.
As a major troop-contributing country to MINUSMA, China has dispatched seven
batches of peacekeepers to MINUSMA, and 426 Chinese peacekeepers are currently
undertaking various tasks in the Mission. We support the MINUSMA adaptation
plan and have pledged to actively consider dispatching an unmanned aircraft system
unit. We sincerely hope MINUSMA will actively implement resolution 2518 (2020),
on the safety of peacekeepers, adopted in March, to effectively protect the safety and
security of peacekeepers and ensure that necessary security supplies are in place.
The African continent is facing the unprecedented challenge of the coronavirus
disease pandemic. As President Xi Jinping stressed in his speech to the seventy-third
World Health Assembly, helping developing countries, especially African countries,
in the battle against the pandemic should be the top priority of the international
community. The international community should provide more material, technical
and personnel support to African countries. China has delivered a large amount
of medical aid to more than 50 African countries, including Mali and the African
Union, and sent 148 medical experts to 11 African countries. We will establish
a cooperation mechanism for our hospitals to pair up with 30 African hospitals,
accelerate the construction of the headquarters of the Africa Centres for Disease
Control and Prevention and help African countries improve their capabilities in
disease prevention and control. Once a vaccine is available in China, we will make
it a global public good and make sure African and other developing countries are
among the first to benefit. We sincerely hope that, with joint efforts by us all, Africa
will defeat the pandemic and restore hope across the continent.

24/32

20-07962

S/2020/541

Annex XII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Indonesia to the
United Nations, Dian Triansyah Djani
First, allow me to welcome you, Sir, and thank you for presiding over this
meeting. I thank Secretary-General António Guterres and African Union (AU) High
Representative for Mali and the Sahel Pierre Buyoya for their briefings.
I would also like to convey my sincere appreciation to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), which
continues to do its best to implement its mandate. I would also like pay tribute to all
the personnel who have paid the ultimate sacrifice in this noble endeavour, including
the two peacekeepers who lost their lives in the quest for peace in Mali. I would like
to share three points.
First, we are encouraged by the progress achieved thus far. As mentioned
by the AU High Representative, the inclusive national dialogue has raised many
hopes. We also welcome the holding of the second-round legislative elections,
which saw a threefold increase in women elected to the National Assembly, which
is welcome news.
The redeployment of the reconstituted army to Gao, Kidal, Ménaka and
Timbuktu is also politically significant, as it marks the return of State presence in
the north.
All of this is happening against the backdrop of the coronavirus disease
pandemic, which poses a significant challenge.
We view it as crucial to continue supporting all Malian stakeholders in
accelerating the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in
Mali. Moving forward, all efforts should be focused on achieving further progress,
including: the holding of the constitutional referendum; the transfer of competencies
to local authorities; the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration catch-up
phase; and implementation of pilot projects for the Northern Development Zone.
Secondly, we remain concerned by the volatile security situation. We condemn
all attacks targeting MINUSMA and international forces in Mali. We reiterate once
again that any attack on United Nations peacekeeping personnel is unacceptable and
its perpetrators must be brought to justice.
We are also concerned at the ongoing clashes between militias, as well as the
intercommunal violence, which have resulted in many casualties.
Despite these issues, MINUSMA has performed relatively well and embarked
on a crucial adaptation plan. We support that plan and efforts to generate the required
capabilities. We have indicated our initial pledge for MINUSMA’s adaptation plan
and will further explore possibilities of future support. And, as I have stated on
many occasions, including in the Security Council Chamber, we are proud that our
peacekeepers, including women personnel, have been contributing to MINUSMA.
Currently, we have more than 1,600 peacekeepers deployed in various missions
in Africa.
In this regard, I would like to stress the importance of the provision of adequate
resources for MINUSMA. As the Force Commander reiterated during the meeting
earlier this month (see S/2020/514), MINUSMA must have the means to properly
execute its mandate. We therefore call on all countries to fulfil their outstanding
contributions, which will be crucial for improving peacekeeping performance.

20-0796225/32

S/2020/541

In line with the appeal of the Secretary-General, we also call on all countries
to ensure the reliability and predictability of the overall budget for United Nations
peacekeeping and to avoid cutting the existing budget, which was already quite
insufficient for the proper undertaking of peacekeeping missions.
On MINUSMA, we note the assessment of the Secretary-General regarding
MINUSMA support to the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel, and affirm
that we must continue to consider the options presented for enhanced international
support. Like other speakers, we also support the extension of MINUSMA’s mandate.
Thirdly, lasting peace and stability in Mali can be achieved only through
a comprehensive approach. That includes providing basic services, reducing
community violence, dismantling militias and creating opportunities for young
people. It is also important to alleviate humanitarian suffering, address displacement
and combat impunity and human rights violations.
In conclusion, we concur with the Secretary-General that the full
implementation of the Peace Agreement remains the viable path to stability in Mali.
MINUSMA’s presence is crucial, and its mandate remains relevant. We need to
continue supporting Malian stakeholders and MINUSMA in advancing the peace
process despite this difficult time. We must work together towards long-term peace,
stability and prosperity in the country. Indonesia will continue to support and
contribute in that regard.

26/32

20-07962

S/2020/541

Annex XIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines to the United Nations, Inga Rhonda King
I thank the Secretary-General and the African Union High Representative for
Mali and the Sahel for their briefings.
As Mali navigates pathways towards durable peace and people-centred
development with the support of the international community, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines commends the recent progress towards the implementation of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.
In this regard, we highlight as significant the support of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) to the
redeployment of the reconstituted units of the Malian army to northern Mali, the
bolstering of policing capabilities, and the country’s holding of the second round of
legislative elections, on 19 April, in spite of the challenges of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic. The increased number of women elected to the legislature,
from 14 to 41, signals both symbolic and qualitative shifts in the terms of engagement
with women. We also welcome steps towards increasing women’s participation in the
follow-up mechanism of the Agreement and the imminent appointment of six women
to the Agreement Monitoring Committee, and encourage further democratization
with respect to gender and young people across public institutions, as outlined in
the Agreement.
The Government of Mali, with MINUSMA’s support, must be recognized
for the COVID-19 response — particularly the provision of sanitary supplies
to justice institutions and the release of prisoners in order to protect persons in
detention facilities, but also for the coordinated approach with public, private and
other international actors to mitigate the effects. MINUSMA’s support for the
establishment of reconciliation committees in central Mali, and their capacitybuilding work on reconciliation and social cohesion, conducted across the linguistic
divide, are noteworthy, given ongoing intercommunal hostilities in the central region.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines condemns the continued terrorist attacks in
Mali and the wider Sahel region. We express our deepest sympathy to the families
of those civilians and peacekeepers who lost their lives in the past few months as a
consequence of that violence.
As the number of food-insecure and internally displaced persons in Mali
and the wider Sahel region continues to rise, combating violent extremism and
intercommunal violence remains urgent. This situation, we must emphasize, is
primarily due to armed conflict and climate change. We endorse the call for greater
support of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), and their
work in defence of the tri-border and wider Sahel region. We also reiterate the request
made by the G-5 Sahel countries, and echoed recently by the African members of
the Security Council together with Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, that the Joint
Force be placed under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations. This would
be advisable given MINUSMA’s limited ability and mandate to provide support
outside of Mali, and as armed terrorist groups are well networked across borders
in the region. Notwithstanding these limitations, we welcome MINUSMA’s force
adaptation efforts towards a more mobile, flexible and agile posture, in line with the
principles of the Action for Peacekeeping initiative.
In conclusion, we wish to reiterate that durable peace demands the simultaneous
pursuit of a comprehensive security agenda as well as inclusive socioeconomic
development. Lasting peace also requires a renewed social contract in which the
20-0796227/32

S/2020/541

State, with the support of its international partners, re-establishes its authority by
protecting civilians and strengthening essential institutions. We welcome efforts
to accelerate the decentralization of key State services; the operationalization of
the Northern Development Zone; the greater focus on education and psychosocial
support for children and survivors of conflict-related sexual and gender-based
violence; and engagement with Malian women and youth organizations currently
pursuing adaptation and resilience strategies for economic development. We stand
with Malians on the cusp of engineering futures beyond the limits of violence and
conflict, COVID-19 and adverse climate.

28/32

20-07962

S/2020/541

Annex XIV
Statement by the Minister Counsellor of the United States of
America to the United Nations, Mark Simonoff
I thank Secretary-General Guterres and Special Envoy Buyoya for their
briefings today. I welcome Foreign Ministers Le Drian and Dramé and all the Foreign
Ministers to the Council and thank you, Sir, for convening this briefing.
Your nation, Mr. President, has been committed to bringing peace and stability
to the Sahel region and tens of millions of its people who want a better future free of
the daily threat of terrorist groups and widespread trafficking of drugs, weapons, and
even humans. I wish to congratulate you and your country’s courageous forces for
killing the leader of Al-Qaida in northern Africa, Abdelmalek Droukdel, along with
members of his inner circle, last week. This daring operation and others, such as the
capture of a senior Islamic State group commander in Mali last month, are exacting
severe blows on terrorist groups that not only threaten the people of the Sahel and
Maghreb regions, but all of us who are gathered here today. We are grateful for
France’s commitment and sacrifice.
The Pau summit in January has re-energized the region’s efforts to address
the failing security situation in the Sahel, and we welcome tomorrow’s ministerial
meeting on the Coalition for the Sahel and its objective of improving coordination.
The United States also recognizes that peace and stability in that region are
not a shared effort. Last month, three Chadian peacekeepers were killed in northern
Mali — a stark reminder that the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) remains the most dangerous peacekeeping
mission in the world. The United States offers its gratitude and appreciation to the
troops, police and civilians of MINUSMA and other security forces in the region,
whose personal sacrifices promote peace and stability in Mali and the Sahel. We also
recognize the challenges of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and commend the
mission for taking the necessary steps to protect its people and the civilian population
while accomplishing its mission. We mourn the two individuals the Mission has lost
to COVID-19 and wish a speedy recovery for those who are sick.
As the Council renews MINUSMA for its eighth year, we must be clear-eyed
about the pattern of failure by the signatory parties to implement the 2015 Algiers
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. Most of the benchmarks in last
year’s mandate have not been achieved. Constitutional reform and transfer of State
services are far from complete; no pilot projects for the Northern Development
Zone have been implemented; and while the goal of redeploying 3,000 reconstituted
Malian forces only fell short by 500, many of these forces are far from operational
and still receive support and protection from United Nations forces.
Meanwhile, the people of Mali continue to suffer under a stalled peace process.
Terrorist attacks and intercommunal violence continue to kill and maim innocent
civilians. Moreover, the humanitarian situation is worsening — Mali’s displaced
population has more than doubled in the past year and millions of people are
suffering from food insecurity. The signatory parties’ inability to make significant
progress since the signing of the accord in 2015 perpetuates the worsening security
environment in the Sahel and prevents MINUSMA from fully implementing
its mandate.
We have a tremendous opportunity to use this mandate renewal to bring real
and lasting change to the people of Mali. It begins with incentivizing the parties to
follow through on the mandate’s benchmarks. MINUSMA must begin planning its
gradual withdrawal and eventual exit, so that genuine trust can develop between the
20-0796229/32

S/2020/541

signatory armed groups and the Government of Mali, and so that the Government
can also gain confidence in taking over the country’s security responsibilities.
MINUSMA should assess when it can make a troop reduction to signal the Council’s
expectation that MINUSMA’s presence is not indefinite.
The Council must also continue to increase MINUSMA’s efficiency and
effectiveness by supporting the Commander’s force adaptation plan and improving
troop and police quality throughout the mission. We commend the Force Commander,
Lieutenant General Gyllensporre, for his work to prioritize troop performance
and hold poor performers accountable. We also commend his efforts to maximize
troop capabilities through the development of the adaptation plan. We continue to
call on Member States that have those capabilities to consider providing them to
MINUSMA. We desire more candid reporting from the Secretary-General, and for
the Force to have greater influence in how it applies and distributes its resources.
The United States is committed to establishing peace, security and a
brighter future for the people of Mali, the Sahel and West Africa. This is why we
are the largest financial contributor to MINUSMA and the largest supporter of
predeployment training for its contingents. It is why we have spent billions of dollars
on security, development and humanitarian assistance in Mali and the region. We are
also committed to supporting the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel by
providing equipment, training and advisory support to fill critical capability gaps on
a bilateral basis, and continue to call on other countries to do the same.
As Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations Jean-Pierre Lacroix
pointed out last week (see S/2020/515), extremists are attempting to capitalize on
the COVID-19 pandemic to undermine State authority and destabilize Governments.
With innocent lives lost daily, schools shuttered and many people denied access to
basic services, we all must be proactive in the face of such devastation and danger.
As I close today, I want to again stress my gratitude to my colleagues here who
have been providing the humanitarian and military support needed to get Mali and
the region healthy and to a much healthier place. While we breathe a sigh of relief
that Droukdel and other evil actors no longer have the ability to terrorize people,
the threat remains. The Security Council must do its upmost to support the peace
process and work to address the violence and political problems that plague Mali.
Terrorism thrives in the current instability and we, as a Council, must be relentless
in our resolve to help the people of Mali and millions of other people in the Sahel.

30/32

20-07962

S/2020/541

Annex XV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Dang Dinh Quy
I would like to thank you, Mr. Jean-Yves Le Drian, Minister for Europe
and Foreign Affairs of France, for presiding over this important meeting and for
your statement.
I would also like to thank Secretary-General António Guterres and Mr.
Pierre Buyoya, African Union High Representative for Mali and the Sahel, for their
insightful briefings.
I would like also to express our warmest welcome and appreciation to all
Ministers for their statements.
We welcome the progress made by the signatory parties in implementing the
2015 Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. It is encouraging to note that
the Government of Mali, with the support of the United Nations team and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
has quickly responded to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, so that the
implementation of the aforementioned agreement has not been delayed.
We also welcome the peaceful conduct of legislative elections in Mali.
Remarkably, the number of elected women has increased threefold in comparison
with the previous period.
However, we remain concerned about the security situation in Mali as a
result of terrorism and intercommunal violence. The number of terrorist attacks on
civilians, peacekeepers and security forces has drastically increased in the northern
and central Mali. We would like to extend our deepest condolences to the Government
and the families of peacekeepers who lost their lives in recent terrorist attacks.
We are also concerned about the withdrawal of the State’s presence in
the concerned areas, especially with the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic
compounding the dire humanitarian and security situation. In total, 3.8 million
children in Mali are now affected by school closures, and 1.3 million are expected to
face crisis levels of food insecurity.
We welcome the support of MINUSMA for the redeployment of the
reconstituted units of the Malian army to northern Mali. We also welcome its
efforts in response to requests of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel).
However, the Mission has also been coping with tremendous challenges and
difficulties in implementing its mandate against the backdrop of instability and
insecurity in the north and centre of the country. My delegation therefore wishes to
make the following observations.
First, we call on all concerned parties to spare no effort to speed up the reform
processes envisaged in the Peace Agreement. It is necessary for signatory parties to
strengthen mutual trust and work together to keep up the momentum of the peace
process. The full implementation of the Peace Agreement remains the only viable
path to a more stable and secure Mali.
Secondly, we call on the Government of Mali, regional and international
organizations and other partners to strengthen their cooperation to tackle the root
causes of terrorism.
Thirdly, we urge the Government of Mali and other concerned parties to
uphold their obligations and responsibilities to implement international humanitarian
20-0796231/32

S/2020/541

law and the protection of women and children in northern and central Mali. All
perpetrators must be brought to justice.
Fourthly, we call for a coherent and integrated approach to the security,
humanitarian, climate-change and development challenges in Mali. We are
therefore of the view that there should be more workshops, seminars on capacitybuilding and training courses for women and youth on sustainable development.
The recommendations of the high-level workshop to enhance women’s participation
should be fully implemented. It is also necessary for all parties concerned to
redouble their efforts to meet the most urgent humanitarian needs and mitigate the
destabilizing impacts of COVID-19.
In conclusion, we commend the tireless efforts of Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Mahamat Saleh Annadif and United Nations civilian and
uniformed personnel for their commitment to peace and stability in Mali.
We support the renewal of MINUSMA’s mandate for 12 months on the basis of
the needs of the Government of Mali and in line with Security Council resolutions.
The renewal will also help MINUSMA to further implement its operations in Mali
and to provide logistic services and life support for the G-5 Sahel Joint Force.

32/32

20-07962
