., -UNITED NATIONS

‘. S.ECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIFTH

YEAR

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (SIAgend42235)

1

. . ..*................................

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*.s*..........

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 28 May 1980 from the Acting Permanent Representative of
Pakistan to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/ 13966) . ..*..............................................

1

SlPV.2235

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in ‘quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a’
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1January 1%5, became fully operative
on that date.

2235th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 26 June 1980, at 10.30 a.m.
President:

2. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members of the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Cuba, Kuwait, Qatar, Saudi
Arabia and Senegal in which they request to be invited
to participate in the discussion of the item on the
agenda. In accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without
the right to vote, in conformity with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure.

Mr. Ole ALGBiRD (Norway).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, China, France, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.
Provisional

agenda (SlAgendaJ2235)

1. Adoption of the agenda
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Roa-Kouri
(Cuba), Mr. Bishara (Kuwait), Mr. Jamal (Qatar),
Mr. Zowawi
(Saudi Arabia), and Mr. Djigo (Senegal)
took the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber.

2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 28 May 1980 from the Acting
Permanent Representative of Pakistan to the
United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/13966)
The meeting

3. The PRESIDENT: I should like to draw the attention of members of the Council to the following
documents: S/14017, which contains the text of a
letter dated 24 June from the representative of Tunisia
to the President of the Security Council, and S/14018,
which contains the text of a letter dated 24 June from
the representative of Bahrain to the President of the
Security Council.

was called to order at I I.10 a.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 28 May 1980 from the Acting Permanent
Representative of Pakistan to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13966)

4. The first speaker is the representative of Kuwait.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.

I. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with previous
decisions [2233rd and 2234th meetings], I invite the
representatives of Israel and Pakistan to take a place
at the Council table, I invite the representatives of
Egypt, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon, Mauritania,
Morocco and the Syrian Arab Republic to take the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber and I invite the representative of the Palestine
Liberation Organization (PLO) to take a place at the
Council table.

5. Mr. BISHARA (Kuwait): In every debate on
Palestine or the ramifications of the question of Palestine, I always look at the face of my friend, Mr. Teni,
who inspires me with ideas, and I always say that
his serene countenance hides plenty of silent tears
because of the aggravation of the decade.

6. Mr. President, I have known you for many years,
for almost a decade in the United Nations. I have
seen your outstanding performance this month, and
not only do we congratulate you, but we congratulate
At the invitation
of the President.
Mr. Blum
ourselves. The success of a friend is a success also
(Israel) and Mr. Naik iPakistan)
took places at the
for his friends. Your success in discharging your
Council table, Mr. Elaraby (Egypt), Mr. Suwondo
duties this month brings to my mind the Vikings’
(Indonesia), Mr. Al-Ali (Iraq), Mr. Nuseibeh (Jordan),
ability as captains. I always say that we Kuwaitis are
Mr. Tu&i
(Lebanon),
Mr. Kane (Mauritania),
also a sea-oriented people, and we have two things in
Mr. Laraki (Morocco)
and Mr. Mansouri
(Syrian
common with the people of Norway: production of oil
Arab Republic) took the places reservedfor them at the
and love of the sea. Sometimes I think that the
side of the Council chamber and Mr. Terzi (Palestine
Norwegians are the Kuwaitis of Scandinavia and that
we are the Vikings of the Gulf. I say that not to
Liberation
Organization)
took a place at the Council
table.
_ conform to the usual rituals of congratulations, but
1

as a sincere expression of congratulations and
sentiments.

but also to confirm that nothing of that sort will
happen. That is why, as I have said, this debate is
very significant. It is important to contain the religious
fervour taking grip not only on the Muslim world but
also on the other side, and to contain a dangerous
decision that is about to be taken by the Israeli
Government, a decision which boils down not only
to an insult but also to the humiliation not of a nation
or a country but of a religion. And the danger of an
insult to a religion is that it mobilizes fanaticism and
a desire for death, which means endless conflagration
and war.

7. Why are we here? Why this debate? Mr. Blum,
in his brief statement the other day [2233rd meeting]
attributed the debate to those who came here to
instigate, to incite, to those who wanted to purvey
hatred. I happen to disagree, and I came here and made
a point of being the first speaker on this day on which
there are no fewer than 20 speakers, as Mr. Terzi
told me-a marathon of speeches-so that I might
. come with a constructive mind simply because I am
worried.

13. That is enough by way of introduction as to why
we are here.

8. When Jerusalem is talked about, it touches uuon
the nerves, the spirituality, the psychological being
and the attachment of 800 million Muslims the world
over. In the last year we have seen the world over a
revival, a resurrection of Islamic fundamentalism.
Perhaps that brought about a certain benefit the
world over. As I came from Kuwait, I was struck
by this revival of fundamentalism in Islam, a fundamentalism that brought about in the span of 90 years
an Islamic empire, which spread from the frontiers of
China to the shores of Spain. That spirit of fundamentalism believed in what the message of God
should be.

14. I should like very briefly to speak about Israeli
policy on Jerusalem. Mr. Begin’s favourite saying is
that Jerusalem is the eternal, indivisible, united capital
of Israel. I would say simply and in all honesty that
such a posture is totally irreconcilable with peace.
There will be no peace in the Middle East, not as
a result of Mr. Lynwood’s mission, the “mission
impossible’*, and not as a result of a conference in
Geneva or a conference even in heaven. As long as
there is no return of Muslim rule over Jerusalem there
will be no peace-simply because Jerusalem is synonymous with tranquillity and peace. The word
“eternal” means perpetuity of hostility; the word
“indivisible”
means the indivisibility of war and
Jerusalem; the word “united” means the disunity of
the Islamic shrines, the disunity and mutilation of the
Muslim body and the mutilation of the Palestinian
religious body. Therefore, all these adjectives and all
these sentences about the Israeli insistence on
Jerusalem are totally irreconcilable, imcompatible
with peace and unacceptable and, as long as the Israelis
insist thus, peace will remain a mirage in the desert.

9. On the other hand, on the West Bank in the last
few months there have been daily incidents. Blood has
been shed, violence has escalated, and religious
passions have increased. These cannot be separated
from the general picture of the revival of fundamentalism.
10. That is happeningnot only in the Muslim world.
It is happening here. Some Zionists, some Israeli
offtcials, come to the United States to recruit orthodox
Jews to go and occupy the West Bank. Their religious
fervour encounters another kind of religious fervour.
That is why I attach great importance to this debate
-because it has been, and it should be, an attempt to
contain the religious confrontation that is bound to
occur. I shall elaborate on that.

15. Why do the Israelis insist upon occupation and
annexation,,upon expansionism? Simply because there
is an ingrained belief in the supremacy of might, the
power of might, the power of force. In this century,
when there is supremacy and belief in might, it is bound
to destroy international law, it is bound to kill the
global political and religious structure. And, unfortunately, supremacy of might always emanates from
something very strange, and that is an alliance between
those who believe in the supremacy of might and those
who are able to provide that might. I should like to
refer to our friends the delegation of the United States.
I shall come to them later.

11. The second point is why we are here to debate
the question of Jerusalem. I would very sincerely
say that those who have leverage and could advise the
Government of Israel should tell it frankly and bluntly
and without any spices of compliment that the removal
of Mr. Begin’s office to East Jerusalem is not only
a humiliation to Islam but an insult which the Muslim
world will not accept. Therefore, it will set off another
religious confrontation-not
only between Zionism
and Islam but, I am afraid, between Judaism and
Islam, with incalculable consequences, as though we
were returning to the religious wars of eight or nine
centuries ago.

16. The whole thing is an anachronism in the sense
that, when I look to my left I see Mr. Terzi, a product
of Jerusalem, a son of Jerusalem, and I see Ambassador Nuseibeh, an erudite friend and a very distinguished son of a distinguished family of Jerusalem,
I remember that they are unable to go to their own land,
while an adventurer Jew from Park Avenue called
Rabbi Kahane goes there and does what? He engineers
the blowing up of the Al-Aqsa Mosque. If he had

12. Therefore, under these circumstances, people of
wisdom and people of reason should approach the
Government of Israel not only to make it reconsider
2

succeeded, we would not have been here today. God
forbid. And the fact that he thought of it is the product
of the encouragement of the supremacy of might. There
are ramifications. Rabbi Kahane, Major Haddad in
the south of Lebanon and others, the mutilation of the
three mayors, the expulsion of many Palestinians-all
are but illustrations of belief in the concept of the
supremacy of might that is catered to by a superPower. That is the whole structure we see, the political
alliance. Mr. Kahane has not succeeded this time.
But I would not rule out others plotting to do something
similar soon.

world. One of the demands of the industrial world is
that we should ensure the supply of oil and energy at
reasonable prices. My argument is that it is impossible,
it is not in my power, to ensure the flow of oil to any
industrial country because, as Mr. Arafat said very
wisely, the two Ps, Palestine and petroleum, are
inseparable.’ I say in all fairness that oil is inseparable
from the Palestinian soil, not by design and not because
we want this linkage, but simply because of the nature
of the problem. When people are desperate, when they
are oppressed and when they are punched in the teeth
every day, they resort to whatever means are available
to them to promote their own cause.

17. I shall now say what we expect of this debate.
) We expect, first, that something will be done, that it
will be said clearly and unequivocally that peace and
Jerusalem are inseparable and that therefore the Israeli
logic and argumentation cannot hold up on logical
grounds-in other words, it is unacceptable; in other
words, it is null and void.

22. I should like to refer now to the United States
delegation. I would say in all fairness that the United
States has a very good Mission here, but it has a very
bad policy. That is one of the salient yet painful facts
of life. As a Muslim, I cannot accept from the United
States reference to a statement read out 10 years ago
by the then United States representative; in other
words, the equating of the question of Jerusalem with
the contents of a statement made by Ambassador Yost
or Ambassador Goldberg, without having the details
spelt out. That is totally unacceptable to the people
in our area. When they ask me what Ambassador Yost
or what Ambassador Goldberg said, my answer is,
“I do not know what they said”. I have looked at the
statement; sometimes I understand it and sometimes
I am befuddled by it. But on the whole, from the
procedural point of view, I think it is unfair to the
Islamic world to use this novelty on such a sensitive
religious issue. Therefore, I would really suggest and
advise the delegation of the United Statesthat perhaps
it should reconsider this novelty in order to satisfy,
and not to increase, the high passions and the fervour
of Islam. This is a procedure which people cannot
understand. Even we who have been here in the United
Nations for decades do not understand this novelty,
let alone our people, the masses in Pakistan, in Indonesia and in the streets of Kuwait. How can they accept
this identification of the United States position with
the statement made 10 years ago? In other words,
that statement is not reaffirmed, but is referred to,
and there is a difference between being reaffirmed and
being referred to. This is a novelty, and I advise the
delegation of the United States, in all candour and
sincerity, to reconsider it so as to eliminate any misunderstanding or misconception about United States
policy on Jerusalem.

18. What do we expect of the Council and this debate?
I would in all fairness say that those who are unable
to support something positive on Jerusalem will
eventually pay the price, because I cannot rule out
marches by fanatical mobs all over the Muslim world
burning down the properties of those who could search
for reconciliation, a search which would involve
sanctions, which would reduce the high passions now
taking over in the area, particularly in the West Bank,
particularly between those orthodox fanatical Jews and
those poor Palestinians that are under oppression and
occupation.
19. We have not come here, in fact, to rub it in
against anybody. We have not come here to provoke
a debate which is unnecessary. We are not, as we
have been portrayed by Ambassador Blum, purveyors
of hatred. We come here with a constructive approach.
If the flames of passions are not contained, they will
rise higher and then everything will be set aflame. Not
only properties which do not belong to Muslim countries but also the whole area will be affected, to the
detriment ,of everybody.
20. We also expect from the Council an unequivocal
stand on Israeli withdrawal, because that is the heart
of the problem. As long as the Israelis occupy Jerusalem and other Arab territories with uninterrupted
schemes for Jewish settlements, all our talk about
peace, about negotiation and about international conferences on the Middle East are really a wild goose
chase, an exercise in futility. We not only have to be
practical and constructive but we have to take the bull
by the horns. The behaviour of the Israeli Government
is really like the behaviour of a bull in a china shop.
We cannot accept that and the world cannot accept
that.

23. My second point with respect to the United States
is that it is not really fair to highlight the importance
of the Islamic decisions on Afghanistan. When we
were discussing Afghanistan, everybody hailed the
decisions on Afghanistan of the Islamic Conference.
Yet when we speak here about Jerusalem, everybody
shuns the decisions on Palestine of the Islamic Conference. To me Afghanistan is important, but it is my
survival that is linked with Palestine. I read in The
New York Times the other day that the United States
Senate unanimously passed a bill calling on the Soviet

21. We are talking here at this very moment about
global negotiations, about economic co-operation
between developing countries and the industrial
3

i

Union to withdraw its troops from Afghanistan. That is
fair and we support it. But I cannot accept the subordination of the question of Palestine ,and the highlighting and overstressing of the question of Afghanistan, an imbalance which is really detrimental to me.
I am not threatened, as I have said here before, by
the rumbling of the Soviet Union’s tanks. I am
threatened by Mr. Begin’s policy. I am threatened by
the insecurity of the area that is due to Israeli expansionism and Israeli illogic. 1 do not like to use unflattering adjectives.
24. Therefore, this global pilgrimage about Afghanistan does not really hold water with us. We want
Palestine; we want a clear position of the United
States on withdrawal. Since the Rogers plan they have
dropped saying anything about withdrawal. Every
time we talk about withdrawal, their new formula
is that resolution 242 (1967) applies to. all fronts.
But that is not convincing to our people. It is very
ambiguous at best. With respect to settlements,
we have favoured coming to the Security Council.
The whole purpose of coming to the Council is not
to stay,put but to keep up the political pressure. It
is better to utter words than to use bullets. It is better
for us to come to the United Nations and to speak
out in the Security Council, sometimes calmly and
sometimes with passion, but it is better to utter words
than to resort to violence. When we spoke to them
about having this debate, they said, “Do not have it,
because you will ruffle the feathers of Camp David”.
That is not true. As I told them privately, we are not
the ,people who are upsetting the apple cart. Who is
upsetting the apple cart? It is Mr. Begin by his policy
of the escalation of Jewish settlements. I have nothing
to do with Camp David. I have no special love for
Camp David. Perhaps I am mistaken-history may
prove that we are right or that you are right-but we
think that it is unfair for the United States to be totally
aligned on Camp David with the Israeli policy at the
expense of its own interests in the future in our area.
After all, we Kuwaitis never forget that early in the
century the only hospital we had was built by an
American missionary-by American money, in fact. So
there was goodwill, and that goodwill should not be.
wasted on an alliance that will not bring about any
progress.
25. Before concluding my brief statement, there is
something I should like to say, namely: a call for
moderation on Jerusalem, which is something we sometimes hear about at international conferences, is impossible because moderation on Jerusalem means the
abandonment of Islamic rights in that city. We grew
up as children in Kuwait never knowing where
Jerusalem was. But we did know that Jerusalem was
sacred, was holy, that we had spiritual attachments
to it. We never thought about where it was or studied
its history because at that time we were poor and did
not have .textbooks in our schools. We did know,
however, that Jerusalem was under Islamic rule. Let
me put it this way for the sake of total clarity: it
is inconceivable that there should be an abandonment

of Islamic rights in Jerusalem in’ order to establish
peace. In other words, there will never be peace as
long as there is pressure on the Islamic world, on the
Muslim world, on Islam to abandon its historical
existence, its spiritual existence and spiritual message
in Jerusalem.
26. I am afraid because our area at this stage is
marked by the escalation of high passions-religious
and nationalistic passions, and a vendetta type of
violence. It is incumbent upon the Council to contribute
to cooling off those passions, to staving off violence,
to heading off confrontation, which may involve
religious elements or countries-indeed all areas-outside the immediate region. In other words, if the confrontation takes on a quality of religious fervour, then
the whole Islamic world will be in total ferment, and,
as I said earlier, I do not rule out the marching of
mobs against the properties of anybody who opposes
the return of Islamic rule to Jerusalem. From Jerusalem
the message of peace started and to Jerusalem the
message of peace will come back. Without the
supremacy of Islam, the rule of Islam, in Jerusalemthere will never be peace in the area, regardless of
what formula mankind can ingeniously contrive.
27. We should concentrate constructively on this
point: how to avoid a collision based on religion and
high passion. It is my sincere hope that polemics and
acrimonious exchanges will be dropped, simply
because they serve no purpose but constitute a setback
for those who resort to them.
28. I was very much impressed by the statement the
other ,day [2233rd meeting] by the representative of
the Palestine Liberation Organization. AIthough a
victim of eviction, a globetrotter looking for a home
in which to live, he spoke with restraint, dignity and
responsibility. That is the type of statement we expect
on such a highly sensitive issue. Speeches telling us
that we are purveyors of hatred or defenders of
incitement will not only really harm the debate but
I think they will harm those who make them. I should
urge that we use restraint in our language so that
we might come up with a document which, while not
necessarily commanding unanimity, would not arouse
dissension. It is our duty to work to that end because
the Islamic world cannot accept, cannot tolerate and
cannot afford a dissenting voice on Jerusalem. That
would be harmful to those who raise it, harmful to
the image of the United Nations and harmful to everybody, including myself.
29. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is Mr. Clovis .
Maksoud, to whom the Council extended an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure at
the 2233rd meeting. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
30. Mr. MAKSOUD: Again we -meet in the Council
to discuss, deliberate and take the necessary action on
Israel’s latest aggression and on the latest consequences of its Zionist plans of annexation. This time
4

of the very ‘basic ideology upon which Israel is predicated-namely, Zionism. The designs of Zionism on
Jerusalem, as well as on the whole of Palestine, are
well established and documented. The timing of Israel’s
measures to achieve its designs is determined usually
by its assessmentof the nature, the level and the scope
of international resistance to them.

the issue before the Council pertains to Israel’s
declared objective of putting what might be called the
final touches on its ex cuthedra and unilateral
swallowing up of the Holy City of Jerusalem. The
proposed basic law, along with the declared plan of
Israel to transfer the Prime Minister’s office as well as
the Israeli Cabinet conference room to East Jerusalem,
is but the latest signal-indeed manifestation-of
Israel’s, unrelenting determination to tear Jerusalem
away from its natural, normal and national ties and to
distort irrevocably its unique, universal, spiritual and
religiously pluralistic character.

35. For example, when Israel claims that it “liberated” Jerusalem in 1967, it is not considering its
occupation of Jerusalem as the “acquisition of territories by military aggression’* but as “liberation”.
The question is, “liberation” from whom and from
what? For Israel to assume that its conquests and
annexations are aspects of “liberation*’ is calling in
question the seriousness and the gravity of what
confronts the international community. When Israel
equates its unilateral annexation of Jerusalem with
‘*liberation*‘, it is in fact asking .the world, which
has condemned and unanimously refused to recognize
Israel’s measures, to change its position to comply
with the diktat of the Israeli occupation authorities.

31. That you, Mr. President, are presiding over these
deliberations ensures a leadership and guidance that
will instil in them a level of wisdom and sense of
purpose that has always been the nature of your contrrbution in the Council’s work. I should like to take
this opportunity to express my deep appreciation for
the kind invitation extended to the League of Arab
States and to me, and to underline the appreciation of
the League for the efforts, diplomatic and concrete,
that your friendly country, Norway, has exerted concerning the problems of the Arab region..

36. Furthermore, Israel’s measures in Jerusalem are
intended to insulate it from accountability to this world
body: it seeks to ‘deny its answerability with regard
to the genuine religious, spiritual, cultural and
emotional ties that many people of different lands
have for Jerusalem. In addition to its forcible eviction
of the inhabitants, Israel has desecrated the Holy
Places and eradicated the city’s authentic identity.
Israel seeks to render Jerusalem an expression of its
own exclusivist, racist institutions and ideology and to
suppress the meaning that Jerusalem has for the
Palestinians, for the Arabs and for the Islamic and
Christian worlds by creating fairs accomplis that
ultimately mutilate its historical, national and spiritual
personality.

32. We are confronted today, as the Council has
often been confronted, with a situation that eludes
rational scrutiny. Here is Israel, a Member State,
arrogating to itself the right to prejudge issues that are
on the agenda of the United Nations. We are dealing
with a situation in which the world community has
repeatedly emphasized to that Member State its
demands that Israel rescind its illegal acts in Jerusalem,
desist from the continuous pursuit of its plans to annex
Jerusalem and declare the city its capital, and further
desist from taking measures designed to pre-empt the
outcome of the deliberations in this body. This situation is so mind-boggling that censure and condemnation are no longer sufficient or adequate. Resort to the
sanctions provided for in Chapter VII of the Charter
has thus become the only course which offers the
possibility of deterrence and relevance, and is the
course required to enhance the credibility of the
Council.

37. Israel seeks to relegate Jerusalem to a position
that not only reduces it to an extension of-Israel’s
settlements under its colonial policy but also renders
it a staging point for the consolidation of Israel’s
annexation of more than 30 per cent of the West
Bank, under the guise of what is called Greater
Jerusalem.

33. It is necessary for us to go beyond the precise
issuesthat are being dealt with elaborately here: that
is, Israel’s unilateral actions in Jerusalem, its obliteration of the city’s demographic, national and cultural
character, as well as the city’s multifaceted spiritual
function for the world in a wider context. If this is
done, then the United Nations, as well as the world
community, will be able to anticipate the course of
Israel’s unfolding of its expansionist, aggressive and
annexationist designs. If that is clearly envisaged, it
then follows that the United Nations and the world
community could and must forestall the tragic consequences that are inevitable when Zionist plans
remain unchecked.

38. Hence Jerusalem, instead of being the arena for
universal faiths, religions and cultures, which discover
one another in unity through diversity, has been
reduced from that noble role to that of a staging
ground for expansion, exploitation, violation, colonization and oppression. Therefore what we are
witnessing is not only Israel’s mutilation of the historical constant and national aspect of Jerusalem, but
a derailment of Jerusalem’s religious and spiritual
functions.
39. It is often stated that Jews have a spiritual and
particular association and affinity with -Jerusalem.
That is true and it is legitimate. But religious and
spirit=ral affiliations of people of Jewish faith and per-

34. It is essential .that we recognize that Israel’s
actions and policies in Jerusalem are an inherent part
5

L

suasion do not constitute under any circumstances
a claim that will legitimize conquest, annexation,
aggression and the denial of the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people. In fact the whole thrust of
Israel’s behaviour in Jerusalem, its unilateral action
and its annexationist policies tend to distort the
religious component of Jewish association with
Jerusalem rather than enhance it. As we have often
stated, we consider Judaism part of our spiritual
heritage and a component of universal and moral
imperatives, but when Israel seeks to make Judaism
exclusivist in approach it erodes its universal character and its function in enriching spirituality. To
render Jerusalem unilaterally the capital of the Zionist
State is to enshrine racial exclusivism in a manner that
violates the universal oneness that all religious and
spiritual values are committed to realizing. Hence the
notion that Judaism has an affinity and a spiritual
association with Jerusalem cannot be under any
circumstances an excuse to render Jerusalem the
arena in which Zionism plays havoc with all moral
and spiritual imperatives.

values of mankind, which the exclusivist claims of
Israel seek to usurp, an Israel intent upon playing
havoc with all efforts towards a human and universal
outlook and commitments.
43. It is with an understanding of this that we consider the Israeli “guarantees” about allowing people
of different religions to have access to the Holy
Places in Jerusalem as intrinsically patronizing, while
the guarantees that we, the Arabs, provide for free
access are inherent in the very foundation of our body
politic.
44. The. immediate reason for the present convening
of the Council is to articulate and give visibility to
the international consensus concerning Jerusalem.
However, the articulation of this will and its visibility
must not be construed as adequate or sufficient to
assuage the deep wound that Israel’s behaviour in
Jerusalem inflicts on the world body politic. It must be
the ultimate priority of the Security Council not to
exacerbate the hurt but to heal the wound. Hence, the
Council must adopt the measures that will put an end
to the usurpation that Israel carries out day after day
in our Jerusalem.

40. Israel claims that because there has been a
Jewish presence in Jerusalem, that gives Israel the
right to make this presence a point of departure ‘for
exclusivist claims. By what right does Israel claim that
if there have been Jews in Jerusalem, that makes
Jerusalem the preserve of the Zionist State? Jews who
are in Jerusalem or any part of the Arab world have
always been considered, perceived and treated as
Arabs of Jewish faith. Being an Arab has never
implied the assumption that one cannot be a Jew. It
is in that context that Judaism is, as I stated, part of
our heritage, while Zionism can be rightly construed
as an ultimate corruption of Judaism.

45. Jerusalem evokes for nearly all mankind positive
meanings and intimate associations. That is why it is
unique and intensely significant. That is why there
has always been near unanimity concerning its fate.
46. However, it must be noted that the efforts of the
Council have been thwarted by a particular licence
that the special relationship of the United States with
Israel provides the latter. True, the United States position has been clear as to the status of Jerusalem. It
must be pointed out that the temptation during a
United States presidential election year to dangle
before Israel the prospect of legitimizing its usurpation
of Jerusalem or of recognizing it as a capital is quite
strong. Scurrying for what is described as the Jewish
vote by overbidding on the future of JeNSalem
is, to
put it mildly, inexcusable. Let me state it quite frankly
and in order that there be no equivocation: Jerusalem
is not up for grabs and its destiny is inseparable from
the destiny of the Arab nation to which it belongs. For
the Arab world, no relations are worth maintaining if
they have to include even a semblance of tolerating
Israel’s usurpation of Jerusalem. So we hope that, as
some of the presidential and congressional candidates
rush to underwrite and adopt Israel’s illegal status in
JeNsalem, they do not lose sight of the damaging
consequences our legitimate reaction will have on the
future of relations. Furthermore, placating Israel at
the expense not only of legitimate Arab rights and
aspirations, hut also at the expense of undermining the
authority and legitimacy of international consensus and
of the United Nations, is dangerous for the prospect
of a United States contribution to a comprehensive
and just peace in the region, as well as being morally
wrong and politically unwise and unhealthy.

41. It is for that reason that we in the Arab world
have never postulated that if an Arab is of any particular religious persuasion, he is therefore something
different from an Arab. It is that which renders Arab
nationalism a function of egalitarian humanism and, in
contradistinction, Zionism an instrument and a vehicle
of Jewish alienation.
42. This is why the destiny of Jerusalem is so central,
not only to our national and spiritual life, but to the
very fibre of our intellectual pursuits and our national
purpose. The legitimacy of Arab claims on Jerusalem
is not only rooted in cumulative historical, legal and
demographic arguments. It is equally to be found in
the very nature of our identification with what is
universal, what is international and what is humanist.
This is so not because of any superior claim the Arabs
have to legitimacy or any preponderance of selfrighteousness in our position. It is due to the fact that
the Arabs in general, and the Palestinians in particular,
start with the premise that we are accountable to the
world community and that we are answerable to its
institutions as manifested in the Charter and resolutions
of the United Nations. It is our belief that what are
at stake in the battle for Jerusalem are the shared
6

47. I mention this here, knowing full well that the
more responsible elements among United States decision makers and opinion makers are putting the brakes
‘on the obscene rush to opportunism. We are eager to
sendlfrorn here the messagethat the injection into any
pohttcal platform of “recognition of Jerusalem as a
capital’* will be an unnecessary and under any circumstances intolerable provocation and will warrant
reactions that all concerned are most eager to avoid.

55. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Cuba. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and.to make his statement.
56. Mr. ROA-KOURf (Cuba) (inrerpreration from
Mr. President, I wish to thank you and the
other members of the Council for having afforded
me the opportunity to take part in this important
debate. At the same time, I should like, on behalf of
my delegation, to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of the Council. I am confident
that with your renowned diplomatic talents and skill
you will lead the present deltberations to a satisfactory
conclusion.

Spanish):

48. How soothing the Pope’s statements on Jerusalem were. That he chose to convey to President Carter
a deep concern on the pivotal role of Jerusalem
testifies to the resilience of the Vatican’s consistency
on the future of the Holy City. We hope that the
Pope’s position will reinforce the United States
commitment to what is legal and what is moral on the
issue of Jerusalem. The Pope, in the few words he
spoke on Jerusalem, expressed the inner and authentic
yearnings of all mankind.

57. For Cuba, as well as all the other non-aligned
countries--over whose Group in the United Nations it
is my honour to preside-the question of Jerusalem is
inextricably linked to the problem of the exercise of
the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people and to
the attainment of a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace in the Middle East. While the Palestinian question, as affirmed by the heads of State or Government
of non-aligned countries in the Havana declaration,
“is the crux of the Middle East problem and the
essential cause of the Arab-Israeli conflict, the City
of Jerusalem is an integral part of occupied Palestine
[and] must be evacuated in its entirety and restored
unconditionally to Arab sovereignty”.’

49. The members of the League of Arab States are
also members of the Islamic Conference, which
initiated the debate on the question of Jerusalem today.
Islam’s involvement with Jerusalem touches the
nerve centre of current Islamic awareness and sense
of identity. For the Muslim world, not only is Jerusalem
interwoven in its spirit and its formation, but it is also
the centre of Palestine, held close and dear to Muslims
everywhere.

58. For the non-aligned countries,

50. To the Vatican and to our brothers in the Muslim
world, we express a special and deep appreciation
for having again, and very recently, affirmed the commitment to Jerusalem as an act of faith.

“All measures taken by Israel in the Palestinian
and Arab territories since their occupation, including
construction work, modifications and alterations
designed to transform the political, cultural, religious, physical, geographic, social and demographic
characteristics are illegal and null and void.“*

51. The European heads of State, meeting at Venice,
moved a significant step forward in coming to grips
with the core issue in the Middle East crisis. Their
input and their position will not only be useful and
constructive, but will help dispel the false euphoria
generated by the Camp David accords. This will
undoubtedly contribute to strengthening international
resistance to Israel’s transgression on Jerusalem.

59. The decision by Prime Minister Menachem Begin
to transfer as soon as possible his offices, the Cabinet’s
meeting rooms and the conference rooms of its Commissions to East Jerusalem, as well as to house several
Israeli ministries in the three buildings under construction in the Al-Sheikh Jarrah area of that part of the
city, constitutes a violation of the legal status of
Jerusalem as defined by the United Nations and is an
inadmissible attempt to take up residence in a territory
acquired through the use of force.

52. To our African, Latin American and Asian
friends, and to those in the socialist camp, we should
like to say that their supportive roles will be remembered as integral and organic elements in our
common struggle.

60. This desire for expansion on the part of the
Israeli State is nothing new. On 2 August 1948, David
Ben Gurion, who was then Prime Minister and Minister
of Defence of Israel, officially and unabashedly proclaimed, that

53. Perhaps those two others, partners in the Camp
David accords, will now realize that what is at stake in
Jerusalem is not only the fate of an occupied city in
Palestine, but also the humiliation that Zionism seeks
to inflict on those who placate it, a humiliation that can
be avoided only by our Egypt rejoining the Arab
consensus and the United States rejoining the international consensus.

“since the area of Jerusalem was in the hands of
the Israeli Army and since it was the duty of the
Army to ensure public safety, law and order, the laws
of the Israeli State would apply in this occupied
territory”.

54. Jerusalem can recharge the batteries of the
credibility of the Council. This can be done.
7

Take note that he admitted that it was occupied territory. On 7 June 1967, the notorious Moshe Dayan
stated:

does not allow such fantasy to have any real existence
and science fiction prefers the penumbraof outer space
to the irrefutable evidence of civitas terra.

“The Israeli Defence Forces have liberated
Jerusalem. We have reunified the divided city. We
have returned to this the most sacred of places never
to leave it again.”

67. Let us not be fooled, then. The simple truth is
that Israel, the illegal occupier of Arab and Palestinian
lands, is attempting to have it its own way at any price
and to confront us with thefait accompli of a Zionist
Jerusalem.for the Zionists in accordance with its ideal
and intolerable model.

61. A lawyer might say that, when you have a confession, no evidence is necessary. The corpus separatum
under international regime which Jerusalem was and
should be in accordance with General Assembly
resolutions became the corpus delicti of Zionist
aggression and occupation.

68. Whoever is not in agreement with that gross distortion of the principles and international norms
approved by the United Nations will certainly be
called “anti-Semite, fanatic and intolerant’* by those
attempting to convince the world that “Jewish” means
“Zionist” and hiding behind the solidarity that every
honourable man has felt with a people upon which
through the centuries the darkest forces of history
have been visited, in order to commit no less reprehensible deeds against the Palestinian people and
the Arab countries.

62. It is a curious “liberation” which turns the true
citizens of a place into vassals, expelling them from
their homes, confiscating their property and con-’
firming the arbitrary actions of 1948in defiance of the
unequivocal will of the international community and to
the detriment to the universal character of the city
as the seat of places sacred to Jews, Muslims and
Christians.

69. The Government of Israel has violated United
Nations resolutions on the legal status of Jerusalem.
From 1948 to 1950 it. occupied and annexed most of
the new city and in 1967 the old city; it altered the
demographic structure of Jerusalem, displacing more
than 100,000 Palestinian refugees; it systematically
violates the human rights of its original inhabitants;
it has destroyed or damaged historical and religious
Muslim sites, such as the Maghrabi area and the AlAqsa Mosque; and now it is attempting to consolidate its conquest by moving its headquarters there
permanently. In the light of international law, the
status of Israel in Jerusalem is that of a military
occupier. All the actions referred to are therefore
illegal under the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12 August 1949.”

63. The Zionist State bases its alleged right to Jerusalem on two fallacies, one historical and one legal. Its
representatives argue that Jerusalem is the historical
capital of Israel and that Israel is the successor to a
previous Jewish State.
64. A brief analysis shows the absence of all historical
or legal basis to such allegations. It was the Canaanites
and not the Jews who founded Jerusalem. The Jewish
kingdom established by David 1,000 years before our
times, which had Jerusalem as its capital, lasted for
73 years and was divided into two rival and hostile
kingdoms-that of Israel, with the capital in Sichem,
Samaria, and that of Judah, with the capital in Jerusalem. The Assyrians destroyed the former in 721 B.C.
and the Babylonians destroyed the latter in 586 B.C.

70. The Sixth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held. at Havana,
stated that “the restoration of Jerusalem to Arab sovereignty is an indispensable condition for a durable
peace. Israel should be compelled to adhere to the
relevant resolutions of the United Nations Security
Council regarding Jerusalem and the Holy Places.“*
Similarly, the Conference

65. For more than 2,000 years, up to the illegal
occupation of the western part of Jerusalem and the
establishment of-the Zionist State, there was no Jewish
regime at all in Palestine. However, Jerusalem went
from Jebusite hands to Semite-that is, Jewish-hands,
to Babylonian, Assyrian, Greek, Roman, Persian,
Christian, Arab, Turkish and British hands before
being divided into the Israeli and Jordanian sectors in
1948. In the meantime, the Palestinians-the descendants of the Canaanites-remained in Jerusalem for
most of that period of 25 centuries.

“appealed to members of the Non-Aligned Movement to take.firm measures, including severance of
diplomatic: and economic relations, with countries
which formally or by implication recognized the city
of Jerusalem as the capital of Israel.“4

66. If, as has been seen, the claim that Jerusalem
is the historical capital of the State of Israel totally
lacks validity, from a legal standpoint such a claim
becomes even more untenable. How could a State
which was established by a United Nations resolution
in 1947 proclaim itself to be the successor of the
Jewish ‘Biblical monarchies which existed 25 or
30 centuries ago? The strict sense of international law

71. The Zionist State persists in its defiant attitude
only because it enjoys the unconditional political,
diplomatic, economic and military support of a permanent member of the Council: the United States.
Even the nine Western allies of this country, recently
meeting at Venice, declared that they would not
8

accept any unilateral initiative designed to change the
status of Jerusalem [S/14009]. Now it is the facts that
count and not speeches.

that General Assembly resolutions 2253 (ES-V) and
2254 (ES-V),’ adopted in July 1967, declared that all
measures taken by Israel to change the status of
Jerusalem were invalid and called upon Israel to rescind
those measures and to desist forthwith from taking any
action that would alter the status of the Holy City.
The Security Council also dealt with this question and
adopted resolutions 242 (1%7), 252 (1968), 267 (1969),
271 (1969), 298 (1971), 446 (1979) and 465 (1980). All
these resolutions have affirmed the principle of the
inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by military
conquest and declared all legislative and administrative
actions taken by Israel to change the status of the City
of Al-Quds, including the expropriation of land and
property, transfer of population and legislation aimed
at the incorporation of the occupied section, to be
totally invalid.

72. World public opinion awaits the decision of the
Council.
73. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
74. Mr. MANSOURI (Syrian Arab Republic):
Mr. President, I thank you very much for giving me
this opportunity to speak before the Council.
75. First of all, I should like to express my congratulations to you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council for this month. The long-standing
friendly relations between our two countries as well
as your great experience and high qualifications assure
us that you will conduct the work of the Council in
a very efficient manner.

80. I return to the declaration issued by the European
Community on 13 June 1980 following their meeting
at Venice [ibid.] at which they stated that they would
not accept any unilateral initiative designed to change
the status of Jerusalem. In this connection, we deem
it imperative to comment on the paragraph related to
the status and future of the Holy City. That paragraph,
in my Government’s view, did not refer to the basic
facts about Jerusalem, first, that Jerusalem is an
integral part of the occupied Arab territories and consequently its people are entitled to the right of selfdetermination. Secondly, that paragraph did not refer
to the withdrawal of the Israeli occupying forces, on
the one hand, or to the basic United Nations resolutions on Jerusalem, on the .other, an omission that
might imply a stand contradictory to those resolutions.

76. I should at the same time like to pay due respect
to your predecessor, Ambassador Oumarou of the
Niger, for the efficient manner in which he presided
over the work of the Council last month.
77. We are meeting here today to discuss one part of
an urgent and important question, the question of the
policy and activities of the Israeli Zionists in the
occupied Arab territories. Indeed, the Council is now
seized of the question of the attitude of the Israeli
Government as shown by its attempt to change the
physical character, demographic composition, institutional structure and status of the Holy City, AlQuds Al-Sharif. This meeting comes in response to
the worry and concern of over 900 million Muslims
in the world as expressed through the Eleventh Islamic
Conference of Foreign Ministers, held at Islamabad
from 17 to 22 May 1980, at which there was a call
for an immediate meeting of the Security Council to
examine the dangerous situation arising from the latest
decision by the Israeli authorities seeking to annex and
declare Al-Quds Al-Sharif-the Holy City of Jerusalem-as the capital of IsraeLs The Conference also
called upon the Security Council, in case of defiance
by Israel, to impose against that State the sanctions
called for in Chapter VII of the Charter.

81. I should like to bring to the attention of the Coun- i
cil the United States position with regard to Jerusalem.
Ambassador Goldberg, the United States representative, declared on 14 July 1967 in the General Assembly* that the status of Jerusalem should not be decided
unilaterally. The United States repeated its position
when Ambassador Yost, addressing the Security Council on 1 July 1969, stated:
“The United States considers that part of Jerusalem that came under the control of Israel in the June
1967 war, like other areas occupied by Israel, is
occupied territory and hence subject to the provisions of international law governing the rights and
obligations of an occupying Power. Among the provisions of international law which bind Israel, as
they would bind any occupier, are the provisions
that the occupier has no right to make changes in
laws or in administration.” [1483rd meeting,

78. Ever since the occupation of Jerusalem in 1967
up to now, the Israeli authorities have been trying to
impose the Israeli plan to obliterate the Arab character of Jerusalem and have persisted in ignoring all
United Nations resolutions in this regard. Those
Israeli attempts were deplored, condemned or
censured by different bodies of the United Nations.

para. 97.1

Lately, President Carter, in his 3 March statement as
reportedin the press, stated that: “We strongly believe
that Jerusalem should be undivided”. On 14 March,
President Carter once again in a press conference said:

79. It is a well-known fact that the United Nations
has adopted a number of resolutions on the question
of Jerusalem’s destiny. It might be worth mentioning

“We agreed on a paragraph in the Camp David
accords concerning Jerusalem. It called for, and we
9

still believe that there should be, an undivided
Jerusalem”.

86. Finally, we think it is high time for the Council
to shoulder its responsibility and act accordingly to
find a way to respond to the wishes and desires of all
the believers in the world and vote accordingly and
unanimously to force Israel to abide by all the Council
and General Assembly resolutions relating to Al-Quds
Al-Sharif.

82. The latest Israeli move to introduce and discuss
in the Knesset a bill declaring Jerusalem the capital
of Israel is a flagrant violation of Israel’s responsibilities as an occupying Power as stipulated in the
Geneva Conventions and is against all the rules of
international law. The Israeli authorities, in their continued defiance of international law and of the wishes
of the world community, have announced recently
that the Government is going ahead in moving Begin’s
offices, the Government conference room and some
other Israeli institutions to East Jerusalem. That act is
in total disregard of resolutions of the Security Council
and the General Assembly.

87. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Israel
wishes to speak in exercise of his right of reply. I call
upon him.
88. Mr. BLUM (Israel): I see little purpose in
engaging in polemics with Mr. Maksoud. The nature
of his approach to the Arab-Israel conflict was
expressed in one basic concept which he himself
today revealed to the Council. He stated that the
Arabs have considered the- Jews who have lived in
their midst as Arabs of the Judaic faith. That,, then, is
the extent and limit of the tolerance which Mr. Maksoud and those for wham he speaks are willing to
display towards Jews. Self-determination for others is
not part of their exclusivist Weftanschauung.

83. One wonders how the Israeli authorities can defy
and ignore the desires and wishes of the international
community. There is no doubt that they are counting
on United States support for their illegal occupation. As a matter of fact, as recently as 1 June in a
television interview, the President of the United States
openly declared:

89. That is how Mr. Maksoud views the right of selfdetermination of the Jewish people and its right to
national independence and sovereignty. Mr. Maksoud, it should be remembered, expressed here the
views of the member States of the new League of
Arab States and has thus highlighted the root-cause
of Arab hostility to Israel-that is, the unwillingness
to recognize not only the Jewish State but even the
existence of the Jewish people.

“We have a veto power that we can exercise if
necessary to prevent this Camp David process from
being destroyed or subverted, and I would not
hesitate to use it if necessary”.
84. The contradictory statements of the officials of
the United States Administration indicate, however,
that the United States stand on Jerusalem may have
already undergone a basic change. Is it that the
Administration of such a great Power has become
hostage to the wishes and designs of the Zionist
movement in a presidential election year? We in Syria
have no illusions whatsoever about the imperialist
American-Zionist co-operation with the Zionists in the
Middle East.

90. I have great admiration for Ambassador Bishara’s
rhetorical skills. Yet I feel constrained to note that,
despite the ostensible reasonableness of his statement,
it must be viewed as an extremely dangerous manifestation of incitement and, I would say, even fanaticism.
Here we have this self-proclaimed Viking of the south
who comes to warn us of the prospect of a holy war of
Islam against Judaism. This is inflammatory and
incendiary talk, even if Mr. Bishara warns us against
that possibility. Beyond that, Ambassador Bishara was
openly threatening the Council, and through it the
entire- international community, with the use of the
Arab oil weapon. Since he represents here one of the
leading oil producers, members of the Council will
wish to take note of this element of oil blackmail,
which has been introduced here for the first time in
such an open and blatant manner.

85. In conclusion, throughout history Al-Quds AlSharif has been well known as the City of Peace. But
how true is that under Israeli occupation? Peace has
lost its meaning when the population of a city has been
living under occupation for the last 13 years. It has
not known the freedom it used to enjoy under Arabic
sovereignty through the centuries. There is no doubt
that the liberation of Al-Quds from its occupiers is a
matter of prime concern to all Arabs as well as to all
believers in the world, regardless of their respective
religions. It is the sacred duty of every believer to
help in liberating Al-Quds. There is, as has been
repeated time and again, no doubt that peace in the
Middle East cannot be achieved without the fulfilment
of two essential elements: first and foremost, the
Israeli forces should withdraw from all the occupied
Arab territories, including Jerusalem; and, secondly,
the Palestinian people should be able to exercise their
inalienable rights, including the right to selfdeter.mination and sovereignty and to a sovereign independent State in their homeland.

91. Ambassador Bishara also brought into our debate
the motif of might versus right. To attribute to the
Jewish people and to the State of Israel a preference
for might over right is, to put it very mildly, and with
all due respect to Ambassador Bishara, slightly
comical. Here you have one of the smallest nations
on earth, a nation constantly threatened with extinction by its neighbours from the very day it achieved its
independence, a State that was overrun by all its
neighbours on the day of its birth, being accused of
10

contradistinction to the very definition of the concept
of a “Jewish State”, which presumes that the ultimate
objective of Israel is to build a Jewish State, which by
definition excludes non-Jews from the right of citizenship by the law of return.

a preference for might over right. And who makes this
charge? The representative of a group of countries
that have never to date reconciled themselves to the
very existence of my country; a group of countries
that have set up a terrorist organization known as the
PLO for the specific purpose of bringing about the
destruction of my country; a group of countries whose
territory is more than 500 times larger than that of my
country; a group of countries that are immeasurably
richer then my country; a group of countries whose
combined military strength by far exceeds and outstrips
not only that of Israel but also that of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization; a group of countries
that holds a grip over much of the oil on which so
much of the world’s well-being depends; a group of
countries whose population is dozens of times larger
than that of my country. Who, then, represents might
here and who represents right?

96. Furthermore, Mr. Blum says that this is the
extent of the tolerance that we are willing to display;
but we state very clearly and openly that the Arabs
do not and will not practise discrimination. We realize
that, like in all societies in the world, there might have
been instances of discrimination in Arab States. But
while discrimination to us, as it is to many parts of the
world, is a problem, a consequence of socio-economic
dislocation, to Israel, as it is to South Africa, discrimination is institutional and a policy.
97. Then when people ask about the unwillingness
to grant the right of selfdetermination for the Jews,
our question, which has been a constant philosophical
question throughout, is: Which Jews want the right
of self-determination? Is that a right that should be
exercised by all Jews everywhere, irrespective of their
actual legal and political citizenship in their respective
countries? Does not this right undermine the sense of
a tie of an organic relationship of an American, a
British, a Soviet, an Indian or an Arab Jew with his
State, with his nation? Does that not undermine the
fact that he has rationally and consciously chosen to
be a citizen- of that particular country? Does it not
undermine and erode that sense of belonging by
deliberately saying that lingering must be a right of selfdetermination in building and belonging to an
exclusively Jewish State?

92. Incidentally, Ambassador Bishara also speaks
here for a country which to date has refused to accept
Council resolution 242 (1967). I have waited in vain for
an announcement by him that his country is now ready
to accept that resolution.
.93. Ambassador Bishara presented himself as a
spokesman of reason and moderation, but he left no
doubt in the minds of his listeners that he was indeed
a spokesman for incitement and hatred, blackmail
and intimidation. He has thus helped us in clarifying
the real motives underlying this debate and for that,
with your permission, Mr. President, I should like to
express to him my gratitude.
94. The PRESIDENT: Mr. Maksoud, to whom the
Council extended an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure, wishes to make a further
statement. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

98. These are serious matters which lead us to the
conclusion that Israel and Zionism seek to disenfranchise Jews who are citizens of many countries of the
world, depriving them of their right of selfdetermination as citizens in their respective countries. That
is our philosophical, national and political position.

95. Mr. MAKSOUD: We are very clear in our
position of stating that throughout our history and
throughout our present political commitment, to be a
Jew in the Arab world cannot and does not necessarily
mean that one cannot be an Arab and a Jew at the same
time. I emphasize this point because to be a Jew in the
Arab world does not disqualify that Jew from being
an Arab. To that extent, we do not consider this to be
an act of “tolerance”, because the word “tolerance”
presumes a patronizing attitude, a gift that we might
give to the Jews who are Arabs. To be a Jew and an
Arab is a matter of right for the Jew if he so wishes.
That is why when we say that to be a Jew it does not
necessarily mean that he is no longer an Arab if he
happens to be a citizen of an Arab State. That is in

The meeting

rose at 12.50 p.m.

NOTES
t A/341542, annex, sect. I, para.102 a and d.
* Ibid., para.102f.
3 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, p. 287.
4 A/34/542, annex, sect. I, para.126.
s A/35/419-S/14129, resolution No. 4/11-P.
6 Ofticiul Records of the General Assembly, Fifth Emergency
Special Session, Plenary Meetings, 1554th meeting.

11

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PLJBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or Ate to: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMM&

SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATlONS UNIES

Les publications des Nations Unies sent en write dans Is librairies et ks lrgencesd&o&aim du
monde cntier. Informez-vous aupr& de votrc libraire ou adressez-vous & : Nations Unies. Seaion
des ventes. New York ou Get&c.
KAK

IIOJlYWfTh

X3naxHx
smax
aawen

Haudi.

HBAAHHEI

Opraxx3at3nx

OPPAHH3AI~HH

OE%EJUfHEHHhlX

HAUHH

06aeJtifxemtbrx

HauHR
Moxmo
nynxrb
8 KJJHJiCHbJX
naraR ureHrcT8ax
BO scex paftorrax
upa.
HaBOXHTe
CnpaBxu
06 HJaaHHRX
8
I~JJXWOY
x8ara3me
HUH
nmnf~e
no
anpecy:
Opraxnkuwn
O6%CnJJJieJJJJbJX
Cexwix
no nponamce rsnamR.
Hbto-Fiopx
xnxSf(exe9a.

COMO CONSEGUIR PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACZONES UNIDAS

Las publicaciones de ias Naciones Unidas astan en venta en libretlas y casas diitriiuidoras en
todas partcs de1 mundo. ConsuIte a su hirero o dirijase a: Nadones Unidas. Scccidn de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations. New York

00300

83-61462-Sqtcm~

19864,050
