S/PV.7323

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7323rd meeting

Tuesday, 25 November 2014, 10.20 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Quinlan .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Australia)

Members:

Argentina .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Oyarzábal
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Hmoud
Ms. Murmokaitė
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Adamu
Ms. Paik Ji-ah
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Gasana
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mr. Pressman

Agenda
General issues relating to sanctions
Letter dated 5 November 2014 from the Permanent Representative of Australia
to the United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral (S/2014/793)

14-64822 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1464822*

S/PV.7323

General issues relating to sanctions

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
General issues relating to sanctions
Letter dated 5 November 2014 from the
Permanent Representative of Australia
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2014/793)
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, and Mr. Jürgen Stock, SecretaryGeneral of INTERPOL.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to also draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2014/793, which contains a letter dated
5 November 2014 from the Permanent Representative
of Australia to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note on the
item under consideration.

25/11/2014

established 25 sanctions regimes in total, the first dating
back to 1966, when the Council imposed sanctions on
Southern Rhodesia, and the most recent in Yemen this
year.
United Nations sanctions have been used to support
conflict-resolution efforts, to prevent the proliferation
of nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction, and to
counter terrorism. Security Council sanctions, together
with United Nations peacekeeping and political efforts,
have made a critical difference in Afghanistan, Angola,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the former
Yugoslavia, Haiti, Liberia, Libya and Sierra Leone,
among other places. United Nations sanctions, in short,
work.
In fact, the regularity with which the Council has
turned to such instruments is testimony to their efficacy.
Today, we have 15 sanctions regimes — the highest
number in the history of the Organization. Moreover,
United Nations sanctions are also fairly economical.
The total cost of supporting the 15 sanctions regimes
is a comparatively modest sum of less than $30 million
per year.

Mr. Feltman: I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity
to address the Security Council on the issue of United
Nations sanctions — an indispensable Charter-based
instrument for the maintenance of international
peace and security. Today’s discussion is set against
a backdrop of unprecedented challenges facing the
international community, including the Council. To
echo the Secretary-General’s words before the General
Assembly prior to the opening of this year’s general
debate, it may seem as if the world is falling apart
and turbulence is testing the multilateral system (see
A/69/PV.6).

The Council has also shown its ability to
continuously innovate and adjust its sanctions regimes.
The most significant transformation was the shift from
comprehensive to targeted sanctions. Since 1994, all
new sanctions regimes have been targeted, comprising
travel bans, asset freezes and arms embargoes; bans
on the trade in commodities, such as diamonds, coal,
wildlife products and charcoal; restrictions on items,
material, equipment, goods and technology related to
nuclear ballistic missiles and other weapons-of-massdestruction programmes; as well as bans on the export
of certain luxury goods. In 1999, the Council introduced
another important innovation, with the establishment
of its sanctions monitoring group on Angola. Today,
11 monitoring groups, teams and panels, with a total of
66 experts, work worldwide in support of the Security
Council and its Sanctions Committees.

Overcoming our common peace and security
challenges requires a Council united in purpose and
action, Member States fulfilling their international
obligations, an effective United Nations system
delivering as one, and a full range of supportive
partnerships. That is certainly the requirement when
we speak about the effective implementation of United
Nations sanctions. The Security Council has a long
history of employing sanctions. The Council has

At the direction of the Council and its sanctions
committees, expert panels regularly cooperate with
international organizations, such as INTERPOL, the
International Civil Aviation Organization and the
International Air Transport Association, on issues
related to travel bans, and with national authorities and
the private sector on asset freezes. I would like to thank
INTERPOL Secretary General Jürgen Stock, who is
here with us today, and his predecessor, Ronald Noble,

I now give the floor to Mr. Feltman.

2/23

14-64822

25/11/2014

General issues relating to sanctions

for the excellent cooperation that we have received
from INTERPOL. We look forward to building on
that partnership so as to further enhance sanctions
implementation.
Over the past decade, the Security Council has
calibrated the designation criteria of its sanctions
regimes to clearly identify the kind of behaviour or
actions that it seeks to modify. Designation criteria have
evolved to include human rights violations, the targeting
of civilians, hate speech, sexual violence in conflict
and even wildlife poaching. In order to ensure that
sanctions designations meet human rights standards,
the Council established the Focal Point for Delisting
in the Secretariat and the Office of the Ombudsperson
of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities. Both are important parts
of the Council’s sanctions history. The Council has
also mandated some United Nations field missions to
monitor certain aspects of sanctions regimes, cooperate
with expert panels, and provide assistance to national
Governments.
The Council’s achievements on United Nations
sanctions thus far allow us to see clearly what more
needs to be done. Work is required to raise the awareness
among all Member States that United Nations sanctions
are supportive, not punitive. They are not meant to
cripple States but to help them overcome instability,
address massive human rights violations, curb illegal
smuggling, and counter terrorism. Some Member
States already understand that and have requested the
Security Council to adopt, fine-tune or strengthen
targeted measures so as to support their fragile political
transitions and national reconciliation efforts. Many
others request the Council to strengthen targeted
measures so as to help protect them against terrorism
and other illicit activities. Those Governments offer
valuable information on listed individuals and entities,
and in a few cases, even put forward listing requests for
consideration.
More work is also needed to provide assistance
to Member States implementing United Nations
sanctions. That will clearly take effort and resources.
And some more work is needed to take more fully into
account the rights of individuals, entities and Member
States designated for targeted measures. Every day, the
Department of Political Affairs Security Council Affairs
Division provides substantive and administrative
support to the Sanctions Committees and expert panels,

S/PV.7323

and works to engage the broader United Nations system
in support of United Nations sanctions. That effort is
central to the work of my Department, and I would like
to take a few minutes to brief you on steps taken to
properly perform that important responsibility.
In the past year alone, Council members will have
noticed several changes. They include standardizing
the methods and formats of communication among
Sanctions Committees, the Secretariat and expert
panels; relaunching the Department’s roster of
experts on sanctions; revamping the recruitment
process; and establishing induction programmes for
Chairs, delegates and experts. In December 2013,
The Department for Political Affairs conducted the
first inter-panel coordination workshop. The aim of
the workshop was to fulfil the call in many Council
resolutions for expert panels to work closely together
and exchange best practices. At last year’s workshop,
we focused on enhancing cooperation among arms
and finance experts working on sanction regimes in
Africa. This year, we intend to focus on enhancing the
engagement between experts and the United Nations
system.
This year, the Department of Political Affairs
(DPA) also led two assessment missions on sanctions
issues, one on the partial lifting of the arms embargo on
Somalia and the other on the termination of sanctions
in Liberia. Those assessment missions strengthened
the understanding of the two Member States on what
the Council expects of them on sanctions issues and
enhanced coordination within the United Nations
system to support sanctions implementation in those
countries.
On 31 October, DPA completed the harmonization
of the format of all committee sanctions lists and
officially launched the consolidated Security Council
sanctions list. The list is being translated into all six
official United Nations languages and, along with a
redesigned subsidiary organs website, will be launched
by April 2015. All those initiatives are intended to
support the Council’s efforts to effectively design,
implement and evaluate United Nations sanctions. DPA
is the committed partner in that effort, as is the United
Nations system as a whole.
This year, the United Nations system conducted
its own internal review of United Nations sanctions,
alongside the State-led high-level review of United
Nations sanctions. An internal inter-agency working

14-648223/23

S/PV.7323

General issues relating to sanctions

group, chaired by me, brought together 20 United
Nations departments and offices, agencies, funds
and programmes working on peace and security,
humanitarian, human rights, legal, protection and
development issues. It is clear from our internal review
process that the United Nations Secretariat needs
to develop clear and coherent system-wide policy
and guidance to support United Nations sanctions
implementation. That should be done within existing
mandates and resources and with due regard for
principles applicable to humanitarian actors.
Regular briefings, trainings and the sharing of
expertise on sanctions issues within United Nations
entities at Headquarters and in the field are also
needed. That is especially important at the outset of a
new sanctions regime, particularly when it coincides
with the establishment of a new United Nations field
mission. We also concluded that the United Nations
system possesses the technical capacity in several key
areas to assist Member States in implementing United
Nations sanctions.Those capacities, however, need to
be better coordinated in-house, better leveraged by the
sanctions committee and better utilized by the Member
States. In some cases, additional financial resources
may be required. Our internal review process also
generated several proposals for the consideration of the
Security Council.
First, the Security Council may wish to consider
increasing the use of assessment missions to take
stock of the impact and effectiveness of United
Nations sanctions. Periodic assessments should also
be undertaken to evaluate the continued relevance of
sanctions measures.
Secondly, where appropriate, the Security Council
should consider expanding the relevant designation
criteria to address specific human rights violations,
such as the use of children for extremist agendas, the
role of mid-level commanders in facilitating human
rights violations, gross violations of women’s rights
committed by extremist groups, sexual violence, other
forms of gender-based crimes, targeted attacks against
women and failure to comply with the responsibility to
protect.
Thirdly, in our view all United Nations sanctions
resolutions should have a clear and standardized listing
and delisting framework. Such a framework should
include clear designation criteria and the requirement
for detailed statements of case. In addition, narrative

4/23

25/11/2014

summaries should be publicly available, biometric
information should be sought so as to reduce false
positives, and a clear reference should be made to the
relevant delisting mechanism.
Fourthly, the Council should continue its efforts to
further strengthen due process when considering the
designation of individuals and entities.
In 2006, the Secretary-General outlined four
elements: the right to be informed, the right to be
heard, the right to be reviewed by an effective review
mechanism, and the need for periodic reviews, especially
regarding the freezing of assets. Those elements are
consistent with the Security Council’s continuing
efforts to improve the fairness and transparency of the
sanctions procedures.
Finally, given that expert panels have been in use
for a considerable amount of time, the concept and
practice of expert panels, including the Office of the
Ombudsperson, should be subject to a comprehensive
review with the aim of enhancing this important tool
of the Council. Likewise, the focal point for delisting,
established in the Security Council Affairs Division,
should also be carefully reviewed and optimized.
United Nations sanctions have proved to be an
effective complement to other Security Council
instruments and actions. We know it is not perfect,
but there is also no doubt that it works. It has to be
continuously improved, and the United Nations system
stands ready to support the Security Council in its
effort to do so.
The President: I thank Mr. Feltman for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Stock.
Mr. Stock: It is a great honour to address the Security
Council, and I would like to thank the Australian
presidency very much for inviting me. I am here today
to speak about how INTERPOL assists countries
with the technical implementation and monitoring of
the Security Council’s sanctions regimes. As United
Nations sanctions have become more targeted, their
implementation has become more complex for national
authorities. INTERPOL can help countries to fulfil
their implementation objectives and can enhance the
effectiveness of targeted United Nations sanctions for
countries transitioning out of conflict.
I would like to ask the Council to consider the
following question. How does the information on the

14-64822

25/11/2014

General issues relating to sanctions

sanctions committees’ lists reach the implementing
authorities dealing directly with the individuals and
entities? How does a border control officer know what to
do when a person subject to a travel ban appears in front
of him? How can details obtained in an investigation
by national law enforcement be identified and used to
enhance the listings and improve the reports of panels
of experts?
With its global cross-border network and modern
tools, INTERPOL is well placed to address those
practical aspects of implemention of United Nations
sanctions. We achieve concrete results. Last year the
Australian police used INTERPOL’s databases to check
fingerprints and found a match with a set shared by
INTERPOL’s National Central Bureau in Washington,
D.C. The individual is subject to a travel ban imposed
by the Security Council, and his whereabouts had
previously been unknown. Thus with the use of
INTERPOL’s tools, Australia and the United States
were able to support Liberia in targeting a designated
individual who had threatened their security.
In my brief statement today, I will describe
INTERPOL’s assistance in general terms, and then as
it relates to specific types of targeted United Nations
sanctions. I will conclude with some ideas as to how
that could be further improved.
INTERPOL’s capacity to communicate information
on United Nations sanctions to police worldwide greatly
increases their visibility. The INTERPOL-Security
Council Special Notice was created in response to
resolution 1617 (2005) and an INTERPOL General
Assembly resolution. There are currently 526 valid
Special Notices, issued at the request of 10 of the 15
sanctions committees. INTERPOL notices are alerts or
requests for cooperation from national police that are
published and circulated in a standard, recognizable
format by our General Secretariat. The Special Notice
is one of many types of INTERPOL notices, which
include other non-criminal notices such as those that
help to locate missing persons and minors. The Special
Notices make the information from the United Nations
sanctions lists accessible to the 25,000 authorized users
in INTERPOL’s 190 member countries, including some
immigration and border-control services, and to visitors
to its public website, where an extract is also published.
INTERPOL supports the implementation of
United Nations sanctions by enhancing the quality of
information available to the sanctions committees.

S/PV.7323

That involves seeking additional details and
identifiers — such as aliases, date and place of birth,
identity documents, fingerprints and photographs — to
supplement the lists. Sometimes that information is
already in INTERPOL’s databases, such as in the case
of an individual subject to United Nations sanctions who
was listed in 2001. The limited data in the sanctions list
was greatly expanded when a check revealed identity
information and photographs from 1996 provided by
INTERPOL’s National Central Bureau in Tashkent.
Authorized personnel of the secretariats of the
sanctions committees can conduct checks against
INTERPOL’s nominal database to search for relevant
information or ask INTERPOL to make enquiries on
their behalf. In all cases, INTERPOL will contact
the country that owns the information for permission
to share it before any data can be used. In addition to
that support, INTERPOL also assists in the effective
implementation of specific types of United Nations
sanctions related to individuals, such as travel bans and
asset-freezing, or to goods, such as the arms embargo
and illegal natural resource exploitation.
With regard to the travel ban, INTERPOL is directly
alerted by our National Central Bureaus in many cases
when there is an attempted violation of this measure
by an individual subject to a Special Notice. Monthly
statistics are also produced by INTERPOL showing
which individuals and entities have been checked, when
and by whom. If further information is available, and
when authorized to do so by the country concerned,
INTERPOL shares details of operational checks with
the sanctions committees. Those details have included
border crossing times and dates and, in some cases,
copies of new passports or pages with entry stamps.
For instance, last year an individual on the travel
ban list of a sanctions committee, who is the subject
of a Special Notice, generated an alert in INTERPOL’s
system when he attempted to leave Côte d’Ivoire. The
national authorities prevented him from boarding the
aeroplane and sent INTERPOL copies of his travel
document, the statement he made, his address and a
recent photograph, all of which was communicated to
the sanctions committee with the permission of Côte
d’Ivoire.
Concerning asset-freezing, INTERPOL is increasingly
involved in coordinating international law enforcement
cooperation on that subject. The second INTERPOL
Expert Working Group meeting on the identification,

14-648225/23

S/PV.7323

General issues relating to sanctions

location and seizure of assets will be held here at
the United Nations in December. Over 100 experts,
including those from the sanctions committees and their
panels, have been invited to produce recommendations
on how to strengthen existing tools and identify new
trends and challenges.
As to the arms embargo, INTERPOL has a number
of tools that can assist the sanctions committees and
their panels of experts in helping countries to apply that
measure by tracing the origin of trafficked weapons.
INTERPOL regularly uses its reference table, network
and records to confirm the identification of weapons
depicted in photographs provided by the secretariat
of the sanctions committees or panels of experts.
INTERPOL recently assisted in the process to identify
handguns used in assassinations of Afghan police
officers, contacted the countries of manufacture for
further details, and then informed the Secretariat.
Due to INTERPOL’s broad range of activities and
connections, specialized information can be provided
when designations extend to the illicit exploitation of
natural resources. Last year, a report on transnational
ivory-poaching syndicates was produced in the
framework of an INTERPOL operation in West and
Central Africa and shared with the panel of experts of
a sanctions committee with the permission of national
authorities in the Central African Republic.
Now that the Special Notices successfully disseminate
information from the United Nations sanctions lists,
the next step could involve increased leverage of our
network and contacts. Meetings could be organized
for law enforcement officers to exchange information
based on region, sanctions committee or type of
measure. Other innovations could include a compilation
of national guidelines for the implementation of United
Nations sanctions and the possibility of a new type of
notice linked to asset-freezing. A further initiative is
training for law enforcement officers on United Nations
sanctions and the use of Special Notices, building on
the seminars already organized thanks to funding from
the Canadian Government and collaboration with a
monitoring team.
We were interested to hear ideas put forward
during the recent high-level review of United Nations
sanctions, and remain keen to assist countries through
our cross-border capabilities in boosting their capacity
for implementation. INTERPOL has been privileged
to enjoy a close working relationship with the Security

6/23

25/11/2014

Council Affairs Division of the Department of Political
Affairs, with which we are in constant contact. We
would like to take this opportunity to thank the Division
for its unstinting work over the years, and look forward
to continued excellent collaboration.
In conclusion, this month INTERPOL celebrates
100 years of international police cooperation and
has worked with the United Nations since 1949. Our
long-standing collaboration with the Security Council
sanctions committees has evolved over the years, and I
am confident that it will continue to move from strength
to strength.
The President: I thank Mr. Stock for his briefing
and congratulate INTERPOL on its 100th anniversary.
I now give the floor to the members of the Security
Council.
Mr. Adamu (Nigeria): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important briefing to examine how
the United Nations system can work concertedly to
give greater effect to the sanctions decisions made by
the Security Council. My delegation appreciates the
excellent concept note you have provided to guide our
discussions today (S/2014/793, annex). I also thank
our briefers, Under-Secretary-General Feltman and
Mr. Jürgen Stock, for their valuable and informative
insights.
Sanctions are a useful conflict-management tool
and play an important role in ensuring compliance with
our collective security architecture, as enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations. The evolving landscape
in the approach to the maintenance of international
peace and security has necessitated a commensurate
modification of the imposition of measures to
discourage the perpetration of conflict. The 15 United
Nations sanctions regimes currently in place are
designed to effectively achieve conflict resolution,
non-proliferation, counter-terrorism, democratization
and the protection of civilians. On their own, however,
they have been assessed as insufficient to induce
compliance with Security Council resolutions.
As sanctions regimes have become more targeted
within the context of intra-State conflicts, the adverse
humanitarian impacts of broad sanctions and a lack
of precision has been, in our opinion, successfully
surmounted. By focusing on spoilers, targeted sanctions
have contributed to the avoidance of unintended
adverse side effects of broad sanctions on the most

14-64822

25/11/2014

General issues relating to sanctions

vulnerable segments of targeted countries. That effort
to avoid collective punishment has enabled the Council
to demonstrate its responsiveness to the human rights
and humanitarian dimensions of its decisions.
To ensure that sanctions remain an effective
component of the Council’s toolkit to promote postconflict stabilization, it is imperative that all actors
involved in their implementation continue to adapt
to the intricacies of the new threats to international
peace and security. That implies that new partnerships
and, in some cases, new strategies may be required
to ensure effectiveness. We acknowledge the positive
contributions of the Governments of Australia, Finland,
Germany, Greece and Sweden in facilitating the review
of United Nations integration and coordination of
sanctions to achieve that objective. We are confident
that the assessment undertaken of current sanctions
practices will provide a springboard for the development
of practical, policy-oriented options that will enhance
their implementation.
It is clear that a one-size-fits-all approach will not be
effective, and that sanctions regimes must be tailored to
address specific situations. The Council must therefore,
through the various panels of experts, assess the
situation on the ground with a view to identifying ways
to engender compliance. In certain situations, sanctions
not involving the use of force, such as asset freezes
and travel bans, can be a useful tool for the Security
Council. Experience shows that they have indeed been
instrumental in helping to fulfil mandates. There are
also situations where sanctions have not quite achieved
their purpose. A case in point is Guinea-Bissau. The
sanctions regime in that case should be given more
impetus, for example by appointing a panel of experts
to monitor and report on the sanctions’ effectiveness.
From a cost-benefit perspective, sanctions are a
relatively low-cost option when considered against
deploying peacekeeping operations. However, their
effectiveness is compromised when regimes are not
complied with. It is therefore essential that the Council
ensure strict compliance with such regimes at all times.
That is crucial to safeguard the Council’s credibility and
helping to maintain its important role in the promotion
and maintenance of international peace and security.
Ms. Murmokaité (Lithuania): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for taking the initiative to
organize this very timely briefing on sanctions. I also
thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman and

S/PV.7323

Jürgen Stock, Secretary General of INTERPOL, for
their detailed briefings.
With the latest additions of sanctions, on Yemen
and the Central African Republic, we now have a total
of 15 sanctions regimes. While that is the highest
number in history, sanctions remain a rather exceptional
measure taken by the Security Council under Article 41
of the Charter with a view to maintaining or restoring
international peace and security.
Whether intended to coerce, constrain or deter,
sanctions can serve their underlying purpose only when
they are properly targeted and implemented. Even the
best-designed sanctions regime will not have the desired
effect when gaps persist in communication and the
capacity to implement, or where there is a lack of political
will to pursue that implementation. Communication,
outreach and transparency in the work of the sanctions
committees are paramount. My delegation believes that
sanctions committees should actively engage with the
countries concerned, consulting on the expectations
and requirements in regard to sanctions implementation
,as well as in response to the needs and difficulties that
arise as countries set out to implement the sanctions.
Ongoing interaction is required, and not only with
the country that gives its name to a sanctions committee
and its immediate neighbours. The wider United Nations
membership needs to be informed and engaged. Public
briefings by chairs of sanctions committees should be
standard, not an exception, and we are pleased to note
that more chairs have chosen to hold public briefings
this year. Only yesterday an open briefing by the
Argentine Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan (see
S/PV.7320) reinforced that upward trend.
Results-oriented communication also requires
readily accessible online information. We welcome
and encourage further progress in developing sanctions
committee websites available in all official United
Nations languages. The regular use of press releases on
sanctions committee work, available in languages other
than English, is important. Visits by chairs of sanctions
committees and assessment missions to the countries
concerned should also be encouraged as a useful tool
for enhancing awareness of sanctions regimes and
compliance with them.
Regarding the committees’ work, we have found it
useful to engage with the Secretary-General’s thematic
Special Representatives, including those on children

14-648227/23

S/PV.7323

General issues relating to sanctions

and armed conflict and sexual violence in conflict, and
with his Special Advisers on the prevention of genocide
and the responsibility to protect. We also see added
value in contacts and exchanges between relevant
sanctions committees, panels of experts and the Office
of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court,
as well as relevant commissions of inquiry. Close
cooperation with INTERPOL, the International Civil
Aviation Organization (ICAO) and other specialized
bodies has been very useful and needs to be further
developed.
Likewise, we have also found it useful to hold joint
meetings with other relevant subsidiary bodies of the
Council, such as, for example, a joint meeting of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140
(2014) on Yemen, the Counter-Terrorism Committee
and the Committee established pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities. We believe such
practice and synergies between relevant committees
should be further explored and encouraged.
With regard to implementation, we believe a change
of attitude towards sanctions is needed so that sanctions
regimes are taken as an opportunity for national and
regional capacity-building. Better use should be made of
reporting on sanctions implementation and committee
dialogue with the countries concerned so as to identify
countries’ capacity, training and technical assistance
needs and enable them to seek practical help. Improved
sanctions implementation capacities can also add to the
overall improvement of countries’ ability to respond
to wider security concerns. For example, assistance
to border or financial controls in relation to sanctions
implementation would also strengthen the capacity
to tackle threats arising from terrorism, international
organized crime and trafficking in and illicit flows of
arms.
In that regard, my delegation sees merit in establishing
a dedicated unit within the Security Council Affairs
Division tasked with improving the coordination and
integration of sanctions implementation. In addition to
providing better support to sanctions committees, such
a unit would also improve the mobilization of technical
assistance and capacity-building in response to needs
articulated by individual Member States. That latter
aspect would be particularly useful, since there are
many potential assistance providers within the United
Nations system, including the United Nations Office
for Disarmament Affairs, the United Nations Mine

8/23

25/11/2014

Action Service, the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime and the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force, as well as specialized agencies such as ICAO
and the International Maritime Organization, along
with INTERPOL, the World Customs Organization, the
Financial Action Task Force and others.
With regard to the panels of experts and monitoring
groups, even if sanctions regimes differ, in our view
there is distinct added value in sharing relevant
information, good practices and lessons learned,
including on establishing patterns of trafficking of
natural resources, illegal financial and arms flows,
and identifying the movements, interdependence and
affiliations of armed groups. Again, the existence of
a dedicated unit would enable us to do that in a more
coherent and systematic way.
Periodic reporting on sanctions implementation
by the Secretary-General would also be useful to
highlight implementation challenges and in discussing
how the Council can better address the coordination
of sanctions regimes with other peace and security
mechanisms and providing recommendations for
improving coordination within the United Nations
system and support to Member States.
I would like to conclude by commenting briefly on
the due-process mechanisms related to the sanctions
regimes. In our view, due process must be a basic
standard and an imperative in all such regimes. As has
been noted on many previous occasions, the Office
of the Ombudsperson is an important mechanism for
improving the credibility of measures taken within
the Al-Qaida sanctions regime. Providing similar
mechanisms for review or redress would be important
to all existing sanctions regimes, either by extending or
replicating the Ombudsperson’s mandate or by applying
other mechanisms to the same effect.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We are
grateful for Australia’s initiative in bringing the subject
of sanctions to the Security Council’s attention. We also
thank Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary General for
Political Affairs, and Jürgen Stock, Secretary General
of INTERPOL, for their briefings.
We believe that the universal nature of the United
Nations makes it the appropriate body for establishing
and monitoring such measures. But beyond the
differences that there may be in the Council in this
regard, we see this meeting as an opportunity to
evaluate the functioning of the multilateral-sanctions

14-64822

25/11/2014

General issues relating to sanctions

regimes enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations,
especially if the idea is to discuss the elements that can
facilitate their effective implementation.
From the perspective of a developing country,
it seems reasonable to us to identify and establish
some criteria that are conducive to facilitating the
implementation of sanctions, while always bearing in
mind the different situations that exist on the ground.
It is important to establish minimum thresholds of
convergence that are applicable in different contexts.
We value the concept of targeted sanctions, something
that might seem obvious today but was not during our
previous tenure on the Council, in 2003. We note that
the sanctions have become more selective and focused,
although they are being applied to a wider range of
situations related to threats to international peace
and security. In connection with the latter point, the
intra-State nature of the majority of the current crises
is a dimension that should also be considered. It is
necessary to consider whether conflicts of that type
deserve to be subject to sanctions by the Council.
We should not ignore due process. We appreciate
the attempts to improve the listing and delisting of
individuals and entities on the sanctions lists, but
we believe that challenges remain in adjusting those
procedures. The adoption of resolution 1730 (2006)
and the establishment of the focal point for delisting
of names on the lists was a significant advance, but
still insufficient. Therefore, we hope progress can be
made in extending the mandate of the Ombudsperson
of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities to other sanctions committees.
We further believe that, to the degree that the
situation allows, it is important to promote field visits
by the sanctions committees and their chairs to verify
on the ground and evaluate the implementation and
compliance. We had the experience of doing that a few
weeks ago as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1572 (2004)
concerning Côte d’Ivoire, and it became clear that such
visits are necessary to maintain a good dialogue and
to bridge any gaps in perception between Headquarters
and the field.
The integration and coordination of sanctions
implementation among the various United Nations
agencies remains a central challenge. In that vein,

S/PV.7323

we support the idea of creating a body for interaction
among them.
When it comes to the groups of experts, we
appreciate the specific and objective contributions
they make. It is our duty as a Council to provide clear
guidelines for their work so that they can concentrate on
what is really important. It is the duty of the Secretariat
to prepare and provide appropriate conceptual tools to
the new experts who join in those tasks. We reiterate
our position that the members of the groups of experts
should be elected because of their professional capacity,
also taking into consideration the principle of equitable
geographical representation and gender balance.
We hope that there will soon be progress towards an
agreement to replicate the selection system for short
lists used by the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004).
Finally, we note that progress has been made in
this area, for example through the establishment of
a consolidated sanctions list, but there is still much
room for improvement. We must take into account
the experience of other entities, such as INTERPOL
and regional and subregional organizations, in
order to establish cooperation that will benefit the
implementation of the sanctions adopted by the Council.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
Australia for convening this briefing and for its work on
trying to improve the effectiveness of United Nations
sanctions. Australia was one of the main sponsors and
contributors to the recent high-level review of United
Nations sanctions, and your efforts, Mr. President, as
Chair of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities, the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), and
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006) show clearly that you are putting theory into
practice. I also thank Mr. Feltman and the Secretary
General of INTERPOL for their briefings this morning.
As Mr. Feltman set out, sanctions are a vital foreign
policy tool that can contribute to achieving United
Nations objectives. They are used to prevent conflict,
human rights abuses, terrorism and the proliferation
of weapons. They have made a critical and positive
difference in situations from Afghanistan to Yemen.
It is incumbent on the Security Council to ensure that
sanctions are used properly. That means designing them
to have maximum and targeted impact and ensuring

14-648229/23

S/PV.7323

General issues relating to sanctions

that they are implemented properly. Each sanctions
regime is designed to achieve its own specific objective
and has its own specific challenges.
Sanctions have been used to support negotiations
towards peace agreements and wider efforts to prevent
conflict. We have seen that in the cases of Sierra Leone,
Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire sanctions. Even the threat of
sanctions, as we saw with the build-up to the eventual
creation of the Yemen sanctions regime, can make
spoilers to peace and security think twice about their
actions. Sanctions have also been used effectively to
counter terrorism. The ability of Al-Qaida and other
terrorist groups to operate has been significantly
constrained by United Nations counter-terrorism
sanctions. The United Nations has united to tackle
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), and
sanctions will help to degrade ISIL’s capability.
Moreover, counter-proliferation sanctions have
made it more difficult for some States to acquire goods
that could aid the development of weapons of mass
destruction. They have helped to restrict Iran’s access
to proliferation-sensitive materials and technologies,
and, with other economic sanctions, they have been
important in bringing Iran to the negotiating table.
Discussions between the E3+3 Governments and Iran
have made progress in recent days. We have explored
with Iran ways to bridge some of the significant gaps
that remain. Both sides are committed to a deal and we
still believe that that is possible, but Iran needs to show
greater flexibility on its programme and to take some
tough decisions if we are to achieve that. We need to
sustain the momentum generated from recent rounds
of discussion in order to secure the comprehensive
agreement that is in everyone’s interests.
Given that sanctions are increasingly being relied
upon to tackle a variety of challenges, it is important
that we consider how to make best use of them. The
sanctions committees, the Secretariat and expert
groups all have a role to play in this. Their work
should mutually reinforce each other. They should
continue to work together to ensure that sanctions help
to achieve the political goals set out by the Security
Council. I welcome Mr. Feltman’s recommendations to
further improve sanctions’ procedures. We should look
carefully at those recommendations.
In addition, the United Kingdom believes that
there is scope for the commitees themselves to be more
active. We suggest that all committees should meet

10/23

25/11/2014

every six months at the level of deputy permanent
representative or higher. That would bring a periodic
discussion at a more strategic level, which could be an
opportunity to review some of the longer-term aspects
of the respective regimes. Are we closer to achieving
our goals? How might we adjust the regime? What can
we learn from implementation efforts to date?
We also see scope for sharing best practice and
lessons learned to cross the regimes. Visits by experts
from capitals can contribute to the debate. We welcome
the efforts by the presidency to set out ways to make
best use of sanctions in a resolution. We strongly
support that work and hope that we will be in a position
to adopt the draft resolution in the very near future.
Effective implementation is crucial. Without it,
sanctions will not achieve their goals. It is worth restating
that sanctions regimes established by the Council under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations place
obligations on all Member States. That is vital, for
example, when it comes to choking off support for ISIL
in line with presidential statement S/PRST/2014/23,
adopted by the Council on 19 November. Assistance
on implementation should be made available to those
unable to comply. Sharing information on challenges
to effective implementation will help Member States
in their own implementation. And we should name
and shame those Member States that do not implement
sanctions properly.
We continue to be strong supporters of fair and
clear procedures for United Nations sanctions regimes.
For instance, we have supported the strengthening of
due process provisions under the 1267 (1999) Al-Qaida
regime. However, no two regimes are alike, so we need
to tailor special solutions for each circumstance, rather
than replicating an identical approach for all regimes.
Sanctions remain a vital part of the Council’s
toolbox. It is important that we continue to use
sanctions in an appropriate manner ‑ targeted and
aimed at signalling, constraining or coercing actors
towards peaceful ends. In that way, smart sanctions
can continue to be used in the long term as an effective
tool of the Council in the support of the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs and the Secretary General of
INTERPOL for their very specific and useful briefings.
I also want to thank you, Mr. President, and Australia

14-64822

25/11/2014

General issues relating to sanctions

for your commitment to this issue and for organizing
today’s debate. It allows us to consider sanctions, a tool
increasingly used by the Security Council.
Last week, on 19 November, Ansar al-Sharia Derna
and Ansar al-Sharia Benghazi were placed under
sanctions. The Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida
and the Taliban and associated individuals and entities
thereby showed its vital role in support of the political
process carried out in Libya by Special Representative
Bernardino León. The designation of Ansar al-Sharia
sends a clear message to the terrorists: it confirms the
determination of the international community, and it
encourages moderate Islamists to distance themselves
from terrorists and to rejoin the political dialogue.
Increasingly, Security Council sanctions are a way
of assisting States in restoring stability. That was one
of the goals of the Security Council this year when
it established a new sanctions regime in the Central
African Republic. In imposing sanctions against
individuals who threaten the return to peace and in
restricting the flow of arms or trafficking in natural
resources, the international community is assisting the
Central African Republic in its stabilization process.
Indeed, sanctions are not an end in and of
themselves. They are a tool at our disposal to achieve
a political objective. In that context, the application of
sanctions requires maintaining a firm attitude while
remaining open to dialogue as part of a dual approach.
As I said earlier, sanctions are not punitive but
rather preventive instruments. The Security Council is
not a judge and has no intention of becoming one, but
it does bear the responsibility to maintain international
peace and security. It is clear that sanctions are an
important instrument at the Security Council’s disposal
in exercising its responsibilities. We welcome the
increased use by the Council of this tool, and it is a
positive development that its usage has evolved in recent
years. Sanctions are now targeted, and procedural
guarantees have been put in place.
Among the procedural guarantees, mechanisms
aimed at enabling the delisting of persons are key, as
stressed earlier by Jeffrey Feltman. It is vital to respect
the fundamental freedoms of listed persons and to ensure
that the regimes have adequate procedural guarantees.
That is why France supported the establishment of a
focal point for delisting requests regarding the other
sanctions regimes and the gradual strengthening of

S/PV.7323

the Ombudsperson’s mandate within the Al-Qaida
sanctions Committee, who is working specifically on
the issue of persons seeking to be delisted. I take this
opportunity to pay tribute to the high quality of the
work carried out by the Ombudsperson.
Moreover, sanctions lists are useful only if they
accurately reflect the status of the threat. Sanctions
must therefore be based on a political strategy that
is continuously being tailored to the context. Here I
wish to highlight the specificity of each of the various
sanctions regimes.
It is vital that sanctions be implemented in
a universal manner. Here cooperation between
INTERPOL and the sanctions Committees has been
exemplary. The establishment of special INTERPOLUnited Nations notices allows the services responsible
for the application of the law around the world to be
informed of whether an individual or entity is subject
to Security Council sanctions. With the threat posed
by the issue of foreign terrorist combatants and in the
framework of the struggle against Daesh, this type of
mechanism is all the more vital.
Finally, the private sector, like States, has a key
role to play in the implementation of sanctions regimes.
It would be desirable if the United Nations and Member
States stepped up their dialogue with the private sector.
Economic operators should be encouraged to adopt
good practices in terms of the application of sanctions
in the form of the implementation of specific prevention
measures and through increased cooperation with
public authorities, in order to facilitate the interception
of illicit merchandise and combat trafficking.
All measures that can be taken to assist States in
their efforts to implement that goal must be supported.
Sanctions are the only instruments at our disposal that
contain a coercive dimension but that do not include the
use of force. They are valuable instruments that help
us to shoulder our responsibilities in the area of peace
and security, and it is in our interest to improve their
effectiveness and universality.
Mr. Oyarzábal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin by thanking Under-SecretaryGeneral Jeffrey Feltman and the Secretary General of
INTERPOL, Mr. Jürgen Stock, for their briefings.
Mr. President, as stressed in the concept note
(S/2014/793, annex) that your delegation prepared for
this meeting, the role of sanctions in the collective

14-6482211/23

S/PV.7323

General issues relating to sanctions

security framework enshrined in the Charter has
evolved significantly over the past 25 years, as has the
way in which the Council uses them. Sanctions have
become measures targeted against individuals and
entities with particular responsibility for the situation
that the Council seeks to address. Likewise, the Council
is increasingly aware of the need to avoid consequences
for the population at large.
We deem it important to bear in mind that sanctions
are a tool that the Charter provided to the Council in
given circumstances that threaten international peace
and security. They are therefore temporary in nature,
since they are designed to be lifted when the objective
sought in each case in achieved.
Argentina considers that, as the Security Council
moves more decisively towards the use of sanctions to
fulfil its mandate to maintain international peace and
security, it must comprehensively deal with the need to
improve the administration, design and monitoring of
sanctions policies.
We are grateful for and welcome Australia’s
initiative to convene this meeting, which gives us
the opportunity to address the issue of sanctions in a
comprehensive manner. We believe that the Council
should continue to consider the issue periodically to
assess the impact of the measures, the challenges faced
in terms of implementation and improvements that
could contribute to increasing their effectiveness and
ensure respect for due process. We also believe that the
debate on this issue should be extended to all Member
States, which, ultimately, are responsible for applying
the measures imposed by the Council.
Argentina has repeatedly expressed its firm
conviction that the maintenance of international peace
and security should take place in the framework of the
rule of law and respect for due process. The measures
that the Council adopts to maintain international peace
and security, including sanctions, must fully respect
international law, especially international human
rights law, international humanitarian law and the
rights of refugees. Such measures should also respect
the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations, such as sovereignty, territorial
integrity, the political independence of States and the
principle of non-intervention in domestic affairs.
Likewise, Argentina advocates respect for due
process in the work of the Council. That is why
resolution 1904 (2009) deserves special mention,

12/23

25/11/2014

which established the Office of the Ombudsperson as
an independent and impartial figure that considers the
requests of persons, groups, companies and entities
that wish to be removed from the list drawn up by the
Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities. The establishment of
the Office of the Ombudsperson represented substantive
progress in terms of due process, but Members of the
Organization continue to have concerns with regard to
the procedural guarantees of sanctions regimes.
One of the most important causes for concern is
the fact that the mandate of the Ombudperson includes
only individuals appearing on the list of the Al-Qaida
sanctions Committee. Of even greater concern is the
fact that, as the Ombudsperson indicated during the
debate on working methods held on 23 October,
“there is no evident rationale as to why an
independent review mechanism is made available to
one set of individuals subject to targeted sanctions,
but not to others. That is particularly the case when
the matter is considered from the perspective of
those subject to the sanctions” (S/PV.7285, p. 2).
As we also noted during the aforementioned
debate, Argentina advocates extending the mandate of
that Office to all sanctions committees of the Council,
adapting its structure to the need to address a larger
number of cases. We understand that the Council should
discuss the issue of due process in sanctions with the
intention of improving it, both to enhance respect for
individual rights of those subject to those measures and
to strengthen the credibility of the various regimes and
advance their implementation by Member States.
In improving due process in the sanctions regimes,
while recognizing the existence of the mechanism of
the focal point, we believe that by its very nature and
structure it does not have the basic features needed
to serve as a mechanism for independent review.
We therefore believe that the Council should seek
to strengthen the Office of the Ombudsperson and
ensure that it has the necessary resources to carry
out its work. In that context, we understand that, even
from a structural point of view, the Office must have
administrative and contractual arrangements that in
practice provide institutional safeguards that ensure its
necessary independence.
I wish to refer to the process for the selection
of experts who are part of groups that support the

14-64822

25/11/2014

General issues relating to sanctions

committees in carrying out their work. We believe
people with experience and the necessary training
should be selected so that each committee may fulfil its
mandate and that geographical distribution and gender
balance should be respected. We also understand that the
process to identify the most qualified candidates should
be transparent. As in other aspects, transparency in the
selection of experts will bring greater credibility to their
work and to the sanctions committees. Therefore, we
are convinced that the various committees should know
which candidates have been submitted and should have
the relevant information about their experience and
training. In addition, we believe that the committees
should participate in the selection of experts after a first
intervention by the Secretariat and take the decision on
each available opening, as in the case of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) .
In closing, I wish to reiterate that Argentina strongly
opposes the use of unilateral coercive measures, the
extraterritorial application of domestic trade laws
and the adoption of discriminatory trade practices, as
they are measures in violation of the United Nations
Charter, the rules of international law and the spirit of
multilateralism. Therefore I want to recall that it is the
United Nations that has the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security as
the cornerstone of the multilateral system. Argentina is
convinced that multilateral action through the United
Nations, in conformity with the principles of the
Organization, will allow us to address the threats to the
international peace and security in an effective manner
and to achieve a safer world for all.
Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing today’s debate on
sanctions. I also thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, and the
Secretary General of INTERPOL, Mr. Jürgen Stock,
for their briefings.
Measures targeting individuals or entities that
the Security Council has taken over 25 years are a
recent development in the area of sanctions. They are
designed to protect civilian populations and to punish
those who are alleged to have committed acts that
violate international humanitarian law or human rights
law. They also now used to fight terrorism, limit the
flow of arms and protect children. Therefore, these
sanctions are a valuable tool for maintaining peace and
international security.

S/PV.7323

Generally speaking, however, the practice of
sanctions still has many shortcomings, particularly
in terms of respect for due process and human rights
guarantees during the process of listing and delisting.
The creation of the Office of the Ombudsperson and
the procedures established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) have helped to improve the situation, but
corrective measures are still needed. For that reason,
the practice of sanctions is constantly being challenged.
Recently, in the last debate on the Council’s working
methods, on 23 October 2014 (S/PV.7285), the members
expressed the need to continue in that direction.
If problems involving respect for human rights arise
with regard to listing and delisting procedures during the
adoption of sanctions, the question of their effectiveness
comes up more strongly, as effectiveness depends on
their implementation. You opened the debate on that
aspect of the question today, Mr. President. The highlevel review of sanctions that your Mission sponsored,
with the participation of several other Missions and
organizations, highlighted the various issues related to
implementing sanctions at different levels. It showed
the weakness in the coordination and monitoring both
among the 15 sanctions committees and between them
and other bodies in charge of sanctions. Considerable
difficulties are also evident in the implementation of
sanctions at the national level.
The issue of capacity-building and strengthening
technical expertise at this level and the lack of funding
are also obstacles to the successful implementation of
sanctions. The Council should take measures to solve
these problems, including by improving dialogue and
information-sharing in the United Nations system,
regional organizations and countries affected by
sanctions. Those countries should receive more
technical assistance and assistance in building the
capacity needed to implement sanctions.
United Nations missions on the ground should
be more deeply involved in information exchange
with the sanctions committees and expert groups.
Coordination with United Nations agencies and
regional and intergovernmental organizations could
also be strengthened.
However, we believe that given the overlapping
technical and political aspects of sanctions
implementation, those measures will not really achieve
their objectives unless they are implemented with good
collaboration with regional organizations and in strict

14-6482213/23

S/PV.7323

General issues relating to sanctions

respect for national laws and the sovereignty of the
countries concerned. It also seems wise to us to use
other methods provided for under the Charter, such as
dialogue and mediation.
We welcome the effective and efficient cooperation
between the United Nations and INTERPOL in the
implementation of sanctions. The discussions we
are having today will definitely contribute to deeper
thinking on the necessity of adopting measures to
improve the effectiveness of sanctions through better
implementation.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman and Secretary
General Stock of INTERPOL for their briefings.
Under the Charter of the United Nations, the
Security Council shoulders the main responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
For many years, the Council has used a combination of
measures, including sanctions, in response to various
security threats and in pushing for a proper settlement
of the relevant issues through peaceful means and has
had positive results. In its practice, the Council has also
continued to evaluate its experiences, both positive and
negative, and has gradually formed a complete system
for sanctions implementation through the important
role it has played.
Meanwhile, in formulating, applying and enforcing
sanctions, the Council is also facing a series of problems
and challenges. In addition, a small number of countries
act at will according their domestic laws and impose or
threaten to impose unilateral sanctions against other
States, which is not only in violation of the principle
of sovereign equality among Member States but also
undermine the authority of Council sanctions.
As to how the Council can best utilize the
mechanism of sanctions, I would like to make three
points.
First, the pre-eminence of the Charter of the United
Nations over sanctions should be safeguarded. The
Council should strictly comply with the provisions of
the Charter and adopt a prudent and responsible attitude
on the question of sanctions. In coping with situations
of concern, the Council should give priority to such
tools as mediation, good offices and negotiations. The
enforcement of sanctions should be predicated on the
exhaustion of other non-coercive means and should be
in keeping with the principles of the United Nations

14/23

25/11/2014

Charter and relevant international law. Sanctions
should not be a tool for one country to use in pursuit of
power politics. The domestic law of one country should
not become the basis for sanctions against other States.
China is opposed to any practice of imposing sanctions
on other countries on the basis of one’s domestic law.
Secondly, we should adhere to the overall pattern
of sanctions serving political settlements, as sanctions
are not the goal but the means. The Council’s sanctions
should be based on the overall goal of achieving a
political settlement of the issue in question. In the
course of the formulation, application and enforcement
of sanctions, the need for a political settlement should
be taken into account at all times and the actions taken
should be truly conducive to an easing of tensions
and to furthering the efforts for mediation and good
offices by the countries and regional organizations in
question. Sanctions should not be carried out for their
own sake, much less interfere with efforts for political
settlement — that would be penny wise and pound
foolish and would put the cart before the horse.
Thirdly, it is imperative to maintain the existing
sanctions implementation system. Currently, sanctions
are generally an effective tool for the Council. An
implementation system has taken shape, which is
comprised of implementation by Member States,
guidance and supervision by the sanctions committees
and professional support by the panels of experts. Since
imposing sanctions is a power given to the Council
by the Charter of the United Nations, at is imperative
for Member States to maintain their ownership of
the issue of sanctions. As the various sanctions
regimes have been established in response to various
situations, discussions on sanctions should focus on the
differences among the various sanctions regimes, and
the implementation of sanctions should be tailored to
specific situations, and we should avoid one-size-fitsall approaches.
Meanwhile, the improvement and perfection of the
existing system of sanctions implementation should
prioritize increasing the relevance and effectiveness of
the sanctions, and efforts should be made to minimize
the negative impact of sanctions on the general
population and third-party States. The Council should
not just add sanctions; it should also reduce them. In the
light of the developments in the countries in question, it
should regularly assess sanctions results and, based on
the needs, amend, suspend and ultimately lift sanctions.

14-64822

25/11/2014

General issues relating to sanctions

As a permanent member of the Security Council,
China has consistently adopted a prudent and responsible
approach towards issues involving sanctions and has
been pushing for greater relevance and effectiveness
in the Council’s sanctions regime in order to serve the
overall interest of the political settlement of the relevant
questions. We are ready to join the other members of
the Council and the wider United Nations membership
in pushing for a Security Council that will better
fulfil its responsibilities and contribute positively and
constructively to the maintenance of common security
and lasting peace around the world.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
am grateful to you, Mr. President, for having taken
the initiative to organize this briefing. Luxembourg
shares Australia’s view of the importance of a proper
implementation of the sanctions imposed by the
Security Council. That is even more important now, as
the number of sanctions regimes has never been higher.
We hope that a draft resolution that will allow us to
strengthen and better coordinate the United Nations
system’s capacity to implement the sanctions regimes
will be adopted as soon as possible.
I would also like to thank the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, and
the Secretary General of the International Criminal
Police Organization (INTERPOL), Mr. Jürgen Stock,
for their very informative briefings and their concrete
recommendations.
Luxembourg has actively participated in the work
of the high-level review of the sanctions imposed by the
United Nations, and we await the final document of that
process with interest. We thank Australia in particular
for having chaired the working group on integration
and coordination within the United Nations system.
As Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1718 (2006) concerning the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, I fully agree with the
objective of achieving better coordination within the
Secretariat and better awareness among Member States.
This is not about affecting the primacy of the Security
Council or constraining the sanctions committees, but
about streamlining their work, making the support
to Committees more effective and improving the
implementation of the measures imposed by the
Council. The efforts of the Department of Political
Affairs, especially the Security Council Affairs
Division, to that end are commendable.

S/PV.7323

To move forward, we support the idea of
establishing a coordination and policy unit within
the Security Council Affairs Division. The unit
would be responsible for identifying good practices
and facilitating exchanges of such practices among
the various sanctions committees, managing the
roster of experts and the consolidated sanctions list,
and identifying and mobilizing within the United
Nations system the expertise required for the effective
implementation of sanctions. The unit could also
support the Security Council’s efforts and those of its
subsidiary bodies aimed at providing practical guidance
to Member States, building their capacity and providing
them with technical assistance for the implementation
of sanctions.
We commend the work done by the Secretariat to
standardize the format of all United Nations sanctions
lists and establish a consolidated list of Security
Council sanctions in all the official languages of
the Organization, to facilitate their implementation
by Member States. To go further, each committee
should be responsible for maintaining and publishing
a document that consolidates all existing measures for
the regime being applied. That would further enhance
the readability of sanctions for Member States and
private sector actors.
The assistance of panels of experts is essential to
allowing sanctions committees to fully discharge the
mandates entrusted to them by our Council. All panels
of experts must receive the administrative and technical
support needed to do their jobs. Similarly, Member
States and all stakeholders should be encouraged to
cooperate fully with the panels of experts, including
by providing them with any information they have
about possible violations of sanctions. This cooperation
is essential to ensuring the safety of experts and
unhindered access for them, particularly the access to
persons, documents and sites necessary to successfully
carry out their mandate.
We also believe that the Council and its
sanctions committees could benefit from increased
interaction with the relevant international and
regional organizations. I will cite as one example the
cooperation between INTERPOL and several sanctions
committees concerning the publication of Special
Notices. Secretary General Stock has just described the
scope of those notices. Luxembourg supports that tool
for disseminating information that educates Member
States on their obligations under the sanctions regimes.

14-6482215/23

S/PV.7323

General issues relating to sanctions

In the spirit of enhancing the coherence of the work
of the various sanctions committees, we hope that all
committees will be able to cooperate with INTERPOL
in the future.
In its resolutions establishing sanctions on Iran
and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, the
Security Council has recognized the value of standards
and further guidance from the Financial Action Task
Force (FATF) for the implementation of financial
sanctions. The FATF recommendations provide useful
guidance to Member States on the requirements they
must meet in order to effectively implement these
restrictive measures. The FATF guidelines also provide
particularly useful guidance to banks and other
financial institutions, which are on the front lines,
so to speak, in terms of sanctions implementation. In
our view, it is also essential that, in its management
of sanctions regimes, the Security Council take into
account its cooperation with the International Criminal
Court (ICC). A practical way to do this would be to
include individuals subject to an arrest warrant from
the ICC on the lists of relevant sanctions committee of
the Security Council.
Let me conclude my remarks by turning to a matter
that quite rightly figures in the concept note (S/2014/793,
annex) that you circulated, Sir, prior to this meeting. I
am talking about the reconciliation of sanctions with
the principles of the rule of law, in particular respect for
due process and for human rights. Targeted sanctions
are an important tool of the Security Council. They
are intended to apply restrictive measures against
individuals or entities that contribute to threats against
international peace and security. But if sanctions are to
be effective, the processes of listing and delisting must
be guided by the principles of fairness, respect for the
rule of law, credibility and transparency.
The establishment and strengthening of the tools of
the Ombudsperson for the Al-Qaida sanctions regime
helped to affirm these principles. As an independent
and effective sanctions review mechanism, the Office
of the Ombudsperson plays an indispensable role to
ensure the accuracy and legitimacy of the sanctions
list. At present, only individuals and entities on the
list of sanctions against Al-Qaida have access to the
Ombudsperson. Yet individuals and entities covered by
other sanctions committees should also be entitled to
fair process. That is why I would like to reaffirm the
conviction of Luxembourg that the Security Council
should expand the mandate of the Ombudsperson to
cover the other sanctions regimes.
16/23

25/11/2014

Ms. Paik Ji-ah (Republic of Korea): I thank the
Australian presidency for organizing this briefing
on the evolution of sanctions. I would also like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman and
INTERPOL Secretary General Jürgen Stock for their
informative briefings.
We share the view that, together with Peacekeeping
Operations, sanctions are a useful tool for the Security
Council in achieving the objectives of the Charter of the
United Nations, especially in maintaining international
peace and security. The increase in Security Council
sanctions resolutions over the past two decades
demonstrates their necessity and the international
community’s support for their utilization in response
to threats to peace and security. We emphasize that all
Member States are obligated to implement Security
Council resolutions in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations.
As mentioned in the concept note before us
(S/2014/793, annex) and in the briefings, today’s
sanctions regimes are evolving and defined by their
targeted application. They stand in contrast to the
comprehensive trade and economic embargoes of the
past. Sanctions are now applied not only to assist conflict
resolution, but also to address a wide variety of security
challenges, including counter-terrorism, violations
of international human rights and humanitarian law,
and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
However, despite the development of sanctions by the
Council, gaps still remain.
The level of understanding of sanctions and the
implementation capabilities of Member States, as well
as the resources of the Secretariat, seem to lag behind
this evolving trend. With regard to the Security Council
sanctions, we would like to emphasize the following
several points.
First, Security Council sanctions must be effective.
If we fail to ensure the effectiveness of sanctions, they
lose their raison d’être. By their nature, sanctions are
a means to achieve a specific goal. We should bear in
mind that this can only be achieved when sanctions are
effective enough.
Secondly, the Security Council must improve
Member States’ understanding of the obligations
imposed by Security Council sanctions. Security
Council resolutions adopted under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations are binding, but this
does not in itself automatically lead to implementation.

14-64822

25/11/2014

General issues relating to sanctions

Sanctions will only be effective when implementation
by Member States and cooperation by international
and regional organizations, as well as from the private
sector converge. In this vein, the sanctions committees
should utilize more open briefings to explain the
sanction regimes to the broader United Nations
membership and facilitate the exchange of views. The
committees and their groups of experts should engage
in proactive outreach to further clarify the measures to
various actors on the ground and to hear their input on
challenges they face or good practices that they may
have developed.
Thirdly, the Republic of Korea shares the view that
there is a growing need to support capacity-building of
Member States in order to assist implementation efforts.
Such support is necessary because States face different
challenges and operate in different environments.
While the responsibility to implement sanctions lies
with Member States, the sanctions committees and the
Secretariat have important roles in assisting Member
States to fulfil their obligations.
Today’s briefing is a part of an ongoing process
to calibrate and strengthen sanctions implementation
as an important policy tool of the Security Council.
We look forward to continued consultations among
actors, including the Security Council, its subsidiary
committees, the groups of experts, the Secretariat and
relevant international organizations and civil society
with a view to enhancing Security Council sanctions
as an effective tool for maintaining international peace
and security.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): At the outset, I would
like to thank you, Sir, for your initiative in convening
this briefing on the evaluation of sanctions. Such
initiative has been a hallmark of your presidency and
of Australia’s tenure in the Security Council. It is also
a coherent follow-up to your close engagement in the
recently concluded high-level review of United Nations
sanctions, which was sponsored by your country,
together with Greece, Norway and Sweden.
The high level of participation by Member States,
including my country, and other stakeholders in the
high-level review was a strong recognition of the
important role United Nations sanctions can play in the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
review also reminded us that improving the effectiveness
of sanctions requires a constant dialogue with those
affected and those in charge of their implementation.

S/PV.7323

I welcome the briefings delivered by Jeffrey
Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, who heads the Department that is the focal
point of the United Nations system on sanctions
issues, and by Mr. Jürgen Stock, Secretary General of
INTERPOL — an important partner in the effective
implementation of sanctions imposed by the Council. I
wish to take this opportunity to congratulate Mr. Stock
on his appointment.
Under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations, the Security Council is empowered with an
important set of tools that it can use to carry out its
mandate, and sanctions are among them. Sanctions
have become more targeted and more sophisticated
so as better to serve their remedial and preventative
purposes. From 1966, when the Security Council first
imposed sanctions, on Southern Rhodesia, as stated
by our friend Jeffrey Feltman, to most recently, when
targeted sanctions were imposed in Yemen in 2014
against those obstructing its stability, sanctions have
continuously evolved in order to respond to emerging
threats to peace and security.
However, we all recognize that the first condition for
the effectiveness of a sanctions regime is to ensure that
they are fully and faithfully implemented by Member
States. The increasing sophistication and complexity of
the targeted sanctions measures that we enact require
that we account for the practical challenges associated
with implementation, which in our view include the
following.
First, we know that the legally binding nature of
the Council’s sanctions is not in itself sufficient to
ensure their effective implementation. A commitment
to compliance requires that sanctions be perceived as
just and contributing to peace and security. However,
what is often the case on the ground is the lack of
knowledge about sanctions and the perception that they
are punitive rather than preventive. We therefore see
a need to establish, throughout the life of a sanctions
regime, effective communication between the sanctions
committees and the affected countries and regions on
the purpose of the sanctions. A regional consensus on
the necessity and legitimacy of a sanctions regime can
go a long way towards ensuring that they are effectively
implemented.
Secondly, presently the large majority of sanctions
regimes are in Africa. Very often, the targeted States
and their neighbours do not have the institutional

14-6482217/23

S/PV.7323

General issues relating to sanctions

capacity to implement the sanctions. It is therefore a
challenge to translate those measures into a national
regulatory system. There is thus a need to renew
efforts and focus on ensuring that those crucial actors
are better assisted in capacity-building and accessing
technical assistance.
Thirdly, as we know, the range of actors involved in
the implementation of sanctions is broad and continues
to expand as the sanctions evolve. Therefore, the
Council should encourage cooperation and coordination
with neighbouring States, regional and subregional
organizations, and international organizations. All
those stakeholders must join efforts to first and foremost
promote the basic principle that sanctions are intended
to help Member States, not to undermine them.
Fourthly, I would wish to make some recommendations
as a non-permanent member of the Security Council.
For example, the decision that the sanctions committees
should be chaired by newly elected members should
be made at an early stage. That would allow members
to prepare adequately, as they do not have time for an
appropriate hand-over from the outgoing chairpersons
of the subsidiary bodies, or to choose their national
experts to be included in their Security Council teams.
Incoming members also need to avail themselves,
at an early stage, of comprehensive information on the
sanctions regime. We are provided only with initial
information by the Security Council Affairs Division,
which I commend here. It is done only towards the end of
November or December, which can be very helpful, but
one basically learns on the job while already assuming
the chairmanship of the sanctions committees. We
therefore call on the Council to change the system to
give more time for the preparation of new members,
which should be adequately informed on the sanctions
implementation mechanisms and given the means to
keep track of the evolution of sanctions.
My fifth and last point is on the groups or panels
of experts. We underscore their crucial support for the
work of the sanctions committees, acting as their eyes
and ears on the ground. It is therefore important to
have minimum standards for the selection and training
process for those experts, which also need to reflect a
balanced geographical distribution. It is also important
that experts execute their mandate in accordance with
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.
As we have stated in the past, Member States play
a critical role in the implementation of sanctions. It is
18/23

25/11/2014

therefore essential that when they are mentioned in the
report of a group or panel of experts, they be provided
with an opportunity to review the preliminary draft
of the report and put forward relevant comments and
responses they may have, with a view to enabling the
group or panel to adjust the conclusion by reflecting the
positions of the said Member States in the reports. That
is a fundamental and indispensable step in legitimizing
the procedural and substantive components of the
reporting of the groups or panels of experts. We note
that such a heightened standard can serve only to
increase the credibility of those groups or panels of
experts, and to bolster the collaborative efforts of the
Member States and the sanctions committees.
To conclude, Rwanda reiterates its views that
Security Council sanctions play a prominent role in
the maintenance and restoration of international peace
and security. We further believe that the Council can
benefit from holding regular meetings or briefings on
the general issues of sanctions, with the participation of
national, regional and international actors, in order to
take on the challenges that come with the effective use
of sanctions.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman
and INTERPOL Secretary General Mr. Stock for their
interesting briefings. For our part, we would like to
note the following.
Sanctions are one of the most important instruments
at the disposal of the international community in the
interests of resolving crisis situations. Moreover, in
introducing them it is the exclusive prerogative of
the Security Council to identify clear and precise
objectives, as defined by the Charter of the United
Nations. In taking an appropriate decision, the Security
Council needs to take into account that sanctions must
be proportionate to the threats to international peace
and security.
The imposition of sanctions, especially comprehensive
ones, is a very harsh and a double-edged measure. They
should not be allowed to be a mechanism for collective
punishment affecting the well-being of the population
of a given country, and undermining the legitimate
interests of third countries. Given all the possible
negative consequences of sanctions, their introduction
should be a last resort to be taken only in cases where
all other methods of political persuasion have been
exhausted, and when the Security Council determines

14-64822

25/11/2014

General issues relating to sanctions

S/PV.7323

the presence of a genuine threat to international peace
and security.

its day, made a significant contribution to improving
the work of the relevant Council committees.

Both at the preparation stages and in the
implementation of sanctions, it is critical to make
an objective assessment of the socioeconomic and
humanitarian impact of the measures introduced. We
should not create a situation in which sanctions cause
unacceptable suffering for civilians, especially the
most vulnerable, when they effectively turn into an
instrument for human rights violations. Sanctions must
be targeted and calibrated. In that regard, we believe
that any sanctions decisions of the Council should
necessarily be open to periodic adjustment, suspension
or lifting in the light of the humanitarian situation
and of whether those targeted have responded to the
Security Council’s demands. They must be able to see a
light at the end of the tunnel.

We firmly believe that the issue of sanctions falls
within the purview and exclusive competence of the
United Nations Member States. The Secretariat has
nothing to do with issues relating to the implementation
and development of relevant recommendations. If
Member States require any kind of assistance in
implementing a given sanctions regime, they are fully
entitled to directly address the relevant sanctions
committee with regard to necessary clarifications and
assistance. That is all the more true inasmuch as each
sanctions regime is, by its very nature, unique and
specific.

Lately, there has been much talk of the need
to improve the effectiveness of the mechanism of
the Security Council’s restrictive measures and to
strengthen the capacities of Member States with
respect to their implementation, which has allegedly
been inconsistent. We do not share that concern. There
may be some problems, but they are not of a systemic
nature, as some would like us to believe, including
the apologists who would like to tighten the so-called
sanctions screw. Instead, they are linked to an absence
of good will on the part of certain Member States
with respect to fulfilling their obligations under the
decisions of the Council.
We look favourably on all rational proposals
concerning ways to optimize the practices for
upholding Security Council sanctions, but we believe
that it would be unwise and harmful to periodically
toss around ideas, especially those not supported
by convincing arguments, regarding the creation of
additional bureaucratic barriers, whether inter-State or
at the level of the Secretariat. Moreover, what we detect
in such initiatives is not simply the danger of creating
excessive red tape but an attempt to consolidate the
approaches of a narrow group of States with regard
to the issue of sanctions, as well as to infringe on
the exclusive prerogatives of the Security Council
itself with respect to sanctions. Nevertheless, in the
spirit of constructive discussion of ways to improve
the effectiveness of sanctions. we might explore the
underutilized mechanism of the Informal Working
Group on General Issues of Sanctions, whose work, in

In discussing the issue of sanctions, we should not
overlook other important issues, such as the illegitimacy
of unilateral sanctions or the fact that it is unacceptable
to use existing Security Council sanctions to arbitrarily
intensify or develop restrictive measures at the
national or regional levels. We categorically oppose
arbitrary, expansive interpretations of the Security
Council sanctions regime. Unfortunately, there has
been a number of attempts via unilateral restrictions to
circumvent the Security Council. We believe that such
actions only undermine the system of international
relations and torpedo political and diplomatic efforts
in the quest to resolve crisis situations. Moreover, such
actions are often of an extraterritorial nature, violating
the sovereignty of third States and their lawful interests,
in particular with regard to foreign trade.
The Russian Federation stands ready to participate
in the collective task of improving the sanctions regime.
However, such an undertaking will have added value
only if certain well known States abandon the futile
practice of unilateral restrictions. It is time to end the
practice of diktat in the international arena.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I wish to extend Jordan’s appreciation to Australia for
convening this meeting and for organizing the highlevel review of United Nations sanctions, bearing in
mind that the last review took place in 2006. I would
also like to express my thanks to Mr. Jeffrey Feltman,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, and to
the Secretary General of INTERPOL, Mr. Jürgen Stock.
Jordan
appreciates
Australia’s
efforts
to
comprehensively review the sanctions regimes, including
initiating targeted measures, improving procedures and
assessing the position of States affected by sanctions

14-6482219/23

S/PV.7323

General issues relating to sanctions

aimed at preserving international peace and security.
Sanctions regimes have become multiple and intricate.
The challenge of our deliberations under the high-level
review has been to build on the progress in sanctions
policy that has occurred in recent years through
improved procedures for listing and de-listing, as well
as the use of panels of experts for monitoring technical
sanctions and arms embargoes. Our discussions have
revealed that there is room for improvement in the
process of consultation and coordination within the
United Nations system, including the Security Council,
the sanctions committees and the concerned Member
States. The same conclusion applies to issues relating to
technical assistance and capacity-building, which have
been identified as key obstacles to the optimization of
United Nations sanctions.
It is undeniable that developing countries face the
greatest burden with respect to enforcing sanctions
throughout Africa and the Middle East. They need to
address significant challenges that include the need
to enhance their capacity to monitor and implement
increasingly technical and targeted measures over
long and porous borders, as well as to improve their
data systems. To address such tasks, my delegation
hopes that the Security Council, together with the
sanctions committees and the Secretariat, will be able
lay the foundation for an institutional dialogue among
assistance providers, donors and adversely affected
States, through which the former may be able and
willing to provide sanctions-related assistance for
clearly identified needs. In that respect, we welcome
the idea of establishing a voluntary United Nations
sanctions trust fund to aid such endeavours and
proactively involve recipient States concerning their
needs.
More importantly, Jordan hopes that the Security
Council will be able to pave the way for developing
a structured approach, as envisaged by the Charter
of the United Nations, for close cooperation between
the adversely affected States — both targeted and
neighbouring States — and the sanctions committees.
To that end, there needs to be a systematic dialogue
that can identify the views, burdens and needs of the
concerned States from the moment that such measures
are imposed. That is becoming all the more important
inasmuch as a considerable number of affected States
implementing sanctions are failed or fragile States at
best.
In other words, the main issue is not simply to
provide technical assistance, but also to pay attention to
20/23

25/11/2014

States and regions that are disproportionately burdened.
In order to enable them to fulfil their obligations under
the Charter, it is vital to work cooperatively with them
towards finding sustainable solutions that address their
needs.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): The
United States thanks Secretary General Stock and
Under-Secretary-General Feltman for their informative
briefings. We are grateful to Australia for its efforts to
focus the Security Council’s attention on strengthening
the implementation of United Nations sanctions.
We share Australia’s view that the Council
should be constantly evaluating the effectiveness of
United Nations sanctions and asking how they can be
improved. As United Nations sanctions have become
more targeted in recent years, their implementation has
also become more challenging. Today, United Nations
sanctions resolutions often contain multiple technically
complex provisions, such as asset freezes, travel bans,
arms embargoes, cargo inspections, natural-resource
bans, maritime interdiction authorizations and bans on
luxury goods. They have the capacity to target narrower
groups than before and focus on non-State as well as
Government actors. And sanctions targets have grown
more adept at evading them. The growing complexity
of sanctions regimes, and the increasing sophistication
of attempts to evade them, necessitates a greater degree
of coordination in enforcing sanctions.
At the same time, as sanctions have become more
challenging to implement, the Council relies on them
more than ever before in responding to global threats.
We need sanctions to be effective. Just look at some of
the places and ways we use sanctions today. Sanctions
make it harder for the terrorist group Al-Shabaab to
fill its coffers through the environmentally ruinous
charcoal trade; sanctions help obstruct the efforts
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant to use the
international financial system to fund its horrendous
and destabilizing terrorism and violence and recruit
foreign terrorist fighters into its ranks; sanctions limit
illicit arms flows to post-conflict States such as Côte
d’Ivoire and Liberia. Earlier this month, sanctions
supported Yemen’s transitional Government by
marginalizing spoilers.
In conflicts where armed groups have committed
unspeakable atrocities against civilians, such as the
Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, sanctions have imposed a significant cost
on such groups’ leaders, limiting their mobility and
14-64822

25/11/2014

General issues relating to sanctions

S/PV.7323

targeting their assets. Sanctions have helped stop North
Korea from acquiring sensitive nuclear technology and
were a major factor in getting Iran to the negotiating
table. Of course, that is not to say that sanctions alone
are the silver bullet for complex crises. They must be
part of a broader strategy for exerting pressure on bad
actors. But what is certain is that without sanctions,
each of these challenges to our collective security
would be much more acute and harder to contain.

and facilitate full implementation of United Nations
sanctions. Field missions, Special Representatives of
the Secretary-General, Force Commanders and United
Nations mediators should be working hand in hand with
the relevant sanctions committees. Diverse parts of the
United Nations system should consider the ways in
which effective sanctions implementation can directly
support their efforts to build more peaceful, stable
societies.

In spite of all of this, some see sanctions as unfair
or illegitimate — unfair, because sanctions may have
a broader impact beyond the individuals or groups
they are intended to target; and illegitimate, because
they question the very idea that the Security Council
should be able to impose such measures. Both critiques
are flawed. While it is true that in the past sanctions
were at times a blunt instrument where a more precise
one was needed, the Security Council has come a long
way towards significantly reducing the unintended
humanitarian effects of such measures, including
through precision targeting, humanitarian exemptions
and fair and clear sanctioning procedures.

Secondly, the Security Council should devote more
attention to helping States enforce United Nations
sanctions. We frequently hear from States that they
sometimes lack the guidance and capacity to implement
those measures effectively, as is required under the
Charter of the United Nations. Instead of just piling
on more obligations that cannot be implemented, the
Council should explore mechanisms designed to provide
States with the help they need. The draft resolution on
United Nations sanctions includes some practical ideas
on how to do this, such as establishing a sanctions policy
coordination unit within the Department of Political
Affairs that would support better communication
between the Council and the States implementing these
measures. Over time, we hope this conversation will
lead to more initiatives to bolster State capacity in this
area.

Meanwhile, those who question the right to impose
sanctions and the grounds on which they are based are
very often the ones who are violating international
norms and laws, and who see little obligation to abide
by the collective standards we have all embraced. In
addition, by imposing sanctions on those who break
international laws and standards — the proliferators,
arms smugglers, human rights abusers, traffickers in
conflict minerals, terrorists and their financiers — we
deepen respect for key principles of our international
system. Tough, effective sanctions can change
behaviour without resorting to the use of force, helping
to avoid the horrific consequences of war.
If sanctions are to be effective, they must be
implemented. In recent years, however, enforcement of
those measures has not kept pace with their increasing
value for the Security Council’s work. Implementation
gaps undermine the Council’s efforts and exacerbate
threats. That is why Australia’s work on focusing the
Council, through these briefings and a draft resolution
aimed at improving implementation of United
Nations sanctions, is so critical. In the spirit of that
draft resolution, we propose two goals for improving
sanctions enforcement.
First, the Security Council should continue to
encourage all parts of the United Nations system to foster

In conclusion, I would again like to welcome the
renewed focus on this critical tool. As today’s threats
to peace become more complex and multifaceted, the
Council must continually review and improve all means
at its disposal, including sanctions. We should seek to
ensure that all our tools — peacekeeping, mediation,
dialogue, engagement and, yes, sanctions — are being
used together to common purpose and in the pursuit of
peace.
The President: I will now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Australia.
I would first like to thank Jeffrey Feltman, the
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, and
Jürgen Stock, the Secretary General of INTERPOL,
for their very helpful and forward-looking briefings on
how the United Nations system can best operationalize
the Council’s sanctions decisions.
Today more than ever, sanctions are at the
very heart of the collective security framework of
the Charter of the United Nations. They are the
instrument the Council relies on increasingly to
maintain and restore international peace and security.

14-6482221/23

S/PV.7323

General issues relating to sanctions

As Mr. Feltman said this morning, we now have the
highest number of sanctions in the history of the United
Nations, and, as several speakers have said today, they
are an exceptionally adaptable instrument, bolstering
States recovering from conflict, protecting vulnerable
populations from the predations of armed groups and
terrorists, preventing a State’s natural resources being
abused for the benefit of insurgents and criminal
networks and blocking the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction.
The reason the Council relies so much on sanctions
is that they are recognized by all Council members as
the only effective tool, short of more interventionist
measures, for maintaining and restoring international
peace and security. In turn, the general United Nations
membership is increasingly recognizing the preventive
and protective character of sanctions. It is therefore in
the interests of the Council and all Member States to
ensure that the measures the Council decides on are
implemented effectively.
As others have pointed out, Australia, together with
Finland, Germany, Greece and Sweden, has sponsored
the high-level review of United Nations sanctions
conducted over the past six months. Our contribution
to the review has been to lead consultations on how the
United Nations system itself comes together, internally
and with Member States, to give effect to the Council’s
sanctions regimes. We have consulted primarily with
Member States to which sanctions currently apply, as
well as with their immediate neighbours and States that
regularly have dealings with the sanctions system. Those
States are the key beneficiaries of an effective sanctions
regime, in terms of delivering peace and security, but
they are also pivotal in making the sanctions effective
in the first place. It remains Australia’s intention to
shortly put to the Council a draft resolution that draws
on the experience of those Member States and other
stakeholders to formulate a blueprint for improving
the implementation of Council sanctions that would
allow cross-cutting discussions of sanctions issues and
would facilitate the provision of technical assistance to
Member States.
Under-Secretary-General
Feltman’s
briefing
demonstrated how the Council and the Secretariat are
already moving in the direction sought by Member
States during the consultations over the past six
months, towards a simpler and more consultative,
transparent and coherent sanctions system. Briefings
of the Council are increasingly public, Committees are

22/23

25/11/2014

more actively engaging with key stakeholder States,
and the Secretariat has made implementation simpler
by standardizing sanctions lists.
As described by Under-Secretary-General Feltman,
the new Interagency Working Group on Sanctions
within the Secretariat, which was created to coordinate
and provide United Nations inputs into the highlevel review from the 20 United Nations entities that
contribute to sanctions implementation, is itself a
highly productive legacy of the review. It has the
potential to further improve the effectiveness of the
Council’s sanctions measures, but clearly there is scope
to do more.
We see value in building the Secretariat’s capacity
to further support the Council and Member States.
There is untapped potential in the Secretariat to
identify best practices, mobilize expertise within the
United Nations system relevant to effective sanctions
implementation, and support efforts by the Council and
the sanctions committees to provide practical guidance
on sanctions implementation issues and capacitybuilding and technical assistance for Member States.
As Under-Secretary-General Feltman noted today, “we
need an effective United Nations system delivering as
one”.
More broadly, we see value in the SecretaryGeneral’s reports to the Council on specific situations
discussing in more detail the coordination between
sanctions and other United Nations conflict prevention,
mediation, peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities.
We would also welcome periodic reports from the
Secretary-General on Council practice and Member
State challenges related to sanctions generally, including
recommendations for better support to Member States
in their implementation of sanctions measures.
To use the expression of the Permanent
Representative of Rwanda, Ambassador Gasana, from
this morning, expert groups assisting the sanctions
committees are our eyes and ears on the ground. They
have proven to be an indispensable asset for improving
the effectiveness of sanctions. While it is essential
that those groups receive the necessary support and
cooperation across the United Nations system and
from all Member States, the way in which the expert
groups engage with the key Member States for a
particular sanctions regime is particularly crucial. A
more interactive relationship between Member States
and expert groups, between Member States and

14-64822

25/11/2014

General issues relating to sanctions

Committees and, as both our colleagues from France
and the Republic of Korea have reminded us, with the
private sector as well, would build trust and confidence
and break down barriers to cooperation.
Looking beyond the United Nations itself,
INTERPOL Secretary General Stock’s briefing
highlighted how international and regional organizations
and intergovernmental bodies can provide both Member
States and the Council with better tools to implement
Security Council sanctions measures. The Council’s
relationship with INTERPOL is long-standing. Its
relationship with the United Nations dates from 1949
and continues to evolve. It provides a model for how
the systems and networks of relevant international
organizations can enhance the effectiveness of the
Council’s sanctions measures, while at the same time
building key capabilities in stakeholder Member States.
The Council needs more such partners.
In conclusion, ultimately the key to the effectiveness
of the United Nations sanctions system remains how it
engages with Member States. It is Member States that
are obligated to implement our decisions in respect of
sanctions. Australia will work over the next few days to
reach a Council consensus on our draft resolution to put
in place these and other measures. We firmly believe
that our draft resolution would improve Member States’
access to information and assistance on sanctions
implementation, as well as enhance the transparency
and responsiveness of the United Nations sanctions
system generally, and the relationship between Member

S/PV.7323

States and the sanctions committees and expert groups
in particular. That would benefit us all.
We encourage the Chairs of sanctions committees
to continue to engage Member States and other
stakeholders as partners in the implementation of
sanctions. And we encourage Member States to
demand greater transparency from and interaction with
the United Nations sanctions system, if it is ever not
forthcoming. Under the collective security framework
of the Charter, sanctions are a shared responsibility
between the Council and Member States, and the more
we engage with each other, the stronger that framework
will be.
Finally, as Chair of three of the Council’s
sanctions committees, let me endorse the practical
recommendations of Ambassador Gasana on better
ways to ensure professional continuity in the task
of presiding over Sanctions Committees as the new
Committee Chairs are identified and transition to their
new roles.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I thank my colleagues for their participation this
morning. I also thank our briefers, Jeffrey Feltman and
Jürgen Stock. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.

14-6482223/23
