United Nations

S/PV.6427

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6427th meeting
Monday, 22 November 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Sir Mark Lyall Grant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Briens
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet
Mr. Kodama
Ms. Ziade
Mr. Puente
Mr. Onemola
Mr. Karev
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Rugunda
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2010/579)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-64592 (E)

*1064592*

S/PV.6427

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2010/579)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Afghanistan, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Botswana, Canada,
Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Egypt, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, India, Indonesia, Israel, Italy, Liechtenstein,
Morocco, Norway, Pakistan, Peru, the Philippines,
Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Slovenia, Sri Lanka,
the Sudan, Switzerland, the Syrian Arab Republic,
Uruguay and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries took
the seats reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend invitations under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Ms. Valerie Amos,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, and Mr. Alain Le Roy,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Ms. Navanethem Pillay, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, and to Mr. Yves

2

Daccord, Director General
Committee of the Red Cross.

of

the

International

There being no objection, it is so decided.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter from His Excellency Mr. Pedro
Serrano, in which he requests to be invited, in his
capacity as Acting Head of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate in
the consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda.
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Security
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of
its provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. Pedro Serrano.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Serrano to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2010/579, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.
The Council has before it the text of a statement
by the President on behalf of the Council on the subject
of today’s meeting. In accordance with the
understanding reached among the members of the
Council, I shall take it that the members of the Security
Council agree to the statement, which will be issued as
a document of the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2010/25.
It is so decided.
The President: At this meeting, the Security
Council will hear briefings by Ms. Valerie Amos,
Mr. Alain Le Roy, Ms. Navanethem Pillay and
Mr. Yves Daccord.
I now give the floor to Ms. Valerie Amos, and I
welcome her on her first appearance before the
Security Council.
Ms. Amos: This briefing to the Security Council
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict is an
opportunity to measure the progress made by parties to
conflict in meeting their obligations to protect civilians.

10-64592

S/PV.6427

The Secretary-General’s report (S/2010/579)
paints a very bleak picture of the state of the protection
of civilians. Any positive and encouraging
developments are heavily outweighed by what is
happening on the ground: the continuing and frequent
failure of parties to conflict to observe their
international legal obligations to protect civilians.
Complementary to that is the failure of national
authorities and the international community more
broadly to ensure their accountability in any
meaningful, comprehensive and systematic sense.
As the Secretary-General’s report notes, the
progress made in the last 18 months has been in the
further strengthening of the Council’s approach to
protection. That has been embodied in the Council’s
thematic resolutions on the protection of civilians, on
women and peace and security, and on children and
armed conflict. Increasingly, that progress has been
embodied in situation-specific resolutions, where the
Council’s informal Expert Group on the Protection of
Civilians has played an important role; in the further
development of international legal standards; in the
efforts of United Nations actors — in particular
humanitarian agencies and peacekeeping missions —
and other international and non-governmental
organizations to enhance protection on the ground; and
above all, in the courage and ingenuity of the affected
populations themselves.
Those are all important and welcome
developments, but as the report of the SecretaryGeneral makes clear, more needs to be done to tackle
the five core challenges that inhibit more effective
protection for civilians. Those challenges are: to
enhance compliance by parties to conflict with
international law, to enhance compliance by non-State
armed groups, to enhance protection by United Nations
peacekeeping and other relevant missions, to enhance
humanitarian access, and to enhance accountability for
violations.
Improving compliance by parties to conflict with
international humanitarian law and human rights law
remains particularly important, especially in the
conduct of hostilities. In countries like Afghanistan, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Somalia and the
Sudan, civilians are frequently targeted or fall victim to
indiscriminate or disproportionate attacks.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) has carried out over

10-64592

200 attacks on villages in the North-East of the country
since January. Between July and September, 75 attacks
were reported in the Central African Republic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Southern Sudan.
Ninety civilians were killed in these attacks, and over
100 abducted.
In Somalia, clashes in Mogadishu and the southcentral part of the country continue to result in high
numbers of civilian casualties, deaths and displacement.
Between July and September, at least 300 people were
killed and over 500 wounded by fighting between
Government forces and their allies and insurgent
groups. At least 8,000 Somalis flee the country every
month.
I remain profoundly concerned at continuing
reports of attacks, including aerial bombing, carried
out by the Sudanese Armed Forces in populated areas
of the Jebel Marra region of Darfur. These have
resulted in civilian deaths and injuries, and some
100,000 people have been displaced. With limited
humanitarian access, mostly due to Government
restrictions, it has been difficult to gain a clear picture
of the situation and of the numbers and locations of the
displaced and other vulnerable groups.
Where we are unable to promote and encourage
compliance with the law, the Council must do more to
enforce. This includes following through on the
willingness expressed in resolution 1894 (2009) to
respond to situations of conflict where civilians are
targeted or humanitarian assistance is deliberately
obstructed.
I would like to draw particular attention to the
concern raised in the report over the humanitarian
impact of explosive weapons, particularly when used in
densely populated areas. As the inhabitants of Baghdad,
Gaza, Mogadishu, the Vanni region of Sri Lanka and
elsewhere can attest, explosive weapons such as
artillery shells, missile and rocket warheads and bombs
can cause substantial and ongoing civilian suffering
when used in populated areas. Civilians within the
vicinity of an explosion are likely to be killed or
injured by the blast and fragmentation from such
weapons. They may be harmed by the collapse of
buildings or suffer as a result of damage to essential
infrastructure, such as hospitals and sanitation systems.
And they live with the threat posed by unexploded
ordnance.

3

S/PV.6427

I would join the Secretary-General in urging
Member States, United Nations actors, and
international and non-governmental organizations to
consider the issue of explosive weapons closely,
including by supporting more systematic data
collection and analysis of the human costs of explosive
weapons use. I would urge also increased cooperation
by Member States in collecting and making available
information to United Nations and other relevant actors
on civilian harm resulting from the use of explosive
weapons. Policy statements outlining the conditions
under which explosive weapons might be used in
populated areas would also be invaluable.
Improved
compliance
with
international
humanitarian law and human rights law will remain
elusive in the absence of and full acceptance of the
need for systematic and consistent engagement with
non-State armed groups. Experience in Colombia,
Liberia, Nepal, the Philippines, Sierra Leone, Sri
Lanka, the Sudan and the former Yugoslavia shows that
lives can be saved by engaging armed groups in order
to seek compliance with international humanitarian law
in their combat operations and general conduct, to gain
safe access for humanitarian operations, or to dissuade
them from using certain types of weapons.
An increasing number of Member States
appreciate the importance of engagement for
humanitarian purposes, but this must translate into
greater consideration of the possible humanitarian
consequences of national legal and policy initiatives
that effectively inhibit humanitarian actors in engaging
armed groups for humanitarian purposes. I am
increasingly concerned by the growing body of
national legislation and policies relating to
humanitarian funding that limit humanitarian
engagement with non-State armed groups that have
been designated terrorist organizations. In the United
States, for example, domestic legislation defines
“material support” in such a way that it includes
advocacy, technical expertise and advice, even when
such activities are aimed at bringing the conduct of
these non-State actors in line with international law.
Across donor States, the threshold of what
constitutes direct or indirect, or intentional or nonintentional material support to designated terrorist
organizations varies; so too does the manner in which
these are formulated in humanitarian funding policies.
The result is a complex web of bureaucratic restrictions
demanding extensive vetting of partner organizations

4

and, in some instances, explicit prohibitions on contact
with designated terrorist organizations as a condition
of funding.
Humanitarian actors face potential criminal
liability and prosecution for engaging with designated
terrorist organizations in the course of, for example,
securing the release of child soldiers or for simply
delivering aid to civilian populations in an area
controlled by such an organization. Measures of this
sort can take us further from, rather than nearer to our
goal of protecting civilians.
From Chad to Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic
Republic of Congo to Liberia, to Sierra Leone and the
Sudan, United Nations peacekeeping missions have
had a significant impact on enhancing the protection of
civilian populations. Important measures are being
introduced to further improve the implementation of
protection mandates by such missions, based on the
recommendations of the November 2009 independent
study jointly commissioned by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO).
Mr. Le Roy will speak to these shortly.
I would like to touch on three issues in the
Secretary-General’s report.
The first is mission drawdown. In recent months,
United Nations peacekeepers have begun to withdraw
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo, while the
United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad is expected to withdraw completely
by the end of this year. The protection and
humanitarian implications of drawdown are contextspecific. It is therefore essential that drawdown be
based on the achievement of clear, context-specific
benchmarks, including on the protection of civilians.
Anything less risks instability, violence and further
protection problems.
In advance of mission drawdown, the Security
Council should insist upon the articulation of
benchmarks relating to the protection of civilians and
on the establishment of a mechanism to measure and
report progress against those benchmarks. Resolution
1923 (2010) on the situation in Chad provides useful
examples in both these respects. Early consideration
must also be given to the likely resource implications
for the humanitarian and development actors that
remain once a mission has withdrawn. These can be
considerable. Member States must be fully aware of

10-64592

S/PV.6427

the need for increased voluntary contributions to
support crucial ongoing humanitarian and development
activities, especially those related to the protection of
civilians.
Secondly, the protection of civilians is a shared
responsibility. Humanitarian workers and peacekeepers
have distinct roles and responsibilities, but these need
to be brought together in a coherent and strategic way.
I look forward to the completion of the strategic
framework that is being prepared by DPKO, in
conjunction with other United Nations actors, to guide
the development of comprehensive protection
strategies by peacekeeping missions. This will, I hope,
go a long way towards ensuring the necessary
coordination and consultation between different actors
and improve our collective efforts on the ground.
Thirdly, approaches to protection must involve
the participation of affected communities and build on
their capacities. This should be incorporated into
mission protection strategies.
Access is a fundamental prerequisite to
humanitarian action and yet, as the annex to the report
demonstrates,
it
is
frequently
compromised.
Bureaucratic constraints, active hostilities, deliberate
attacks against humanitarian workers and the
economically motivated theft of humanitarian supplies
and equipment continue to undermine efforts to protect
and assist those in need. In resolution 1894 (2009), the
Council noted with grave concern the severity and
prevalence of constraints on humanitarian access and
the frequency and gravity of attacks against
humanitarian personnel and their implications for
humanitarian operations. It further stressed the
importance of parties to conflict cooperating with
humanitarian personnel in order to allow and facilitate
access to conflict-affected populations. Importantly, the
resolution reaffirmed the Council’s role in promoting
an environment that is conducive to facilitating
humanitarian access.
The Council’s continued attention to access
constraints is welcome. However, greater precision is
needed in specifying the nature of the constraints and
the actions to be taken to counter them. The Council
must ensure enhanced accountability for grave
instances of deliberate delays or denials of access for
humanitarian operations, as well as situations
involving attacks against humanitarian workers. That
can be achieved by encouraging domestic prosecutions

10-64592

or through referrals to the International Criminal Court.
In line with resolution 1894 (2009), I stand ready to
bring to the Council’s attention situations where
humanitarian operations are deliberately obstructed,
and to suggest possible response actions for
consideration by the Council.
As emphasized in resolution 1894 (2009), the
primary responsibility for ensuring accountability for
violations of humanitarian and human rights law rests
first and foremost with States. In practical terms that
means disseminating information about international
humanitarian and human rights law. It means training
combatants and ensuring that their orders and
instructions comply with international law and are
observed. When violations occur, it means
investigating and prosecuting those responsible.
Regrettably, instances of disciplinary action and
national prosecutions are in short supply, despite
mounting allegations of serious humanitarian law and
human rights violations in today’s conflicts. In some
cases, a lack of capacity is to blame. I would urge
Member States to provide the necessary technical and
financial support to national efforts, or for
consideration to be given to the establishment of socalled mixed courts and tribunals, as we see in
Cambodia and Sierra Leone, to support much-needed
investigations and prosecutions at the national level.
In other cases, the fault lies in an absence of
political will. However, unnecessarily slow or
ineffective national efforts must not hinder the pursuit
of accountability, including at the international level.
The mandating of international commissions of inquiry
sends an important signal that violations will be
pursued and victims heard. Yet, while their utility is
clear, their establishment is often politically fraught.
We need to find ways of using such mechanisms on a
more consistent and less politically influenced basis.
As the Secretary-General notes, scrutiny must be the
norm. I therefore welcome the Secretary-General’s
intention to request Secretariat departments directly
involved in launching and supporting inquiries to
undertake a review of the United Nations experience in
these processes.
In addition to the various recommendations
aimed at the Council and Member States, the
Secretary-General’s report identifies three actions that
are implicit yet fundamental to enhancing our
collective efforts to bring about more effective

5

S/PV.6427

protection for civilians. First, we must ensure a
comprehensive approach to protection. Resolution
1894 (2009) expresses the Council’s willingness to
respond to situations of conflict where civilians are
being targeted or humanitarian assistance is being
deliberately obstructed, including through the
consideration of appropriate measures at its disposal. I
would urge the Council to extend that willingness to
act to conflicts of which it is not already seized. These
often raise many of the same, and sometimes more
acute, protection concerns than we see in those
situations already on the Council’s agenda, and may
equally warrant or demand Council attention.
Secondly, we must ensure a consistent approach.
We need greater consistency in the manner and extent
to which the Council addresses protection in those
contexts of which it is seized. The systematic
application of the aide-memoire — an updated version
of which has been adopted today — is crucial in that
regard. So too is the continued use of the informal
Expert Group and the consideration of other ways in
which it could further inform the Council’s
deliberations. Those would be important steps in this
direction.
Finally, we must ensure an accountable approach.
Systematic monitoring and reporting on the impact of
our efforts to improve the protection of civilians is
essential. We need to assess and report on the extent to
which our actions are making civilians safer. That also
applies to all relevant actors, not only peacekeeping
missions, as well as all relevant situations, not only
those in which peacekeepers are present. As requested
by the Secretary-General, we plan to develop
indicators for systematic monitoring and reporting on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
The work of the Council on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict is of prime importance. We
face a sobering reality, and yet progress has been made.
I hope that the Council will continue to be seized of
this matter and keep the protection of civilians at the
centre of its agenda.
The President: I thank Ms. Amos for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Alain Le Roy, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.
Mr. Le Roy (spoke in French): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity,
following the comprehensive briefing just made by

6

Ms. Valerie Amos, whose recommendations I fully
support, to inform the Security Council about the latest
efforts by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO) to better protect civilians in the eight missions
we have been mandated to carry out, as well as, more
generally, on the progress we have made in carrying
out those crucial and difficult missions.
Recent tragic incidents, notably in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in which the lives
and safety of civilians have been so grossly
disregarded by armed militias are a tragic reminder of
both the importance of protecting civilians where we
are mandated to do so and of the immense complexities
that this entails. We must acknowledge and
communicate that peacekeeping operations cannot
protect all civilians at all times, especially when they
are deployed over very vast areas and in the midst of
ongoing conflict. Both the international community
and those whom we endeavour to protect must
understand that peacekeeping operations cannot be
regarded as a substitute for State authority. The
protection of civilians will ultimately depend upon
stable and legitimate State institutions. Peacekeeping
operations can augment their capacities and help to
build them, but cannot, and should not, replace them.
That being said, over the course of 2010 the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support undertook a very detailed
examination of how we can improve our performance
in protecting civilians. With the operational concept
developed earlier this year, we have focused on five
principal tracks to improve our planning and
implementation of our civilian protection mandates.
Those include the development of a strategic
framework to provide guidance for missions in
elaborating comprehensive strategies for the protection
of civilians; predeployment and in-mission training
modules that include a range of scenario-based
exercises for all mission components; an evaluation of
the resource and capability requirements necessary for
the implementation of protection mandates; a thorough
examination of protection planning processes, both
predeployment and within the mission; and, lastly,
capability development efforts, including addressing
capability standards for military units, to better
articulate the performance requirements to meet this
task as well as the other modern mandated
peacekeeping tasks.

10-64592

S/PV.6427

(spoke in English)
Our efforts in those areas have already had an
impact on the ground. In addition to the three missions
that previously developed protection of civilians
strategies, four missions are in the process of doing so
based on the draft general guidance that is being
developed here at Headquarters. That guidance assists
missions in undertaking a systematic analysis of the
relevant threats facing civilians in their areas of
operation, so as to better orient their efforts towards
addressing them. That includes identifying the
capacities that are required to ensure the effective
implementation of protection of civilians mandates.
One of the most prominent examples of the
implementation of such strategies is certainly the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
which has already developed and is continuing to
implement a number of innovative and practical
approaches. Recent efforts have focused on further
enhancing the situational awareness of MONUSCO
troops and, as the Council is aware, on improving
communication between them and the population. Such
measures must of course be accompanied by the ability
to respond when and as necessary. It is in those
situations that capacity shortages, especially in terms
of aviation, are felt most acutely.
In the Sudan, in the crucial period leading up to
the referendum, the United Nations Mission in the
Sudan has finalized, in consultation with the country
team, a strategy for the protection of civilians, which
strengthens the coordination between the Mission’s
civilian and military components and envisages joint
mapping processes of protection needs, actors and
potential emergencies.
In Darfur and Côte d’Ivoire, missions are
finalizing comprehensive strategies that include
analyses of current and potential protection threats and
vulnerabilities that civilians face, as well as risk
mitigation measures.
For the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL), the primary threats to the protection of
civilians are civil disorder and violent crime, including
sexual violence. UNMIL and the Liberian National
Police are working to develop clear and practical
procedures to enable community members to alert the
Mission or Liberian authorities in the event of an
emergency or major incident.

10-64592

As we look at the planning and implementation of
the protection of civilians in greater detail, it remains
clear that the efforts that we have undertaken thus far
constitute only the beginning of what will necessarily
be a continuous process. Peacekeepers in the military,
police and civilian components continue to request
more detailed operational guidance on the
contributions they can make to the protection of
civilians.
While we have made progress in bringing clarity
to how peacekeeping operations implement protection
of civilians mandates, we still require a more detailed
articulation of how key functions within missions can
more effectively protect civilians on a daily basis. This
operational guidance will be a critical part of the
protection toolkit that we are developing.
In conclusion, it must be reiterated that our
efforts to improve the implementation of protection of
civilians mandates within United Nations peacekeeping
operations is not a job for DPKO or the Department of
Field Support alone. It is critical that our key partners,
in particular troop and police contributors that
ultimately deploy personnel to protect civilians in the
mission area, are fully engaged. Ensuring that they are
aware of the expectations to protect civilians that have
been placed upon them and that they are prepared to
meet them is a shared task that will require a strong
and focused partnership moving forward. Likewise, the
support and engagement of the Council will be critical,
in particular in ensuring that missions with protection
of civilians mandates are fully resourced for the task,
as we endeavour to bring greater operational clarity to
some of the mandate language typically used in
mandate missions to protect civilians and bring
political leverage to bear on the parties to conflict.
The President: I thank Mr. Le Roy for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Navanethem Pillay,
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
Ms. Pillay: First, let me welcome the
contribution of my colleague Valerie Amos and
congratulate her on her appointment. The work of our
respective Offices is complementary at many levels,
something I was reminded of listening to her speak
today.

7

S/PV.6427

Let me also thank the members of the Security
Council for giving me the opportunity to address the
Council today on the subject of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. This is a subject that has
rightly become a central focus of the Security Council.
It is also an important priority for my Office as we
seek to promote and protect human rights worldwide.
Protecting civilians from the atrocities of war is an
essential element of our human rights work. It is also
an indispensable part of any strategy for managing
threats to international peace and stability.
The concept of the protection of civilians, which
is rooted in international humanitarian and human
rights law, has been developed as a way to encourage a
more comprehensive and coordinated approach by
Member States, international organizations and
agencies to our efforts to protect civilians from the
imminent threat of violence during armed conflicts.
Over time, in responding to emerging threats to
civilians, the Council has looked beyond situations of
actual armed conflict to situations of civil strife
preceding full-fledged conflict, as well as post-conflict
and natural disaster situations. In situations such as the
ones in Haiti, Côte d’Ivoire and Liberia, the Council
has established broader protection mandates to ensure
that the populations’ human rights are protected.
Today, human rights are thoroughly integrated in
United Nations peace missions. There are currently 17
human rights components of peace missions led by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Political Affairs, established at the
behest of the Council and supported by my Office.
Of the five core challenges to the protection of
civilians identified in the report of the SecretaryGeneral before the Council (S/2010/579), my Office
and human rights officers on the ground are directly
engaged in four. We work to enhance compliance with
international law, compliance by non-State armed
groups, protection in the context of peacekeeping and
accountability for violations.
Our approach to protection is first and foremost
to prevent the commission of human rights violations.
Where that fails, as regrettably it sometimes does, we
also contribute to mitigating the effects of conflict on
populations at risk and to ensuring proper
accountability for violations once they have occurred.
Establishing accountability, in turn, can help serve the

8

longer-term goal of prevention by making a recurrence
of violations less likely.
Effective prevention begins with the facts.
Through human rights monitoring and reporting, we
are able to build up a detailed picture of the situation
on the ground, anticipate emerging threats and take
appropriate preventive action in a timely manner. Time
and again, human rights reports and their
recommendations have provided the basis for decisionmaking by heads of missions, whether in relation to
responses to immediate threats, longer term preventive
measures or following up with relevant national
authorities and international actors.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for
example, the preliminary report on the horrific mass
rapes that took place in Walikale in August 2010,
which was released on 24 September by the United
Nations Joint Human Rights Office, was a key
document in helping to establish the facts and identify
protection gaps. In the week following the publication
of the report, the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo set up two additional temporary operating
bases in Binyampuri, deployed additional staff and
equipment and stepped up day and night patrols in the
area. These actions have reportedly provided muchneeded reassurance to local populations.
Monitoring and reporting on human rights and
the protection of civilians can also play a role in
raising awareness of the impact of military operations
on civilians and in encouraging the parties to a conflict
to take steps to strengthen the protection of civilians.
Since 2007, the human rights contingent of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) has monitored and reported on civilian
casualties in the conflict in Afghanistan, and engaged
in advocacy to strengthen the protection of civilians.
The Afghanistan mid-year report on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict in Afghanistan, released on
10 August, found that in the first half of 2010 there
was an overall decrease of 29 per cent in civilian
deaths attributed to pro-Government forces, as
compared to the same period in 2009, with a 64 per
cent decrease in civilian deaths caused by aerial attacks.
UNAMA concluded that the implementation of tactical
directives governing air strikes, night searches and the
escalation of force contributed to this significant
reduction in civilian casualties.

10-64592

S/PV.6427

Effective monitoring and reporting of human
rights violations and encouraging greater compliance
with international human rights law require
opportunities to engage directly with both State and
non-State actors, as well as access by human rights
officers to populations at risk. In that context, it
remains of grave concern that human rights officers
still cannot access large parts of Darfur for security
reasons.
Further, in Somalia, intense fighting in
Mogadishu and other parts of the country severely
limits the access of human rights officers. Human
rights officers of the United Nations Political Office
for Somalia have been working with internally
displaced persons in Somaliland and Puntland and
interviewing on a regular basis individuals who had
fled southern and central Somalia. Their testimonies
indicate a pattern of risk and violations occurring
throughout the country. Human rights officers also
work with national monitoring networks in order to
gather relevant information from within Somalia.
Apart from these constraints, it is essential that
the Council give missions the requisite mandate and
resources, including the prioritization of logistical
support and access of human rights monitoring and
investigation. Unfortunately, in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, insufficient access to
vulnerable populations by human rights officers, due in
part to limited air assets or military escorts, has
impeded our ability to adequately identify threats, plan
accordingly and ultimately protect civilians from
violations.
While our primary concern is to prevent the
commission of violations, where prevention fails we
collectively bear the responsibility to ensure
accountability. The Secretary-General’s report rightly
identifies accountability as one of the core elements of
the protection of civilians. Not only is accountability
required to fulfil international legal obligations; it is
also our best tool for preventing the recurrence of
violations.
My Office’s efforts to enhance accountability are
multifaceted. As Council members will be aware, my
Office has recently concluded a mapping report of the
most serious violations of human rights committed in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo between 1993
and 2003. Through its assessment of existing
accountability mechanisms and the challenges faced in

10-64592

addressing the violations documented, the report
provides a road map for engaging the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Congolese
population and the international community in a
constructive dialogue on how to ensure accountability
and offer remedy to victims within the overall goals of
reconciliation and peace. I hope that we will be able to
make a further contribution on the question of what
measures or mechanisms can provide a sense of redress
for victims when we receive the report of a high-level
panel of experts, led by my Deputy, who went to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in October and held
hearings around the country with survivors of sexual
violence.
Human rights officers work closely with national
authorities and civil society to support national judicial
institutions and other accountability mechanisms.
Again taking an example from our work in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Joint Human
Rights Office, through its joint investigation teams,
provides direct support to military prosecutors to
investigate cases of violations, including by helping
them access populations to carry out their
investigations and by ensuring judicial follow-up. This
support has allowed prosecutors to bring many cases to
court that might not otherwise have been pursued,
including cases of sexual violence. A recent example of
facilitating national efforts for accountability is the
arrest of General Jérôme Kakwavu, who was accused
of rape and whose file is being transmitted to the high
military court of Kinshasa.
In some cases, the longer-term challenge is to
build up the capacity of non-United Nations security
forces, including national forces and institutions, to
take on the task of effective protection of civilians
once the international presence has been withdrawn. In
this context, my Office has been playing an essential
role, including by participating in the training and
technical advice being provided to police and military
officers and contributing to necessary legislative and
policy reforms. There is an important discussion to be
had in this context — specifically, on how to ensure
that United Nations support to non-United Nations
security forces is based on respect for human rights
and international humanitarian law. My Office is
currently contributing to the review of United Nations
experience in this respect.
Our expertise has also increasingly been called
upon to conduct commissions of inquiry in the context

9

S/PV.6427

of political crises where there is no peace mission but
where the lack of protection of civilians and of
accountability for violations of their rights represents a
threat to peace. An example is our involvement in the
Secretary-General’s international commission of
inquiry to investigate the violence that occurred in
Conakry, Republic of Guinea, on 28 September 2009.
In Guinea, as in many other cases, establishing the
facts is a first step on the road to remedy and eventual
reconciliation. I am pleased to confirm that, in line
with the Secretary-General’s recommendation, my
Office will work actively with co-lead departments
directly involved in inquiries of this kind with a view
to reviewing past experiences and making proposals as
appropriate.
In conclusion, my Office stands ready to assist
the Council as it seeks to strengthen the protection of
civilians threatened or affected by the effects of armed
conflict. Every day around the world, human rights
officers mandated by this Council make a vital
contribution to protecting civilians, often working in
very challenging conditions and with limited resources.
I encourage the Council to ensure that the
mandates that it establishes provide the necessary
elements for this work to continue as effectively as
possible: robust and well resourced mandates that
ensure that human rights officers are present
throughout areas affected or threatened by conflict,
including remote areas; that allow such violations as do
occur to be properly documented and reported; and that
provide for support to national authorities to restore
and strengthen the rule of law.
Finally, I would welcome the opportunity to share
information relating to this topic with the Council in
future, including reports and recommendations arising
from our human rights monitoring work on the ground,
and to keep it apprised of evolving situations where
civilians are at risk. In addition to formal meetings
such as today’s, my Office stands ready to contribute to
Arria Formula meetings and expert-level meetings of a
less formal character, as the Secretary-General
recommends in his report.
I thank members of the Council for their attention
and for this opportunity to speak here today. I look
forward to our continued dialogue.
The President: I thank Ms. Pillay her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Daccord.

10

Mr. Daccord: I thank you, Sir, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council today.
The protection of civilians in armed conflict has
been high on the international agenda for the past
decade. On one level, progress has been impressive.
Never before have there been so many policy
statements and resolutions, so much global information
and advocacy, and such a proliferation of actors
professing to carry out protection work. Sadly, these
fine words and good intentions are rarely matched by
the reality on the ground. While there may still be
diverging views on what protection actually is, there
can be little doubt about what happens when there is no
protection.
This is the reality facing the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) in our daily work
in far too many armed conflicts and other situations of
violence around the world. The reality is that, in some
places, men, women and children are being killed or
raped, forced out of their homes, losing all their
possessions and living in a state of fear. Hospitals are
being bombed and health workers attacked.
Beyond the deliberate targeting of civilians, the
reality is also the countless numbers of other, often
forgotten victims who are equally in need of protection.
The reality is that in war people go missing. People
have the right to know what happened to their missing
relatives. Governments, military authorities and armed
groups have an obligation to provide information and
assist efforts to put families back together. In addition,
the hundreds of thousands of people in prisons or
detained in armed conflict must not be forgotten.
So why is the reality on the ground so often
dismal compared to the progress in policy and
doctrine? The fundamental reason is as obvious as it is
challenging. It is the lack of respect for international
humanitarian law by State and non-State actors. That,
coupled with the prevailing culture of impunity, is the
main cause of the human suffering we are witnessing.
Various factors compound that challenge. The
increase in non-State armed groups in some contexts is
one. When armed actors are motivated by crime or
banditry, it is harder to talk to them about their
obligation to protect civilians. The constant evolution
in the means and methods of warfare is another factor.
Waging battle in densely populated urban areas,
sometimes with highly explosive weapons, is just one
example.

10-64592

S/PV.6427

Yet despite, or rather because of, the flagrant
violations committed by parties to conflict around the
world, the ICRC firmly believes that the relevance and
importance of international humanitarian law is
reaffirmed, not weakened. That is echoed in the five
core challenges in the Secretary-General’s reports in
2009 (S/2009/277) and 2010 (S/2010/579) on the
protection of civilians.
Working to ensure respect for international
humanitarian law in situations of armed conflict
remains at the heart of our mandate and our missions.
For the ICRC, protection and assistance go hand in
hand. Our presence on the ground ensures our
proximity to the victims. We engage in confidential
dialogue with State and non-State actors to uphold the
rights of people affected, aiming as much as possible to
prevent violations. We remind parties of their
obligation to protect civilians, and we promote
compliance with international humanitarian law. That
includes supporting authorities’ efforts to incorporate
international humanitarian law into national legislation
and into army training. It also includes working to
clarify or develop international humanitarian law
through extensive consultations with States and other
stakeholders.
At the same time, the ICRC works to address
victims’ needs — food, water, shelter, other essential
items or medical care — tracing missing family
members and re-establishing links between them, and
ensuring that people in detention are treated well.
Protection can facilitate assistance, and vice-versa.
The ICRC approach is only one of many among
an increasing number of civilian and military actors,
with different mandates, objectives and ways of
working.
The United Nations has gone a long way in
including protection activities in the mandates of its
peacekeeping missions and in improving protection for
specific groups such as women and children, refugees
and internally displaced persons. The ICRC will
continue to work for the protection of civilians within
the limits of our mandate and expertise, based
explicitly on a neutral and independent approach.
True consensus on the meaning of protection may
be hard to achieve. It is essential to have clarity and
transparency on the objectives of different actors, be
they civilian or military, and to clearly distinguish
between them. To avoid unrealistic expectations, it is

10-64592

important to distinguish between physical protection —
which humanitarian actors cannot provide — and
protection by promoting compliance with the law.
In any event, women, men and children in need
of protection must truly be at the centre of any action
that is undertaken. The challenge of turning words and
intentions into concrete, meaningful action is one we
all face. That challenge ultimately rests with States and
non-State actors, both bound by international
humanitarian law. I end by making a sincere plea to
them and to the Council to show the necessary political
will and good faith to turn legal provisions into
reality — to take seriously the obligation to protect
civilians. That would be the most meaningful progress
of all.
The President: I thank Mr. Daccord for his
briefing.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than four minutes,
in order to enable the Council to carry its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate the text in writing and to
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.
I shall now give the floor to members of the
Council.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Let me thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this debate and for the
strong interest and support your country has
traditionally given to today’s topic. I would like to also
thank you for bringing about a very substantive
presidential statement, which has our full support.
We would like to welcome Under-SecretariesGeneral Amos and Le Roy and thank them for their
briefings. We are also pleased that High Commissioner
Pillay is here with us again today. This is the third time
running that she is participating in a debate on the
protection of civilians, and we very much hope that
this tradition will be continued. Finally, let me also
thank Mr. Daccord for his intervention.
Today’s debate is an important opportunity for
my delegation to take stock of our common efforts in
an area that has been at the core of my country’s own
engagement in the Council. The latest report by the
Secretary-General (S/2010/579) provides us with an
excellent basis for our discussion.

11

S/PV.6427

While we share the Secretary-General’s
assessment that more needs to be done to meet the five
core challenges, we are also encouraged by the
progress made over the past year in implementing
resolution 1894 (2009). I would like to thank the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations for their consistent work and support. We
particularly welcome the draft operational concept on
the protection of civilians, as well as the envisaged
strategic framework. We also strongly support the
Secretariat in its endeavour to further improve
predeployment and in-mission training on the
protection of civilians. That initiative needs to be
accompanied by national and international efforts.
Host countries and the Council should come to a
common understanding that our decisions to draw
down missions or adapt mandates are conditioned on
the achievement of clear benchmarks, including in
relation to the protection of civilians. The
establishment of a mechanism to measure and report on
progress against such benchmarks would be very
important, and we think that the experience gained in
that context in the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad is useful and
should be followed up.
Given the gravity and number of existing
allegations, the recent arrests of commanders allegedly
responsible for committing war crimes and crimes
against humanity in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo are but a welcome start. The Council must
ensure respect for its resolutions and take vigorous
measures against perpetrators, including through the
establishment of commissions of inquiry, referrals to
the International Criminal Court and the imposition of
targeted measures.
Mass rapes in Kibua in Eastern Congo in July and
August this year have demonstrated the massive
challenges we still face in preventing and responding
to such atrocious crimes. As the presidential statement
rightly underlines, peacekeeping missions must
communicate with the local communities and must be
equipped with the necessary capacities to do so. We
expect the upcoming report of the Secretary-General
on sexual violence to contain bold recommendations
for improving our response, and we hope that the
Security Council will be able to adopt a substantive
outcome next month.

12

We share the concern of the Secretary-General
over the threat posed to civilians by explosive weapons,
particularly when used in densely populated areas, and
I am grateful for the very clear words of UnderSecretary-General Amos on this subject. On
16 September, Austria, together with OCHA, hosted a
panel discussion on that subject that clearly
demonstrated the need for more systematic data and
analysis. We hope the Council will become actively
engaged on that important emerging subject.
We welcome the reference contained in the
presidential statement on the need to find durable
solutions to issues concerning internally displaced
persons and refugees, and we hope for a more
systematic consideration of that issue in relevant
Council debates and resolutions. More systematic and
comprehensive reporting on protection issues in the
Secretary-General’s country-specific reports will
enhance the consistency of the Council’s actions
regarding the protection of civilians. Following the
example of resolution 1325 (2000), this is another area
where we believe that indicators would be useful and
that they should be developed by the Secretariat. That
will allow the Council to assess the effectiveness of its
own policies and measures. We are further looking
forward to receiving the guidance for peacekeeping
and other relevant missions on the reporting of
protection of civilians that was requested in resolution
1894 (2009).
We are encouraged by the fact that the SecretaryGeneral’s report has noted a change in the way and
extent to which protection is addressed in Council
resolutions, including in the mandates of peacekeeping
operations. We are convinced that the briefings
received and our discussions in the Expert Group, as
well as the use of the aide-memoire (see
S/PRST/2009/1), have significantly contributed to this
more consistent approach on the part of the Security
Council. Let me express my gratitude to OCHA for
undertaking the work to update the aide-memoire,
which has been adopted in conjunction with the
presidential statement today.
While our membership of the Security Council
comes to an end next month, let me assure you,
Mr. President, that my country will remain strongly
committed to the subject of today’s debate. In this
context we are very much encouraged by the
continuing strong interest of the membership of the
United Nations in issues regarding protection of

10-64592

S/PV.6427

civilians, as is demonstrated by the broad attendance at
today’s debate. We look forward to continuing our
cooperation with interested Member States and the
Secretariat to further strengthen the protection of
civilians in conflicts around the globe.
Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Under-Secretaries-General
Amos and Le Roy, to the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Ms. Pillay, and to
Mr. Daccord, Director General of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, for their briefings.
The Russian Federation favours the peaceful
resolution of disputes. However, despite all the
international community’s efforts, armed conflicts
happen and claim the lives of many people, the
majority of whom are civilians. They especially need
our protection. We are speaking, first and foremost, of
children, women and the elderly, and the humanitarian
personnel who help them. We are convinced that
correcting this situation demands strict compliance
with the norms of international humanitarian law and
human rights standards and implementation of relevant
Security Council decisions.
We firmly condemn both premeditated attacks on
civilians and their death as the result of the
indiscriminate or disproportionate use of force, which
is a flagrant violation of international human law.
There is no justification for armed groups who attack
peaceful populations, commit terrorist acts and take
hostages. We emphasize the responsibility of all parties
to a conflict to ensure the security of civilians and to
comply strictly with the norms of international
humanitarian law. We advocate the thorough
investigation of such incidents and punishment of the
perpetrators.
That also applies to the activities of private
military and security companies, the victims of whose
actions are often entirely innocent people. In the
context of formulating clear international standards, we
welcome the recent decision to establish, within the
framework of the Human Rights Council, an openended working group to prepare a draft of a legally
binding document on the activities of such companies.
We are pleased that those topics are reflected in the
text
of
today’s
presidential
statement
(S/PRST/2010/25).
The protection of peaceful populations is a highpriority task for the Governments of States involved in

10-64592

conflict. All parties to armed conflicts bear the
responsibility for ensuring the security of civilians. The
actions of the international community should be
aimed at assisting national efforts in that area. Taking
appropriate measures, particularly those involving the
use of force, is possible only with the approval of the
Security Council and in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations. Moreover, it is important to take
into account the economic, social, historical, religious,
cultural and other specifics of countries and regions, as
well as the nature of each conflict, its underlying
causes and the possibilities for settlement.
There is no doubt of the need for the Security
Council to draw up clear and realistic mandates for the
protection of civilians, taking into account the financial
and logistical resources at the disposal of United
Nations peacekeeping operations, as well as the
leadership in this area, on the basis of consultations
with Member States.
We should not forget, however, that the
protection of civilians is only one element in the
mandates of peacekeeping operations. The main task of
United Nations peacekeeping is to facilitate the peace
process. One very important aspect of the protection of
civilians is the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants. Those programmes
require adequate support from United Nations
peacekeeping missions.
The work of humanitarian agencies is an
important factor. It should be based on the norms of the
United Nations Charter and basic humanitarian
principles, while their effectiveness depends largely on
how they fit into the international community’s efforts
for political settlements. In that context, respect for
State sovereignty is a fundamental principle.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): Let me
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this important
debate and for your leadership on the presidential
statement that we adopted today (S/PRST/2010/25).
Let me also thank Under-Secretaries-General Amos
and Le Roy, High Commissioner Pillay and the
Director General of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, Mr. Daccord, for their valuable briefings
and their dedication to protecting civilians.
Today we commend the work of the United
Nations and the hundreds of thousands of brave
peacekeepers and humanitarian workers who put their
lives at risk to protect civilians living in harm’s way.

13

S/PV.6427

We recognize the importance of the collective efforts
by the political, peacekeeping, human rights,
humanitarian and development components of the
United Nations to ensure proper protection from the
horrors of war. We have seen the impact the United
Nations and its partners have made in such places as
Burundi, Côte d’Ivoire, Haiti, Liberia, Sierra Leone,
the Sudan, Timor-Leste and other countries shaken by
armed conflict. The United Nations and regional
organization partners have also played an important
preventive and mediation role in countries such as
Guinea and Kenya.

We must also pursue accountability in places
where insurgents and terrorists hide among civilian
populations and turn communities into battlefields.
Those groups continue to inflict unspeakable crimes on
innocents. In some cases, they actively use religious
establishments, hospitals and neighbourhoods to launch
rocket and mortar attacks and compromise the
protection of civilians in such areas.
The United States hopes that we can work
together towards improvements in four key areas.
First, we must continue our efforts to better tailor
peacekeeping mandates to adequately address
situation-specific challenges on the ground. That
includes laying out a clear hierarchy of tasks so that
peacekeepers can understand the priorities. The
Secretary-General’s report notes the progress that the
Council has made in mandating civilian protection in
peacekeeping missions. Nevertheless, better planning,
preparedness and policies are needed to support the
missions’ efforts to reduce the vulnerabilities of
innocents in conflict zones.

The progress of the United Nations is the result
of years of hard work at Headquarters and in the field.
Resolution 1894 (2009) was a landmark in the global
effort to better protect civilians in conflict zones. So,
too, is this year’s report from the General Assembly’s
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
(A/64/19). Both documents called for mission-wide
planning, better predeployment training and stronger
protection strategies. We applaud the Organization’s
recent development of mission-wide protection
strategies in Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of
Secondly, we should increase our ability to
the Congo and the Sudan. We urge that those strategies provide peacekeepers and humanitarian organizations
be implemented, and we look forward to the expansion with the knowledge, training and resources needed to
of similar approaches to other United Nations missions. fulfil their protection mandates, including protection
against sexual and gender-based violence. Many
Despite those notable achievements, we are still
peacekeeping missions and humanitarian organizations
reminded every day of how far we have to go. We are
struggle due to inadequate resources and insufficient
deeply concerned by the trends outlined in the
communication with local communities. The United
Secretary-General’s report (S/2010/579), especially the
States is proud to play a leading role in developing
seemingly ceaseless unlawful targeting of civilians,
peacekeeping capacity, particularly with regard to
including women, children, humanitarian workers and
military and police programmes.
journalists. Children are still being forcibly recruited to
become soldiers. Women and girls in particular face
Thirdly, we must ensure that the Council is not
constant threats of rape and sexual abuse, and the being selective in its application of protection
number of refugees and internally displaced persons principles. We are encouraged by the work of the
has only grown larger since last year.
informal Expert Group on the Protection of Civilians.
We call for its focus to expand to consider crossAll too often humanitarian workers themselves
cutting protection concerns and to monitor progress on
are the targets of attack by warring parties and
the benchmarks and indicators being developed by the
terrorists. Such intimidation and violence is appalling
Secretary-General. We also welcome the updated aideand unacceptable. While eight United Nations
mémoire of the Office for the Coordination of
peacekeeping missions are now mandated to protect
Humanitarian Affairs, which will be useful in Council
civilians from physical violence, many civilians suffer
discussions.
not only from indiscriminate attacks but from attacks
directed at them deliberately. The United States calls
Fourthly, we must hold accountable groups and
for more concrete actions to hold accountable those individuals that flagrantly violate the laws of war,
who attack humanitarian and peacekeeping personnel.
including those who use rape and sexual violence as a
weapon of war. The primary responsibility for ensuring
accountability lies with States, but the international

14

10-64592

S/PV.6427

community must be prepared to take action against
those who violate international humanitarian law,
including through the imposition of sanctions, such as
the freezing of assets, the banning of international
travel or restricting the flow of goods and arms. We
must help Governments create, maintain and operate
credible national courts, where possible, and support
international and hybrid tribunals, when necessary, to
end impunity. The International Criminal Court plays a
key role in bringing perpetrators of the worst atrocities
to justice.
We understand far better than we did a decade
ago what protecting civilians in armed conflict truly
entails. We are developing more tools and mechanisms
to implement lessons that have been painfully learned.
We must remain vigilant and address future challenges
together more consistently. We still have far more to do
to save the lives of civilians in conflict zones. The
situations differ from conflict to conflict, but all
civilian victims are innocent and they should all be
sheltered by the rule of law and the rules of war.
Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): Let me begin by
commending your initiative, Mr. President, in
convening this important and timely debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. Allow me to
express my gratitude to Ms. Valerie Amos, UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs; Mr. Alain
Le Roy, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Ms. Navanethem Pillay, United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, and
Mr. Daccord, Director General of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, for their informative
briefings.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s progress
report (S/2010/579) and commend its analytical depth
and consultative observations. Judging from the wideranging perspectives shared with us today, the
protection of civilians in armed conflict is an important
yet daunting global challenge. Therefore, the efforts to
build consensus on the subject and the progressive
development of normative frameworks to address
civilian protection challenges, including resolutions
1894 (2009), 1882 (2009) and 1888 (2009), are
encouraging developments.
We also recognize the contribution of some
individual Member States and regional organizations to
these developments. At the regional level, Nigeria is a
signatory to the African Union Convention for the

10-64592

Protection and Assistance of Internally Displaced
Persons in Africa — the Kampala Convention. Once
the Convention enters into force, it will be the first
legally binding regional instrument to impose an
obligation on State parties to protect and assist
internally displaced persons (IDPs).
At the international level, we commend the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
the Department of Field Support and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations for keeping the Security
Council sharply focused on this issue. The 2009 joint
study, the operational concept on the protection of
civilians, and the newly updated aide-mémoire are
important tools that the Council should continue to use
to systematize our approach to protecting the rights and
persons of civilians in armed conflict.
Despite those notable developments, the grim
reality of today is that civilians are still casualties of
conflicts and the direct targets of abduction, sexual
violence and the denial of humanitarian access. Recent
developments underscore the increasing difficulty that
we face in addressing the five core challenges
articulated in the Secretary-General’s report, contained
in document S/2009/277.
The acts of rape perpetrated by rebels in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo in August
and the recent assault on civilians in Western Sahara
illustrate the magnitude of the task of civilian
protection. Difficult protection challenges remain in
Afghanistan and Somalia. Indeed, the impending
referendums in the Sudan may present serious
protection challenges for which the United Nations
Mission in the Sudan, the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and all United
Nations actors on the ground must be prepared.
Protection requires early intervention and the
swift deployment of humanitarian assistance by the
international community. It also requires coordination
and the pulling together of the capacities of the various
multilateral agencies involved in efforts to bring relief
to IDPs and refugees. I must stress that our growing
understanding of the needs and vulnerabilities of
civilians in armed conflict must be marked by the
ability and capacity to protect. In the same vein, while
the trend towards mandating peacekeeping missions to
protect civilians is a positive step, it is essential to
support such aspirations with adequate resources.

15

S/PV.6427

As a major troop-contributing country, Nigeria is
aware of the acute resource constraints that United
Nations peacekeepers face in the field daily. Such
constraints limit their ability to effectively protect
civilians, guarantee safe passage for IDPs, facilitate the
movement of humanitarian actors and, crucially,
establish assessment and early-warning mechanisms to
prevent a crisis. Indeed, better resourcing would make
the exercise of benchmarking the outcomes of
peacekeeping missions more accurate and effective.
As caretakers of international peace and security,
our efforts should be directed at addressing those and
other constraints that militate against the effective
protection of civilians. We therefore echo the
Secretary-General’s call for a comprehensive,
consistent and accountable approach to protecting
civilians in hostilities. In our view, the three additional
actions suggested by the Secretary-General in his
report will fundamentally enhance the protection of
civilians.
In that respect, we firmly support the
recommendation that the Council should avoid a
selective approach to the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. All cases requiring protection should be
given equal emphasis, whether in Southern Sudan,
Darfur, Somalia, Afghanistan or Western Sahara. When
an issue requiring civilian protection is not on the
Council’s agenda, the United Nations should give its
full support to the regional or subregional organization
already addressing such issues.
It is evident that composite measures are required
to protect civilians, prevent conflicts and deal with
their consequences. There is the need for States to
ratify and implement existing conventions and
protocols on armed conflict. Efforts should be
intensified to strengthen legal frameworks and
mechanisms for monitoring and reporting attacks
against civilians by State and non-State actors alike. In
West Africa, the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons is a threat to the protection of civilians. We
would therefore like to reiterate our call for the
elaboration of an arms trade treaty.
Conflict prevention is fundamental to the
protection of civilians. Practice has shown that it costs
less to prevent than to control conflicts. That is why
Nigeria fully supports region and subregional conflict
prevention initiatives, and we encourage the Council to
do the same.

16

Post-conflict peacebuilding efforts through the
Peacebuilding Commission should also be intensified.
Such peacebuilding strategies should not only address
immediate challenges, but also lay the foundation for
long-term development. We agree with the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation concerning the need to
develop a set of indicators for the systematic
monitoring of and reporting on protection of civilians
in armed conflicts.
Nigeria believes that the responsibility to protect
civilians in armed conflict situations is a shared one,
although the primary burden rests with national
Governments. The cooperative engagement of all
actors on the ground and of policymakers is necessary
to support national Governments in securing and
protecting their civilian populations.
The international community should remain
vigilant and bear its fair share of our collective
responsibility to protect civilians. If we act
purposefully and in concert, we can better shield
civilians from the ravages of armed conflict.
Mr. President, we support the presidential
statement adopted earlier that was prepared under your
guidance (S/PRST/2010/25).
Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs for presenting the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2010/579), as well as the
High Commissioner for Human Rights, the UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations and the
Director General of the International Committee of the
Red Cross for their briefings. We welcome their
ongoing commitment to protecting civilians and the
tireless efforts of their teams alongside the victims of
armed conflict on the ground. France supports the
statement to be made by the observer of the European
Union.
Recent
months have brought
important
developments on two points: peacekeeping operations
and the fight against impunity. First, with regard to
peacekeeping operations, since the adoption of
resolution 1894 (2009) a year ago, the Security Council,
the Secretariat and all actors concerned have mobilized
to improve the process of defining, following up and
monitoring the implementation of mandates involving
the protection of civilians in peacekeeping operations.
All the recent mandates of the Security Council contain
a protection of civilians segment, which is a priority in

10-64592

S/PV.6427

all cases. The protection of civilians justifies measures
that are adapted to the situation on the ground when
necessary. We continue to develop this approach. The
updated aide-memoire we adopted this morning (see
S/PRST/2010/25) is a valuable instrument in that
regard, and we thank the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs for its update.
The challenges we face remain numerous. There
have been serious breaches, notably in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo this summer, when massive
sexual violence was perpetrated while our forces were
present in the zone. But the Council and the
Organization assumed responsibility for the failure and
immediately took measures to strengthen its early
warning and prevention capacities. One of the main
perpetrators was arrested by the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo with the help of the Forces
armées de la République démocratique du Congo.
Situations also persist where the forces mandated
by the Council do not have the cooperation they need
from local authorities, which undermines their action.
The African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID), whose freedom of movement is
too often hindered in Darfur, still does not have
sufficient access to the population. It often arrives too
late, when it does arrive, at the scenes of the crime,
such as Jebel Marra.
I draw three lessons from these difficulties. First,
the Secretariat must develop a strategic framework for
every peacekeeping operation on the protection of
civilians, as well as specific training modules, and
identify the resources and capacities necessary to each.
Secondly, peacekeeping operations must develop
closer communication with the local population in
order to strengthen their ability to prevent and respond
to threats posed by armed groups, which involves a
linguistic component, as well as adequate logistics and
communications.
Thirdly, the Council must receive regular reports
on the protection of civilians and be informed as soon
as possible of situations where there are human rights
violations against civilians. Such reports will require
the establishment of a systematic monitoring
mechanism to follow progress or gaps in the protection
of civilians on the ground, provide detailed information
on incidents and make it possible to identify those who
violate international humanitarian law and human

10-64592

rights, assess the effectiveness of measures taken to
protect civilians, and evaluate threats. In that regard,
UNAMID has set up a data collection system on sexual
violence, and the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan produces thorough reports on these
matters.
We must have access to such information in all of
our areas of action. We welcome the intention of the
Secretary-General to set up monitoring indicators to
follow up the protection of civilians in countries at risk.
We have to continue developing synergies
between peacekeeping operations, the teams of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights and the
humanitarian community. Parties to conflict must
guarantee access and full, unhindered security for the
humanitarian personnel of international organizations
and non-governmental organizations and for their
provisions and equipment. Obstacles to the delivery of
humanitarian assistance are serious violations. Groups
of experts on the protection of civilians must be
regularly updated in that regard.
As for the fight against impunity, France
welcomes the publication of the mapping report of the
Secretary-General on crimes committed in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo from 1993 to 2003.
We commend the resolve of the authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to prosecute the
perpetrators of the abuses committed at that time and
of those committed today.
France welcomes the content of our presidential
statement, which indicates the progress made by
international justice and application of the Rome
Statute, as confirmed at the Kampala Conference.
We welcome the intervention of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) in Guinea, where it is
contributing to efforts to prevent crime at this historic
time for Guineans. The judicial activity of the Court
against those who recruit child soldiers, those
responsible for sexual violence and genocide
campaigns could contribute decisively to protecting
civilians if we are all committed to respecting the
decisions of the judges in all circumstances. No one
has any interest in encouraging impunity.
The Court also has a role to play in preventing
attacks against peacekeeping personnel. I note in that
respect the upcoming opening in The Hague of a
procedure against those responsible for the deadly

17

S/PV.6427

attack against African Union soldiers in Haskanita in
2007 as they were assuming their mandate to protect
the population.
In supporting the Rome Statute of the ICC, in
cooperating with Court, in carrying out its arrest
warrants and in respecting its independence, we are
protecting civilians today and tomorrow.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I would like to thank UnderSecretary-Generals Valerie Amos and Alain Le Roy,
High Commissioner Navi Pillay and the DirectorGeneral of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, Yves Daccord, for their briefings. I also express
my appreciation to the Secretary-General for his indepth report (S/2010/579), which provides a useful
overview of the progress made and challenges found in
protecting civilians over the past 18 months and
contains many important recommendations. We are
pleased that the Council has taken up a number of them
in the presidential statement adopted this morning
(S/PRST/2010/25).
Among the several aspects of such a wideranging issue as the protection of civilians, I would
like to focus my comments today on three points:
reporting, peacekeeping and the root causes of conflict.
Comprehensive though they may be, periodic
reports of the Secretary-General on the protection of
civilians have not provide detailed enough information
on the protection aspects of all agenda items where
such aspects are of concern. Brazil would therefore
welcome more information on protection issues in the
Secretary-General’s country-specific reports to the
Council, as also mentioned by the Permanent
Representative of Austria. Such enhanced reporting
could also use information that is already available to
the United Nations and currently shared in a more
limited and informal fashion, for instance with the
Security Council informal Expert Group. Broadening
and deepening the treatment of protection issues in
country-specific reports by the Secretary-General
would also allow protection information to be
disseminated to the wider membership.
I reiterate the great importance that Brazil
attaches to the protection of civilians by peacekeepers.
I also reaffirm our firm belief that the protection of
civilians is a multidimensional task that must be
pursued by all mission components in the field and by
both the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
the Department of Field Support at Headquarters. The

18

breadth of protection of civilian mandates is such that
fulfilling them as completely or as perfectly as one
would like will always be challenging. Yet every effort
must continue to be made to ensure that peacekeeping
missions have the capabilities and resources they need
to discharge their protection responsibilities as
effectively as possible.
My delegation very much appreciates the
emphasis
in
the
presidential
statement
(S/PRST/2010/25) adopted today on the critical issue
of communication between peacekeepers and local
populations. A positive two-way dialogue is an
indispensable element of a comprehensive and
effective protection strategy. Valuable resources, such
as United Nations radio stations and town hall
meetings, must be used more consistently and in an
integrated and mutually reinforcing manner. Moreover,
for protection strategies to work, the information
gathered from dialogue with local populations must
feed into effective information-management and crisisresponse mechanisms. The situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is a case that quickly comes to
mind in that regard. The production of intelligence to
inform protection strategies is vital. Without
intelligence, operations will be limited to reacting and
responding to events.
One of the main challenges in effectively
protecting civilians is balancing the imperatives of
immediate protection, such as defending civilians from
physical violence and ensuring humanitarian access,
with attention to long-term protection. In many cases,
this means combining traditional peacekeeping
components with political and economic tools to
address the root causes of conflict. In that context, my
delegation welcomes and agrees with the SecretaryGeneral’s emphasis on the role of housing, land,
natural resources and property issues in conflicts.
Addressing such critical issues is key to achieving
sustainable peace and development, which is, in the
long term, the best way to ensure the protection of
civilians. While those are fundamentally internal issues
and the legal basis for the Council to address them is
narrow, as they are not explicitly security issues, the
international community must be prepared to give
political, material and technical support to their
resolution in conflict and post-conflict situations in
order to enhance the prospects for sustainable peace.
After a decade of experience, we are still
struggling to effectively protect civilians in armed

10-64592

S/PV.6427

conflicts. While recognizing the progress made in
defining policy and building a framework for the
protection of civilians, my delegation concurs with the
Secretary-General and with Mr. Yves Daccord that we
must now redouble efforts to enhance protection on the
ground.

civilian populations. The reconfiguration of MONUC
and its transformation into the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) made it possible
to take into account in MONUSCO’s mandate the
commitments set out in resolution 1894 (2009).

Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French):
The protection of civilians in armed conflict is a
subject of great concern. I take the opportunity of this
debate to reaffirm Gabon’s commitment to work in this
area. The report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/579)
and the briefings by Ms. Valerie Amos,
Ms. Navanethem Pillay, Mr. Alain Le Roy and
Mr. Yves Daccord — and I welcome their clarity —
show unambiguously that the situation remains
alarming. Of course, I share their views.

Pursuant to resolution 1925 (2010), the mandate
of MONUSCO now attaches primary importance to the
protection of civilians. In that framework, United
Nations police, which are one of the components of
MONUSCO, have now become involved in training
Congolese police officers. It is also in that framework
that the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and MONUSCO forces have organized joint
patrols to ensure the protection of civilians in the
province of Haut-Uele, in the eastern part of the
country.

In spite of the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War and
resolutions 1894 (2009), 1888 (2009) and 1674 (2006),
warring forces continue to attack civilians. Whatever
the continent or the country, armed conflicts are
invariably accompanied by massive violations of
human rights, barbaric acts, particularly against women
and children, and death and displacement among
populations. This situation is unacceptable in human
terms.
The Council’s debates on this subject are of great
importance to Gabon, as they allow us to evaluate
progress made in our efforts to strengthen the regime
for the protection of civilians. My delegation would
like to highlight three points: the progress made; the
shortcomings that have been noted on the ground and
prospects.
The progress made relates mainly to the mandates
of peacekeeping operations. During previous meetings
on the agenda item under consideration, the Council
has acknowledged the need to include a strong civilian
protection dimension in the mandates of peacekeeping
operations. In the light of the scale of the task in the
host countries, the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT) and,
above all, the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC)
symbolize the challenges faced by the United Nations
in this area.
With respect to MONUC, solutions were
attempted in the framework of resolution 1856 (2008),
but they were unable to put an end to the abuse against

10-64592

The adoption of resolution 1923 (2010), which
extended MINURCAT’s mandate until 31 December,
also addressed the demand for the protection of
civilians. Concerned by the effects of violence in
Darfur on the humanitarian situation and security in
eastern Chad and in north-eastern Central African
Republic, the Council wanted to ensure that
MINURCAT would continue to grant particular
attention to the protection of civilians, including
refugees, displaced persons and humanitarian workers.
Clearly, in Chad, MINURCAT’s mandate made it
possible to help strengthen assistance to the
Détachement Intégré de Sécurité (DIS), whose mission
is specifically to protect civilians and humanitarian
workers. Nevertheless, MINURCAT’s drawdown will
be complete by the end of this year. In order to enable
the DIS to continue to play its role effectively, it seems
essential that it should benefit from all of the
operational camps left behind by MINURCAT. Gabon
urges the Council to include that element in the
framework of its support to the DIS continuity plan.
This progress is tenuous and should in no way
mask the shortcomings highlighted by reality on the
ground. The massacres carried out against civilian
populations, particularly women and children, between
30 July and 3 August in Walikale, not far from a
MONUSCO base, are terrible and intolerable. Beyond
Walikale, women continue to be subjected to rape in
the most humiliating conditions. Moreover, following
the examples of the Lord’s Resistance Army and the
Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda,

19

S/PV.6427

warring forces regularly attack villages, and even
refugee camps, killing civilians and recruiting children
with impunity.
Given these continued abuses, the protection of
civilians in armed conflicts remains an enormous task
that is difficult to carry out. Although it is true that
through its Operation Shop Window MONUSCO was
able to restore calm in the east of the country after the
events of Walikale, there is reason to question its
ability fully to carry out its mission to protection
civilians. The area it must cover, although limited to
the region of the Kivus, is too vast. It is larger than
Afghanistan, and the difficulties related to
infrastructure seem insurmountable. The African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and
MINURCAT in the Central African Republic, to cite
just two examples, are also facing the same challenges.
The problem, therefore, is twofold: first, the ability of
peacekeeping operations to adapt to their environment
and, secondly, ensuring that the resources made
available to them match the missions they are given.
Gabon invites the Council to continue its reflection on
those two issues.
The fight against impunity is another area where
there are clear shortcomings and where Governments
should work harder to avoid giving legitimacy to the
crimes that are committed. It is true that, in some
places, timid initiatives have been taken and, in many
countries weakened by crisis, the rule of law is still in
its early stages. However, it is crucial to ensure that the
perpetrators of abuses against civilians are held
accountable for their crimes before national
jurisdictions and, in the case of the failure of national
jurisdictions, the creation of ad hoc and mixed
tribunals is essential.
We should recall that the primary responsibility
for the protection of civilians belongs to States.
Therefore, it seems to us essential to strengthen their
capabilities in order to enable them to better respond to
that obligation. We must help them to reform their
security and defence sectors; we must help them to
establish the rule of law and re-establish their
administrative structures; and we must help them to
undertake large-scale programmes against poverty and
corruption. We are convinced that the protection of
civilians can only be effective if States have reliable
institutions, a stable republican army and police force
and adequate financial resources.

20

In conclusion, my delegation hopes that the
United Nations will establish mechanisms for
evaluation, which could help improve States’
performance in the protection of civilians in armed
conflicts. The presidential statement that we will adopt
and which was drawn up by your delegation reflects
our commitment to work along these lines.
The President: I would remind people to keep
their statements to four minutes. Not a single person
has stuck to the designated time, and I will now crack
the whip. I will stop you if you go over the designated
time, so please keep your contributions to four minutes.
If there are written contributions, you can, of course,
circulate them.
Mr. Kazuo Kodama (Japan): I thank the UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Amos,
the
Under-Secretary-General
for
Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Le Roy, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Ms. Pillay, and the
International Committee of the Red Cross DirectorGeneral, Mr. Daccord, for their very pertinent briefings.
It is clear that civilians in great numbers become
victims when conflicts erupt. It is therefore imperative
for us all to achieve concrete improvements on the
ground with the help of today’s debate.
To that end, we support the proposal by the
Secretary-General to promote three approaches aimed
at overcoming the five challenges raised in his
previous report (S/2009/277). The first of the three
approaches, the comprehensive approach, can be
achieved when the actors involved are proactive and
engage in greater cooperation with each other. First, it
is the responsibility of the Government and the army of
a country in which a conflict occurs to protect its own
people. To that end, the rule of law should be
established by promoting security sector reform and
strengthening the judicial system and law enforcement.
Secondly, with the enhancement of the response
capacity of United Nations peacekeeping operations,
we are pleased to see that the United Nations missions
in Côte d’Ivoire, the eastern Democratic Republic of
Congo and the Sudan have developed strategies for the
protection of civilians and that training modules will be
completed shortly for all peacekeeping personnel. Still
more comprehensive strategies are required to fill the
gap between existing capacities and the standards to
which we aspire.

10-64592

S/PV.6427

Thirdly, the control of weapons, should be
strengthened, especially through the promotion of
regional cooperation and the creation of a legal
framework. As for small arms, last June the fourth
Biennial Meeting of States on Small Arms considered
the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects, which should be
implemented without delay to prevent and eradicate the
illegal trade in small arms. Also, the first Meeting of
States Parties to the Convention on Cluster Munitions
was held in Laos in early November, and the Vientiane
Declaration and Vientiane Action Plan were adopted
there. Japan would like to see the international
community engage in the cooperation necessary to
make that treaty universal and fulfil its provisions.
Fourthly, the protection of women and children is
a priority. Japan appreciates the active discussions at
the ministerial open debate on women and peace and
security last month (S/PV.6411) and supports the
utilization by the United Nations and Member States of
a set of indicators in implementing resolution 1325
(2000). Japan is also concerned over the intentional use
of sexual violence by armed groups, and therefore it
supports the active efforts being made in that area by
the Secretary-General’s Special Representative on
Sexual Violence in Armed Conflict. We expect UN
Women also to play a significant role in coordinating
the work being done in this field, and we reaffirm the
need to strengthen targeted sanctions against persistent
perpetrators of violence against children, in accordance
with the resolution 1882 (2009).
Turning to the consistent approach, Japan
welcomes the recent development of the operational
concept by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the Department of Field Support aimed at
promoting consistency. Cooperation between the
military and civilians should be strengthened to further
ensure humanitarian access. It is also a priority to
protect humanitarian aid workers in order to prevent
them from becoming the target of attacks. In that
regard, the establishment of a nationwide network of
interagency protection working groups, under the lead
of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS),
is a good example.
Secondly, in light of the need to share best
practices and lessons from the past, we must definitely
learn from the tragic and heinous accident of mass
rapes that were committed in the eastern part of the

10-64592

Democratic Republic of the Congo earlier this year,
which provided us with many lessons, including that
the early warning system needs to be strengthened,
communication between local people and peacekeeping
missions needs to be developed, troop-contributing
countries need to receive training, and there needs to
be close and smooth communication between the
Council and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations. An example of the kind of success we need
in that area was the establishment in Timor-Leste of a
hotline between the United Nations Mission and
civilians and local authorities. The updated aidemémoire should also be utilized proactively to this end.
The experience of drawing down and then withdrawing
the United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad (MINURCAT) should be shared,
with a view to utilizing benchmarks for the protection
of civilians.
Thirdly, the Council should obtain the most
accurate and objective information and then make use
of it on the ground in a timely manner, so that the
establishment or renewal of a mandate related to the
protection of civilians can be considered. For that
reason, we should start to communicate with troop- and
police-contributing countries at an early stage in
United Nations involvement. The Council should
utilize informal mechanisms, such as interactive
dialogue, and the discussions in the Security Council
should better reflect those taking place in informal
expert groups.
Last but not least, Mr. President, I stress the
importance of the accountable approach, which stresses
maintaining accountability and fighting against
impunity. To those ends, the affected country should
build its own capacity to establish the rule of law as a
means of strengthening the protection of civilians. And
cooperation between the affected country and the
United Nations should be pursued in order to spread
the rule of law to many more countries. I might
mention, in that connection, that in July this year the
first conviction was handed down by the Extraordinary
Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia, to which Japan
has given its support. Further efforts should be made to
strengthen the rule of law at both the international and
the national levels, based on a careful analysis of the
situation in each country. In addition, the Council
should engage in efforts to strengthen accountability
and enhance cooperation with United Nations
organizations, including the Human Rights Council and

21

S/PV.6427

the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights. We should be aware that measures
are being taken, such as the establishment of the
committee of investigation at the Human Rights
Council. As mentioned in the latest report of the
Secretary-General
(S/2010/579),
strengthened
monitoring on the ground, through the involvement of
many United Nations and other actors, will contribute
to promoting and enhancing the protection of civilians.

the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Lord’s
Resistance Army in the Central African region and
Al-Shabaab in Somalia. We deplore those attacks and
reiterate our call on the international community to
strengthen its collective resolve to deal effectively with
groups such as those. The existence of such groups is a
clear reminder of the challenge that we all face in
dealing with non-State actors who commit such
heinous crimes against civilians.

In closing, I would like to emphasize the
relevance of the human security approach, which can
serve as a conceptual basis for protecting and
empowering those in a society who are its most
vulnerable members. Empowerment of vulnerable
people, such as children, internally displaced persons
and refugees through education and training at the
individual and community levels, is also an essential
means of preventing conflicts from recurring once they
have been resolved. For that reason Japan has been
steadfast in providing support for such efforts, for
example, through the United Nations Trust Fund for
Human Security.

It is essential that peacekeeping mandates are
realistic and robust and that peacekeepers have the
necessary tools to undertake their protection mandates.

Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): We thank you for
organizing this important debate on the protection of
civilians in situations of armed conflict. We thank the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,
Ms. Valerie Amos, the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Alain Le Roy, and also
thank the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, Ms. Navanethem Pillay, and the
Director-General of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, Mr. Yves Daccord, for their informative
briefings this morning.
Uganda remains concerned that civilians still
account for the vast majority of casualties during
situations of armed conflict. It is essential, therefore, to
put in place effective safeguards for vulnerable persons
during situations of armed conflict. We welcome the
revised aide-memoire by the Office for the
Coordination
of
Humanitarian
Affairs
(S/PRST/2010/25, annex) as a practical tool that
provides a basis for improved analysis and diagnosis of
key protection issues, and we are of the view that there
is a need to continue its use on a more systematic and
consistent basis.
We continue to witness blatant attacks on
civilians by armed groups, such as the Rwandan
Defence Forces and the Allied Democratic Forces in

22

It is also important to focus on achieving durable
solutions for refugees and internally displaced persons,
in particular their voluntary, safe and dignified return
or local integration and resettlement. As a result of
conflict situations, Africa hosts 11.6 million of the
world’s 26 million documented internally displaced
persons. In this regard, we underscore the importance
of the United Nations working with regional and
subregional organizations like the African Union to
find durable solutions to protection issues.
We remain concerned by the humanitarian impact
of conflict, especially the excessive accumulation and
destabilizing effects of small arms and light weapons,
as well as the devastating impact of landmines and
explosive remnants of war. Even more significant for
us is the recognition of the needs of persons with
disabilities as a vulnerable group brought about by the
indiscriminate use of those weapons.
Uganda recognizes that States bear the primary
responsibility to respect and ensure the human rights of
individuals within their respective territories, as
provided by the relevant international law. We reiterate
our commitment to those principles and urge all parties
to armed conflict to endeavour to meet the basic needs
of the civilians affected by such conflict. We also
underscore the responsibility of States to comply with
their relevant obligations to end impunity. To that end,
we recall the outcomes of the first Review Conference
of the Rome Statute, held in Kampala in May and June
of this year.
It is necessary that all parties to armed conflict
emphasize the dignity of civilians by recognizing
losses that result from armed conflict, even those from
lawful combat operations. In that regard, we encourage
all parties to conflict to provide meaningful amends to
affected individuals and communities, such as financial

10-64592

S/PV.6427

assistance or funding for humanitarian aid programmes.
We encourage all Member States to embrace the
concept of making amends, not because there is any
legal obligation to do so but simply in the interest of
mitigating suffering and promoting humanity. A small
gesture of compassion goes a long way in regaining the
trust and understanding of the affected civilians. That
has been the policy of the Uganda People’s Defence
Forces and continues to be implemented by the Uganda
People’s Defence Forces serving under the auspices of
the African Union Mission in Somalia — AMISOM.
I would like to emphasize, however, that making
appropriate amends never creates a licence to harm or
an excuse for violations of international law. It is not a
replacement for reparations, nor does it constitute an
alternative for prosecuting those who are responsible
for violations of international humanitarian law.
Finally, we pay tribute to the men and women of
the United Nations who continue to serve in often
difficult circumstances in the protection of civilians
and, regrettably, sometimes pay the ultimate price.
Uganda thanks the delegation of the United
Kingdom for its work on the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2010/25) that we adopted this morning.
Mr. Puente (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to join previous speakers in thanking UnderSecretaries-General Valerie Amos and Alain Le Roy for
their very valuable briefings. I would also like
especially to welcome the participation in today’s
meeting of Ms. Pillay and Mr. Daccord.
The great number and complexity of
contemporary conflicts, the lack of respect for the
norms of international humanitarian law and the use on
civilian populations of increasingly sophisticated
weapons with indiscriminate effects are factors that
have increased the challenges facing the Security
Council and constitute the basis for evaluating the path
that the international community must take in dealing
with those matters of crucial importance.
The Council must implement concrete, effective
and forceful actions to tackle these situations. That is
crucial for those who suffer the pain of armed conflict
and is a requirement for States such as Mexico that are
convinced of the preponderant role that the Security
Council is called on to play.
Resolutions 1894 (2009) and 1882 (2009),
promoted by Austria and Mexico in 2009, undoubtedly

10-64592

constitute significant progress, but we continue to
witness attacks of various kinds on the civilian
populations in different regions. In the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Somalia, Darfur, Chad,
Afghanistan, Iraq, Gaza, Sri Lanka and Kyrgyzstan, to
mention a few examples, the protection of civilians
demands our prompt attention, because of both the
variety of situations and the complexity of the
scenarios, which require appropriate responses from
the Security Council.
We are especially concerned with two specific
aspects, given their impact on civilian populations —
first, the denial of humanitarian assistance, and second,
the use of explosives in densely populated zones.
Parties in armed conflicts barely comply with the
obligation to permit and facilitate access of civilian
populations to humanitarian assistance, subjecting
them to greater risk. Compounding the difficulty are
attacks on humanitarian workers in conflict zones and
on facilities used in the delivery of assistance. The
instruments of international humanitarian law are very
clear about the obligations of States and parties in
conflict to allow safe, timely and unhindered access to
humanitarian assistance.
Regarding the use of explosives, the fact that
there is no specific ban on the use of certain weapons
does not mean that those weapons are permitted. We
must condemn the use of explosives in areas where
civilian populations are concentrated because of their
indiscriminate effects and the attendant risks. We must
add that the widespread availability of small arms and
light weapons supplied by illicit traffic has direct
adverse consequences on civilian populations.
It is essential to move forward in the effective
implementation of Security Council sanctions regimes,
particularly arms embargoes, and, more broadly, to
enforce the international obligations of the relevant
Palermo Protocol and the United Nations Programme
of Action on the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons. We also believe it is necessary to deepen our
analysis of the impact of certain explosive weapons,
such as cluster munitions, landmines and improvised
explosive devices, among others, in densely populated
areas.
We believe that the international instruments in
the area of international humanitarian law, in particular
the four Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their
Additional Protocols, as well as customary

23

S/PV.6427

international law, give us a solid basis of principles and
standards designed to protect all of those who do not
take part in hostilities or who have stopped
participating. It is crucial that they be respected by all
parties in conflict, regardless of who they are or the
nature of the conflict in question.
Violations of international humanitarian law may
be war crimes, and it is States themselves that have the
primary obligation to prosecute their alleged
perpetrators. If they cannot or are unwilling to do so,
the International Criminal Court has jurisdiction to
receive such cases. Its existence must not only be an
incentive to strengthen national legal systems, but also
an effective mechanism for addressing crimes when
national judicial structures have been destroyed by
conflict.
Our obligation to respect and enforce respect for
international humanitarian law requires us not only to
make use of the instruments at our disposal to ensure
peace, security and international justice, but also to
formulate a robust culture of respect that does away
with impunity and repairs the harm inflicted on
civilians in armed conflict.
During my delegation’s presidency of the
Security Council in June, we held a debate on the
promotion and strengthening of the rule of law (see
S/PV.6347), at which, through the adoption of a
presidential
statement
(S/PRST/2010/11),
we
recognized that “respect for international humanitarian
law is an essential component of the rule of law in
conflict situations” and reaffirmed that “the protection
of the civilian population in armed conflict should be
an important aspect of any comprehensive strategy”.
I wish to conclude by expressing the support of
the Mexican delegation for the presidential statement
adopted earlier (S/PRST/2010/25), including the
updating of the aide-memoire, which is itself a useful
tool for the establishment of a common basis for the
responsibility of the Security Council and Member
States to protect civilians in armed conflict. We hope
that the Security Council will in the future adopt more
forceful measures in response to the humanitarian
impact of the use of explosives in densely populated
areas and areas identified by the Secretary-General in
his report on this issue.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank Ms. Valerie Amos, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency

24

Relief Coordinator; Mr. Alain Le Roy, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations;
Ms. Navanethem Pillay, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights; and Mr. Yves
Daccord, Director General of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, for their respective
statements.
China is gravely concerned about civilian
casualties in armed conflict. We condemn all acts that
deliberately target civilians. I wish to emphasize the
following three points concerning the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.
First, the protection of civilians in armed conflict
must be strengthened in line with the Fourth Geneva
Convention, international humanitarian law, and the
principle of respect for State sovereignty, political
independence and territorial integrity as enshrined in
the United Nations Charter. National Governments
bear the primary responsibility for protecting their own
citizens. In a situation of armed conflict, the
international community can assist in the protection of
civilians, but such assistance should not substitute for
the responsibilities and obligations of the national
Government concerned.
Secondly, in strengthening the protection of
civilians, attention should be paid to addressing the
root causes and symptoms of conflict. The deployment
of United Nations peacekeeping operations alone
cannot offer a fundamental solution to the protection of
civilians. The Security Council should prioritize
preventive diplomacy in order to prevent and mitigate
conflict. In a volatile conflict situation, the Council
should commit to pushing for a strong and viable
political process to achieve lasting peace and stability
at an early date. The Council must focus on helping the
affected countries to expedite security sector reform in
order to build professional military and police forces
and provide effective protection for their own citizens.
Thirdly, in order to ensure the effective protection
of civilians, the various United Nations bodies and
agencies must ensure a synergetic division of labour,
with a clear focus on the effective implementation of
existing commitments. The protection of civilians in
armed conflict involves the development and evolution
of international humanitarian law, which requires
in-depth discussions with the broader membership with
a view to reaching consensus. United Nations
peacekeeping operations are deployed in varying

10-64592

S/PV.6427

circumstances and conditions. Their priorities should
be tailored to local specificities. The one-size-fits-all
approach will not work.
Ms. Ziade (Lebanon): At the outset, allow me to
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this open
debate. I also wish to thank Ms. Amos, UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator; Mr. Le Roy, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations; and
Ms. Pillay, United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, for their briefings. I further thank
Mr. Yves Daccord for his statement.
While the international community has endowed
itself with a solid normative framework to protect
civilians in armed conflict, actual compliance with the
existing standards remains far from satisfactory. How
do we translate this normative progress into concrete
improvement in the lives of the hundreds of thousands
of civilians who suffer extreme violence and hardship
during conflict?
If successful compliance with protection
standards requires an integrated and comprehensive
protection strategy in collaboration with the main
humanitarian actors, it remains that the primary
responsibility for civilian protection rests with the
concerned Government itself. Furthermore, occupying
Powers have the clear obligation under international
law to protect the population under foreign occupation.
We would like to stress in this regard the implications
of severe and sustained violations of international
humanitarian law in the Palestinian-occupied territories
and the appalling humanitarian situation confronting
the 1.5 million Palestinians confined to the Gaza Strip.
There is a prevailing awareness that United
Nations peacekeepers cannot protect everyone from
everything. However, protection is most successful
when it is part of a larger strategy. The development by
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support of an operational concept
and a framework to guide the preparations of
protection of civilians strategies by missions is a good
step in the right direction. There is a need, furthermore,
to strengthen cohesion between mandates, resources
and expectations, and to enhance peacekeeping
capacity, especially in transport, communications and
intelligence.
A mission that protects civilians under imminent
threat but makes no progress in helping to address the

10-64592

underlying causes of the conflict will not lead to
sustainable peace or to the durable and effective
protection of civilian populations. The United Nations
is invited to assist countries in advancing the peace
process and peaceful coexistence through inclusive
dialogue, reconciliation and reintegration. In the course
of establishing genuine and sustainable peace, the rule
of law and good governance should also be adequately
addressed. The Security Council should also consider a
more comprehensive and less selective approach to the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.
Armed conflict is the source of devastating
calamities. This is why, all around the world, brave and
dedicated men and women strive to alleviate the
suffering of innocent victims. All parties to a conflict
should allow and facilitate the rapid and unimpeded
passage of impartial humanitarian relief to civilians in
need.
In his recent report (S/2010/579) on the subject of
our debate today, Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
suggests that the Security Council has long recognized
that the maintenance of peace and security will not be
achieved or sustained without due attention being paid
to redressing grievances, ending impunity and
protecting the human rights of civilians. Based on that
principle, Lebanon reiterates its demand that Israel pay
due compensation for the tragic human, environmental
and material losses caused by the war it waged on
Lebanon in 2006.
During and subsequent to that war, Lebanon
suffered greatly from cluster munitions, which are
indiscriminate in nature and have a devastating effect
on civilians at the time they are used and long after the
fighting has come to an end. Today, I am honoured to
inform the Council that, earlier this month, my
Government submitted its ratification instruments on
the Convention on Cluster Munitions. Furthermore,
Lebanon has offered to host the second meeting of
States parties to the Convention in 2011. In that regard,
we urge States that have not yet done so to ratify the
Convention.
It is a moral imperative for us to prevent conflicts
and to place the people in need of protection at the
centre of our efforts and policymaking.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): At the outset, I wish to
thank today’s briefers for their comprehensive
presentations.

25

S/PV.6427

Turkey welcomes the Council’s increased
attention to protection issues, including its adoption
last November of resolution 1894 (2009), which was a
significant step in this area. We also attach importance
to recently adopted resolutions on women and peace
and security and children and armed conflict.
There is no doubt that the primary obligation to
protect civilians lies with States. However, the
international community also has a shared
responsibility to help to protect civilians in situations
where States fail to do so. We therefore need to build
collective awareness of the importance of that
responsibility. We must also be able to agree on
fundamental guidelines. The updated aide-memoire,
which has been adopted today, provides a useful guide
for improved analysis of key protection issues.

Let me underline two issues. The first relates to
dialogue with non-State armed groups. We understand
the rationale of humanitarian access to civilians.
However, Turkey believes that in doing so we should
be extremely careful not to extend any sense of
legitimacy to such organizations. Some terrorist groups
in various parts of the world attempt to exploit such a
humanitarian approach to gain international acceptance
and recognition.

My second point is that we should make a clear
distinction between the counter-terrorism efforts of law
enforcement agencies and armed conflict. We strongly
condemn all acts of terrorism. As indicated in the
Council’s presidential statement (S/PRST/2010/19) of
27 September, terrorism continues to pose a serious
threat to the enjoyment of human rights and to social
and economic development. It also undermines global
As mentioned in the report (S/2010/579) of the
stability and prosperity. Governments therefore not
Secretary-General, while in the course of the past 11
only have the legitimate right but also the obligation to
years a comprehensive framework has been established,
effectively combat terrorism and fully and effectively
the emphasis must now be on making progress in
cooperate with other States.
enhancing protection on the ground. We must therefore
translate our legal commitments into actions. The real
The issue of protecting civilians in armed conflict
problem lies with implementation, rather than norm- is a cause that the international community must
setting.
pursue with unwavering determination. We believe that,
in order to ensure long-term and lasting protection of
A case in point is Gaza, where tragic
civilians, human rights, the rule of law, democracy and
developments have taken place and civilians continue
good governance should be strengthened. We should
to suffer. In that regard, we will also follow up the
also ensure that perpetrators of violence against
inquiry process, both in Geneva and New York, on the
civilians are held fully accountable for their actions.
Israeli attack against the humanitarian aid convoy to
Sustainable prevention and protection will only be
Gaza, which took place in international waters and
possible if there is no impunity.
resulted in nine civilian deaths and many wounded.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I would
The protection of civilians during peacekeeping
like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this
operations is one of the key challenges before us.
debate. We would also like to thank Ms. Valerie Amos,
Turkey attaches importance to incorporating that task
Ms. Navanethem Pillay, Mr. Alain Le Roy and
in peacekeeping mandates, including effectively
Mr. Yves Daccord for their comprehensive briefings.
implementing it. Regional ownership and cooperation
Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomes the report of
are also worth mentioning. Moreover, it is important to
improve predeployment training on the protection of the Secretary-General (S/2010/579) and the latest
civilians for peacekeeping personnel, including taking update of the aide-memoire, which is an important
into consideration cultural differences and sensitivities. practical and useful analytical tool to address issues
related to the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
In some situations, civilians become victims in
Allow me to start with the unfortunate and
spite of the fact that parties fully comply with
applicable law. Turkey calls upon parties to armed unacceptable fact that civilians continue to account for
conflicts to make amends to the civilians they harm, a high number of casualties in conflicts. Bosnia and
with a view to respecting their inherent dignity as Herzegovina condemns all deliberate attacks against
civilians, forced recruitment, attacks on schools, the
human beings.
use of civilians to protect military objectives and the
deaths resulting from the use of force.

26

10-64592

S/PV.6427

Women and children continue to suffer extreme
violence during conflicts. Recent events in the eastern
part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo illustrate
failures in the areas of both prevention and response.
We should bear in mind that the struggle against
impunity is an integral element of the protection of
civilians, which cannot be addressed seriously without
prosecuting those responsible for serious crimes.
Efforts must be enhanced to support the fight against
impunity, both at the national and international levels.

to create areas of security and provide access for
humanitarian assistance. The challenges facing the
Council with regard to the protection of civilians call
for greater international cooperation and better
coordination between the Council and other United
Nations bodies and agencies. To that end, additional
efforts should be made to prevent conflicts and their
recurrence and to promote early warning systems and
effective responses to situations that specifically
threaten civilian populations.

Sanctions and other targeted measures play an
important role in overall efforts, as well as in
initiatives to improve compliance with the law by nonState armed groups.

We support more comprehensive and detailed
information on the protection of civilians in countryspecific situations as well as on measuring progress in
the implementation of peacekeeping mandates issues
related to the protection of civilians. That is of key
importance in the context of mission drawdown, as
well as when identifying areas of concern, prioritizing
response activities and ensuring accountability for
actions or shortcomings.

Although the primary responsibility for the
protection of civilians lies with States and with parties
to an armed conflict, the United Nations, with its
systematic approach to the protection of civilians, must
be, and is, at the helm of the global effort.
Positive developments must be supported and
publicized. The enhancement of communication
between the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict and sanctions committees is one such example.
Situation-specific resolutions calling for protection to
be prioritized in the implementation of peacekeeping
mandates constitute another such development. There
have also been significant improvements in creating
joint protection teams, as is the case with the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Activities have
also been undertaken to foster interaction with local
population and provide valuable information for
assessments on the ground.
In addition, there must be support for the
enhancement of accountability. Different justice and
reconciliation mechanisms should also be considered,
including national and international criminal courts and
tribunals. Such mechanisms are aimed at supporting
national-level investigation and prosecution.
Unfortunately, conflicts remain the major cause
of the increasing number of refugees and internally
displaced persons. We would like to emphasize the
importance of unhindered access to humanitarian
assistance to those vulnerable groups. We also express
our awareness of concerns about the security risks and
continued dangers faced by humanitarian personnel as
they operate in increasingly complex situations. We
urge the cooperation of all parties to a conflict in order

10-64592

The President: I now wish to make a statement
in my capacity as representative of the United
Kingdom.
I join others in thanking all the briefers today.
The United Kingdom believes that the protection
of civilians should remain at the forefront of the
Security Council’s work. We know from experience
why that needs to be the case.
In the Sudan, civilian protection is central to
peacekeeping missions, particularly in Darfur, where
more than 10 per cent of the population is living in
camps.
As
the
Under-Secretary-General
for
Humanitarian
Affairs
and
Emergency
Relief
Coordinator said, the continued poor security situation
in parts of Darfur causes great suffering to the civilian
population and impairs the ability of humanitarian
agencies to provide essential assistance.
In Burma, we remain deeply concerned about the
lack of progress towards national reconciliation and the
implications for civilians living in ethnic minority
areas and the border regions. In many of those areas,
civilian continue to be targeted by the military. We
remain very troubled by reports of indiscriminate
attacks on vulnerable people, including women and
children. Reports also document that many have had
their land confiscated and their homes destroyed and
have been forcibly relocated. The United Kingdom
urges the Burmese regime to undertake meaningful

27

S/PV.6427

dialogue with ethnic groups to maximize the
opportunities presented by the election for national
reconciliation.
Recent mass rapes in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo highlight the urgent need for enhanced
civilian protection in the east of the country. The
primary responsibility for the protection of civilians, as
in other host Governments, rests with the Democratic
Republic of the Congo authorities. However, the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo plays an
essential role in supporting the authorities where they
lack the capacity to provide such protection.
Today, we are pleased that the presidential
statement (S/PRST/2010/25) recognizes the valuable
role of the informal expert working group on
protection of civilians and endorses the updated aidememoire.
The protection of civilians debates are biannual
and, unfortunately, I have to note again the lack of
progress on issues of humanitarian access. The United
Kingdom particularly deplores and condemns violent
attacks on humanitarian workers by parties to the
conflicts. We call on States and other parties to ensure
that all affected civilians have access to humanitarian
aid according to need and without discrimination. We
need to see progress on that point before the next
debate on this important issue. I now resume my
functions as President of the Council. I give the floor
to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): I, too, wish to express my
deep appreciation to the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Valerie Amos, for her
briefing, which gave us a broad perspective of the
challenges we face in the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.
I also wish to thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Alain Le Roy, the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Ms. Navanethem Pillay, and the Director-General for
the Red Cross, Mr. Yves Daccord, for their
contributions.
Italy fully endorses the statement to be made by
the European Union (EU) delegation and wishes to
make some additional observations.
Italy is committed to combating impunity for
international crimes and believes that that fight is

28

inextricably linked to the principle of accountability.
The Council has a crucial role to play in that regard. It
must be ready to take prompt action against those who
continuously undermine the credibility of that
commitment.
Non-compliance with international humanitarian
laws inevitably leads to the injury or death of what is
becoming a growing number of civilians every year.
Every measure should be taken to prevent violence,
starting with the implementation of national laws.
I would add that, in situations where civilian
populations are the target of attacks, the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court is an essential
instrument that provides the legal basis for holding
perpetrators accountable for attacks, when a State is
unwilling or unable to do so.
We share concerns over the severity and
prevalence of constraints on humanitarian access, as
well as the frequency and gravity of attacks on
humanitarian personnel. Consistent improvements in
humanitarian access will only be made if States
promote a culture of protection, taking into account the
particular needs of women, children, the elderly, and
persons
with
disabilities.
Active
hostilities,
bureaucratic constraints and economically motivated
attacks on humanitarian supplies are major obstacles
on the path to protecting those in need.
This is why the acceptance of independent,
neutral and impartial humanitarian action must be
broadened.
Under
international
law,
primary
responsibility for the security and protection of
humanitarian personnel lies with the Government
hosting a United Nations operation. Effective measures
to enable relief activities during active fighting,
including calling on parties to allow safe passage for
civilians trying to escape from conflict zones, could
represent a concrete and tangible set of actions that
could be implemented.
We welcome the encouraging developments in
the protection of civilians by peacekeeping missions as
mentioned in the Council’s latest report (S/2010/579).
The protection of civilians, I wish to reiterate, is first
and foremost the responsibility of the State, which may
require assistance in the fulfilment of its duties in that
area.
When a Government lacks the resources to ensure
compliance with its obligations, the protection of

10-64592

S/PV.6427

civilians is a moral obligation inherent to peacekeeping,
although peacekeepers are not the only actors involved.
Greater efforts should thus be made to ensure that
peacekeeping mandates include explicit reference to
civilian protection, clear strategies for pursuing it and
careful monitoring of the implementation and impact
of these mandates.
The security of civilians in post-conflict
environments is also critical to the legitimacy and
credibility of United Nations peacekeeping missions,
the peace agreements they are deployed to implement
and the United Nations itself.
These are difficult tasks that require a consistent
approach, including advanced planning to ensure that
future and current missions have the authority and
capacity to protect. At the earliest stages of planning,
threats to civilians must be taken into consideration,
and peacekeeping missions must be properly tasked
with clear, credible and achievable mandates to be
implemented by military and police personnel who
have received the appropriate training before
deployment.
Training is crucial. It should be made standard on
the basis of clear operational guidelines regarding the
implementation
of
protection
mandates
by
peacekeeping missions. Such guidelines should be
drafted in close cooperation among the United Nations
and other organizations involved, such as the African
Union and the European Union.
Italy, in cooperation with the Secretariat, makes a
key contribution to that sector through its Center of
Excellence for Stability Police Units (CoESPU). In five
years, the Center has already trained 3,630 trainers to
prepare national contingents for deployment as formed
police units.
The protection of civilians is greatly enhanced
when the police and civilian components of
peacekeeping missions are also involved. Hence, there
is the need to strengthen the police component and
integrate civilian capacities, particularly in the rule of
law sector. That is indispensable to helping a country
to fully resume national ownership and responsibility
in the crucial area of protecting civilians.
Today, there is greater attention to understanding
and advancing the protection of civilians. Thanks to
remarkable efforts, there have been improvements in
United Nations peacekeeping operations’ ability to

10-64592

protect, but more needs to be done to transform our
ambition into realities on the ground and to establish
precise benchmarks to monitor implementation.
Resolution 1674 (2006) reaffirms the principle of
the responsibility to protect. As we have stressed on
previous occasions, that principle should not be
perceived in an adversarial manner but rather as an
instrument available to the international community for
settling conflicts, provided that the conditions referred
to in paragraphs 138 and 139 of the 2005 Outcome
Document are met.
The informal interactive dialogue of the General
Assembly on early warning, assessment and the
responsibility to protect was an important step towards
understanding and implementing the concept. We look
forward to new opportunities to continue that dialogue.
Mr. Rivard (Canada): On behalf of the
Government of Canada, I would like to thank the
United Kingdom for having convened this open debate.
I also wish to express my appreciation to today’s
speakers for their remarks.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s eighth
report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2010/579). The report offers a sobering view of the
situation facing civilians in armed conflict. It also
offers a clear set of actions that can be taken by the
Council to better respond to protection needs.
Ten years after the adoption of Security Council
resolutions 1265 (1999) and 1296 (2000), the linkage
between civilian protection and the maintenance of
international peace and security has been firmly
established. Subsequent resolutions, including those on
women, peace and security and on children and armed
conflict, have demonstrated the Council’s resolve to
better protect civilian populations living in situations
of armed conflict, as has the Council’s regular
consideration of protection concerns and strategies in
country-specific contexts.
(spoke in French)
In his previous report, the Secretary-General
identified the overarching challenges we all must face,
as well as the crucial steps to be taken to better protect
civilians. Here, I would like to address a number of
such measures that we view as being of particular
importance.

29

S/PV.6427

First, it is important that the Council consider
comprehensive approaches to the better protection of
civilians in situations of armed conflict. We agree with
the Secretary-General that new and innovative ways
need to be identified to address country-specific
situations that are not on the Council’s formal agenda.
In doing so, the Council could send a strong message
that it is determined to take action against attacks
deliberately targeting civilian populations.
Canada strongly encourages Council members to
ensure greater consistency in terms of how the Council
addresses protection issues. In that light, the aidemémoire on the protection of civilians and the informal
group of experts are important tools that could be
drawn upon by the Council to a greater extent in order
to make well informed decisions. The aide-mémoire, in
particular, is an important guidance document that
reminds the Council of the full range of tools at its
disposal in situations where civilian populations are at
risk.
At the same time, the Council would benefit from
better defined criteria its disposal to complement the
aide-mémoire in assisting the Council in determining
when and how to intervene. That is particularly true for
those situations of which the Council is not actively
seized but where there are concerns with regard to
protection and where strategic and targeted attention by
the Security Council could yield results.
(spoke in English)
Secondly, comprehensive protection strategies
need to be fully integrated into the day-to-day work of
United Nations country teams and peacekeeping
missions. For the latter, it is important that protectionof-civilian mandates be fully considered in the
planning, resource-allocation and training stages of
missions. In that regard, we welcome ongoing efforts
by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to
develop an operational framework as called for in
resolution 1894 (2009). We strongly encourage that
Department and others to ensure that such a framework
builds on the key indicators identified in resolution
1325 (2000).
In addition, protection considerations should
ultimately inform decisions to drawdown or withdraw
United Nations peacekeeping personnel, as well as
decisions on how resources are allocated. But,
protecting civilians is not just a job for military
personnel. For all United Nations actors on the ground,

30

both civilian and military, protection strategies should
be clear, concrete and measurable, drawing on clear
indicators and benchmarks. They should also be well
coordinated with all actors — local, national and
international.
Thirdly, Canada believes that enforcing strict
accountability for those who target civilian populations
is fundamental. States must fulfil their obligations to
investigate and prosecute persons suspected of such
crimes, and, where appropriate, cooperate with
international judicial institutions to ensure that
perpetrators are brought to justice. Monitoring and
reporting mechanisms should be strengthened to ensure
that violations of international human rights and
international humanitarian law are documented and
reported to the Council. Such mechanisms can be
critical in terms of providing early warning
information leading to the implementation of effective
preventive and protective measures.
In that regard, we applaud ongoing efforts to put
in place an effective monitoring mechanism to report to
the Council instances where humanitarian access is
deliberately delayed or denied. We strongly encourage
the Council to act on such information when it is
received and to take appropriate steps to address
violent attacks against humanitarian personnel as well
as to deal with bureaucratic constraints that
deliberately hamper efforts to access those in need of
life-saving assistance.
In conclusion, the protection of civilians is
inextricably linked to the maintenance and promotion
of freedom, democracy, human rights and the rule of
law. Translating protection norms and our collective
statements of support into concrete, effective,
meaningful and measurable actions has not been and
will not be easy. It will require the ongoing and full
attention of the Council. The Government of Canada
stands ready to continue to support Council efforts on
this important issue.
Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Sir, for having convened this open debate. I
also thank the Secretary-General for his latest report on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2010/579).
Switzerland welcomes the adoption of the
presidential statement today, which reaffirms the
importance of the achievement made so far in the
protection of civilians. I would also like to warmly

10-64592

S/PV.6427

congratulate Ms. Valerie Amos on her appointment to
the post of Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator.
Over the past ten years, the activities of the
Security Council have been increasingly influenced by
the issue of the protection of civilians. Encouraging
progress has been made, especially in terms of
establishing general standards, as well as in taking into
account the specific protection needs of women and
children. Other bodies of the United Nations system
have followed the Council’s lead, showing that the
protection of civilians is by no means the prerogative
of a single body. For example, the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations has worked over the past
three years on a common definition of the strategic
framework within which a mission must perform its
tasks relating to the protection of civilians as defined
by the Security Council.
However, the impact of those developments will
have little value if they are not transformed into a
tangible improvement in civilian protection on the
ground. We therefore encourage the Security Council,
and in particular its informal group of experts on the
protection of civilians, to take that into account in their
work.
I would like to focus my remarks on four central
aspects of the report of the Secretary-General before
the Council today, which are: engagement with nonState armed groups, humanitarian access, the standards
governing the activities of private security companies,
and, lastly, the issue of the humanitarian impact of
explosive weapons.
First, Switzerland agrees with the SecretaryGeneral’s evaluation of the need for greater respect for
the law by non-State armed groups and stresses the
importance of preventing obstacles to the efforts of
humanitarian organizations in that regard. We are
concerned by the impact that the adoption of lists of
terrorist groups may have on efforts to strengthen the
protection of civilians. In our view, it is important
rather to gain a better understanding of the motivations
of non-State groups and to identify strategies to ensure
that they fully respect the law. In that connection,
Switzerland welcomes the work of the Geneva
Academy of International Humanitarian Law and
Human Rights referred to in the report.
Secondly, humanitarian access remains a crucial
element for all protection and aid activities relating to

10-64592

people affected by armed conflict and violence.
Switzerland expresses its concern with regard to the
growing restrictions on access granted to humanitarian
actors in conflict zones. We also wish to reiterate that it
is the primary responsibility of States to provide their
people with protection and aid. To do so, States must
ensure swift and unrestricted humanitarian access. In
that regard, the Security Council needs to continue in
its efforts to monitor constraints on humanitarian
access and, where necessary, take the necessary
measures to eliminate any such obstacles.
Thirdly, with regard to the normative framework
in conflict situations, private security companies are
playing an increasingly important role. It is essential
that those companies undertake to abide by and respect
international norms. We therefore welcome the recent
signature of an international code of conduct by some
60 private security companies, under which they have
committed to respect human rights and humanitarian
law in their activities. This initiative, the first of its
kind, was jointly launched by Switzerland and industry
associations. The code should be considered as just
part of a series of initiatives. Indeed, in 2008,
Switzerland and the International Committee of the
Red Cross presented the Montreux Document, which
reminds States of pertinent international obligations
and good practices related to operations of private
military and security companies during armed conflict.
In conclusion, we think it appropriate to continue
to follow the issue of explosive weapons, especially
with a view to better implementing international
humanitarian law. The use of certain explosive
weapons in densely populated areas is clearly a major
source of suffering for civilians in situations of armed
conflict. A more in-depth study could, for example,
reveal the extent to which greater protection could
limit these impacts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Reuben (Israel): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important debate. I also wish to
thank
Under-Secretary-General
Amos,
UnderSecretary-General Le Roy, High Commissioner Pillay
and Director-General Daccord for their informative
briefings.
Today’s debate raises some of the most complex
and challenging issues facing the international
community. Israel’s deep commitment to protecting

31

S/PV.6427

civilians in armed conflict is reflected by our extensive
cooperation with the International Committee of the
Red Cross and the United Nations in this area and at all
levels. It is also shown by the extraordinary efforts that
we take to avoid causing civilians harm during combat
operations.
Israel is encouraged by the continued efforts of
the Security Council and the Secretariat in this area
since July’s briefing (see S/PV.6354) and welcomes the
latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/579). We
note the considerable progress on this issue. However,
it remains clear that the international community
continues to face major challenges and difficult
operational, humanitarian and moral dilemmas in
ensuring that civilians are protected in armed conflict.
Foremost among these challenges is the new and
complex phenomenon of asymmetric warfare, which
blurs the important distinction between combatants and
civilians under the laws of armed conflict. In our
region and in many other corners of the world, regular
armies are increasingly finding themselves fighting
terrorists or guerrilla organizations that deliberately
operate within the vicinity of civilian populations.
This
phenomenon
produces
a
horrific
transformation of the civilian landscape: religious
institutions becoming launching pads for rockets and
artillery; schools and hospitals becoming storage
facilities for weapons and terrorist infrastructure; and
residential neighbourhoods becoming combat zones.
Recognizing that there are no simple solutions,
the Security Council must seriously consider the many
dilemmas inherent in asymmetric warfare. While
upholding the central value of protecting civilians in
conflict, the Council and other international bodies
cannot ignore the tragic reality in which terrorists
deliberately put innocents in harm’s way.
Israel’s experience illustrates that terrorists’
blatant disregard for protecting human life is not
restricted to the civilians of their adversary; it often
extends to their own people. In the Gaza Strip, Hamas
launches rockets and mortars at Israeli towns from
densely populated areas and cynically places its arms
and munitions in installations inside and adjacent to
mosques, hospitals and schools. Only last week, we
witnessed yet another series of rocket attacks from
Gaza designed to target and terrorize Israeli civilians.

32

In Lebanon, Hizbollah deploys weapons and
builds its military infrastructure within the fabric of
civilian life, endangering the Lebanese population. For
example, within the past 16 months, three Hizbollah
weapons caches have exploded in the villages of
southern Lebanon. The last such explosion took place
in the Lebanese village of Shehabiyya on 3 September,
causing the injury of five individuals.
Given the threats it faces on its borders, Israel —
in full conformity with its international obligations —
has sought to protect civilians while it pursues the
terrorists who hide among them. Israel’s Supreme
Court has addressed the significant challenges inherent
in balancing these two objectives during active warfare
and at times has suspended military operations to this
end. In pursuit of this goal, my country also employs
many independent oversight mechanisms and places a
humanitarian affairs officer in every combat unit above
the battalion level with the goal of minimizing
casualties and damage to civilian property.
Israel also wishes to express its continued support
for the work of humanitarian agencies that provide
essential services on the ground. In considering the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, we all must
remember that, under international humanitarian law,
the right to free movement of humanitarian personnel
is subject to military necessities and security
considerations. These considerations include the safety
of the humanitarian personnel themselves and the need
to prevent the abuse of humanitarian channels. We
cannot ignore the fact that terrorists such as Hamas
often abuse such access privileges, which can endanger
humanitarian workers and obstruct the movement of
aid.
The subject of today’s debate calls for careful
consideration about how to best protect civilians in the
face of terrorism and within the complex reality of
asymmetric warfare. For its part, Israel will continue to
share its experience in this critical debate as part of our
nation’s commitment to the rule of law and to the
fundamental value of protecting civilians.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Afghanistan.
Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): First, let me thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict — a topic of
particular importance in Afghanistan. I would also like
to thank the High Commissioner for Human Rights and

10-64592

S/PV.6427

the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
for their briefings, and welcome the recent report of the
Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict (S/2010/579).
Nine
years
ago,
the
Afghan
people
overwhelmingly supported the United States-led
intervention and joined the United States and coalition
forces in the fight against terrorism. They saw the
international military campaign as crucial to security in
the country and the region and to bringing an end to
their suffering. From 2001 to 2006, the trust and
cooperation between the Afghan people and the
international community helped the country to become
increasingly stable. However, with the re-emergence in
2006 of the Taliban from sanctuaries in the region and
its attempts to attack national and international forces,
parts of the country began to slide back into conflict.
Violence and insecurity, particularly in the past two
years, have widely affected people’s security, and
thousands of civilians have lost their lives. The
increase in the number of civilian casualties has
negatively affected the people’s trust in the prospect of
peace, security and development in the country.
Afghans are the first to feel the tragic effects of
conflict in their country. Civilian casualties are caused
mainly by intentional acts of the Taliban, Al-Qaida and
other extremist groups. Terrorists and extremists have
recently expanded the scope of their activities,
attacking all sectors of Afghan society. By resorting to
new and brutal tactics, including suicide bombings,
abductions,
targeted
assassinations
and
the
indiscriminate use of improvised explosive devices,
they show complete disregard for human life.
Furthermore, terrorists and extremists continue to
conduct attacks from densely populated areas and to
use civilians as human shields. Nevertheless, there are
also a number of unfortunate, unintended casualties
resulting from the military operations and activities of
international forces and the joint military operations of
both international and Afghan forces.
As shown in the 2010 mid-year report of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(S/2010/463), the number of civilian casualties due to
violence in my country has increased. In the first six
months of 2010, there were 3,268 civilian casualties,
including 1,271 deaths as a result of armed conflict —
or an average of over 18 civilian casualties a day. It
shows a 31 per cent increase from the same period last
year. Seventy-six per cent of the incidents were the

10-64592

result of the activities of the Taliban and Al-Qaida
terrorist groups. Six thousand civilian casualties
occurred in 2009.
In discussing civilian casualties, let us remember
that we are referring to people — to the loss of human
life, all too often of innocent women, children and
elders. Such deaths must not be looked at as merely the
consequences of ongoing violence or as collateral
damage. Each death in Afghanistan represents a life
lost, a family left behind and an entire future denied its
potential.
The protection of civilians during military
operations is our shared responsibility and an
international obligation. Increased coordination
between international and Afghan forces during
military operations and greater cooperation between
the international community and the Afghan
Government are necessary for ensuring the safety and
security of civilian populations.
This is an important issue that has long been a
crucial point of discussion with Afghanistan’s
international partners. My Government has called on
international forces to take measures necessary to
minimize or eliminate civilian casualties. We
appreciate the NATO commanders’ commitment to
give a central place to the protection of civilians in
their new military strategy. We hope that further
necessary steps will be taken in this regard so as to
safeguard the lives and rights of Afghan civilians,
particularly in the areas affected by conflict.
To protect the lives of civilians, Afghanistan is
committed to working with the international
community to achieve lasting peace and stability in the
country. The protection of civilians must be placed in
the context of the emerging transition, in which Afghan
national forces will begin to assume full responsibility
by 2014.
Just this weekend at the NATO summit in Lisbon,
we embarked on the transition from an internationally
guided process to an Afghan-led one. Security is at the
core of this transition. It is essential that NATO and our
international partners enhance training for Afghan
security forces in order to ensure enduring security and
consequently the elimination of civilian casualties. The
transition is happening while the enemy is attempting
to disrupt the Government’s activities and continuing
its attacks on the Afghan people and Government and
the international forces. As the Afghan Government

33

S/PV.6427

seeks to prepare itself to take on the responsibility for
leading security efforts, the continuing support of the
Afghan people for our shared efforts and their active
participation in the stabilization process are crucial to
success.
The protection and promotion of the rights of
civilians should be among the top priorities of the
international engagement in Afghanistan. In his address
to the heads of State at the NATO summit in Lisbon,
President Karzai said,
“We are in dialogue with the International
Security Assistance Force on issues of serious
concern to the Afghan people, in particular:
civilian casualties, detentions, lawless behavior
by some security companies and, at times,
NATO’s posture. We need the space to discuss
these issues and resolve them in a spirit of
collaboration and teamwork. The sustainable
solution to these issues will, of course, come
from the realization of our common objective of
replacing international forces with Afghan
security forces.”
We are of the conviction that civilian protection
is not confined to preventing civilian casualties.
Ending the loss of civilians requires the establishment
of lasting peace and stability. The recent Joint
Coordination and Monitoring Board’s progress report
on the Afghanistan National Development Strategy,
covering the first 100 days after the Kabul Conference,
rightly points out that we have achieved more success
in improving security. Afghanistan has completed 89
per cent of planned activities in the area of security and
has exceeded expectations in the growth of the national
army and national police.
In addition to military efforts, the Afghan
Government is engaged in a comprehensive outreach
initiative aimed at achieving lasting peace and security.
The Afghan-led peace process calls on the Taliban to
lay down their arms and join the peace process and
reconciliation efforts. Engaging the armed opposition
in peace talks, creating Afghanistan’s High Peace
Council and selecting 60 members for it are significant
steps towards strengthening peace and reconciliation
efforts. Our national reconciliation process is based on
our growing responsibility for the promotion of human
rights, building trust and continuing outreach to the
people of Afghanistan.

34

Going forward, the issue of protecting civilians in
armed conflict will continue to be central to our
national efforts. Today’s meeting reminds us of the
importance of civilians in the overall work of the
United Nations and the international community’s
efforts in general. We look forward to further
collaboration with our international partners in
achieving our ultimate objective: ending violence and
attaining lasting peace. The success of our joint efforts
is the best way to ensure the protection of civilians.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Mr.
Quinlan
(Australia):
Thank
you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to address the
Council on a decisive issue that goes to the core of the
Council’s role in maintaining international peace and
security and building the defences of peace. This, of
course, is the issue of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. I would like to thank the United
Kingdom for convening this debate, and the
introductory speakers this morning for their
presentations.
My statement today will obviously not be able to
do justice to all the challenges presented in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2010/579), so I would
like to briefly draw attention to three issues.
First, we need to ensure there is greater
compliance with international humanitarian law.
Australia is concerned about the increased
indiscriminate targeting of civilians with explosive
weapons, including improvised explosive devices
(IEDs). The most recent Secretary-General’s report on
the situation in Afghanistan (S/2010/463) reported an
82 per cent increase in IED incidents, which is an
alarming trend. We support the Secretary-General’s
recommendation for further systematic data collection
and analysis of the human costs of the use of explosive
weapons.
Secondly, we support the Secretary-General’s call
to move away from a selective approach to addressing
the protection of civilians. We must acknowledge that
peacekeeping is but one tool at the disposal of the
Council in protecting civilians. The most effective way,
of course, is to prevent the conflict in the first place.
In this vein, we welcomed the initiative of the
United Kingdom earlier this month in convening a
meeting of the Council with Under-Secretary-General

10-64592

S/PV.6427

Pascoe at the start of the month to provide a briefing
on global hotspots. The Council, as members know
better than I, has a heavy, labour-intensive agenda each
month — much of it predetermined through regular
mandate renewals, reviews of reports by the SecretaryGeneral, thematic reviews. We think that an early,
focused briefing on hotspots, such as was undertaken
this month, should better prepare the Council to
anticipate trouble and take action as required to prevent
conflict and to protect civilians.
Thirdly, I would like to discuss an issue on which
Australia has been particularly active. Uniformed
components of peacekeeping missions need guidelines
to
implement
protection-of-civilians
mandates.
Guidelines are necessary to enable troop and police
contingents to understand their responsibilities and
adequately prepare and execute protection-of-civilians
mandates. Guidelines will assist peacekeepers in their
engagement with the local population, their
anticipation of threats and the assessment of the use of
force and deterrence permissible under the mandate.
The development of guidelines will also assist in
determining the necessary resources and capabilities
and the overall management of expectations.
Australia has been pleased by the considerable
progress that has been made during the last 18 months
in this area. We are encouraged by the development of
a strategic framework to guide senior mission
leadership in the development of mission-specific
strategies on the protection of civilians, following a
request by the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations earlier this year. We look forward to cohosting, with Uruguay, another workshop here in New
York on 6 December to enable discussion between the
Secretariat and Member States on that framework. We
have also been pleased to contribute in a small way to
the work under way to develop African Union (AU)
guidelines on protection of civilians, as referenced in
the Secretary-General’s report. We will continue to
assist the AU in that endeavour.
Despite some progress, much work obviously and
inevitably remains to be done. Public information
strategies are needed to manage international and local
expectations regarding the ability of a peacekeeping
mission to protect civilians, including the reality that
peacekeepers cannot possibly protect everyone,
everywhere, all of the time. Australia encourages
United Nations missions to develop risk mitigation
strategies where insufficient resources are available to

10-64592

physically protect all civilians. As examples, those
could include visits to areas within missions where
there is not a permanent United Nations presence, the
establishment of mechanisms to encourage dialogue
with the local population and the establishment of
effective communication mechanisms to provide early
warning, as is already the practice in some missions.
The use of benchmarks in peacekeeping mission
mandates is an important tool for the articulation of the
Council’s expectations. Benchmarks on the protection
of civilians need to be included from the mission outset,
should include effective indicators to measure progress
and need to be used as a basis for determining when a
peacekeeping mission may draw down. To support
such initiatives, as requested in resolution 1894 (2009),
there also needs to be a comprehensive and consistent
approach to reporting on protection of civilian issues as
part of peacekeeping operations.
To conclude, we welcome the presidential
statement that was adopted at the start of today’s
debate (S/PRST/2010/25). As we know, the majority of
casualties in a conflict are civilians. The Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, the preceding speaker,
has just reminded us very well of what that means: the
loss of life. As the Secretary-General’s own report says,
the unstinting and rigorous attention of the Council to
the protection of civilians remains vital and must be at
the centre of not just its deliberations, but more
decisively, of course, its actions.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): I have the pleasure to
address the Security Council on behalf of the NonAligned Movement, and to start by expressing the
Movement’s appreciation to you, Sir, for having
organized this debate. I also wish to thank Baroness
Valerie
Amos,
Under-Secretary-General
for
Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Alain Le Roy, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Ms. Navanethem Pillay, High Commissioner for
Human Rights, and Mr. Yves Daccord, DirectorGeneral of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, for their briefings today.
Despite all the efforts exerted by the United
Nations, including the Security Council, civilians
around the world are still suffering in massive numbers.
The measures adopted so far have proved to fall short
of addressing the wider implications of attacks against
civilians, their impact on international peace and
security and their humanitarian impacts. The Secretary-

35

S/PV.6427

General’s report (S/2010/579) prepared on this topic
and submitted pursuant to resolution 1894 (2009) also
highlights ongoing and emerging concerns regarding
the state of the protection of civilians, such as the
proliferation and fragmentation of non-State armed
groups, the displacement of civilians within and across
borders, the continued violence and hardship that
women and children face during conflict and the
continued existence of a culture of impunity.
In that regard, the Non-Aligned Movement
believes that due priority should continue to be given
to promoting knowledge of, respect for and observance
of States’ obligations assumed under the United
Nations Charter and international, international human
rights and international humanitarian law, in particular
the four Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their 1977
Protocols. We call upon all parties to armed conflicts to
redouble their efforts to comply with their legal
obligations by, inter alia, prohibiting the targeting of
civilian populations, civilian property and certain
special property during armed conflict, and by obliging
parties to any conflict to ensure general protection
against threats to civilian installations, hospitals, relief
materials, means of transportation and the distribution
of such relief materials arising from military operations.
The Movement reiterates its condemnation of the
increasing attacks on the safety and security of
humanitarian personnel, and urges the Governments of
United Nations Member States to ensure respect for the
protection of the personnel of humanitarian
organizations, in conformity with the relevant
provisions of international law. In the meantime, we
reaffirm that humanitarian agencies and their personnel
should respect international humanitarian law and the
laws of the countries where they operate, the guiding
principles of humanitarian assistance set forth in
General Assembly resolution 46/182 and its annex and
the principle of non-interference in the cultural,
religious and other values of the population in the
countries where they operate.
Furthermore, in the peacekeeping context, the
Non-Aligned Movement stresses that the protection of
civilians under imminent threat of physical violence is
the primary responsibility of each host country of any
peacekeeping operation. It further stresses that relevant
peacekeeping missions with such a mandate should
conduct their tasks without prejudice to the primary
responsibility of the host Government to protect
civilians. The successful conduct of tasks relating to

36

the protection of civilians, wherever a United Nations
mandate exists, requires a holistic approach that
encompasses the provision of timely and adequate
resources, logistical support and the required training,
as well as clearly defined and achievable mandates.
The principle of consent of the host State as a
founding principle of peacekeeping must be fully
respected. That requires open political discussions
between senior mission leadership and national
authorities, as well as follow-up on how to implement
all mandated tasks, including the protection of civilians.
Moreover, the Movement raises doubts regarding
a number of the recommendations of the November
2009 independent study, entitled Protecting Civilians
in the Context of United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations, jointly commissioned by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
Department for Peacekeeping Operations. The
Movement underlines that any suggestions or
recommendations in that area must be addressed in a
comprehensive and holistic approach, taking into
account the need to provide all necessary capabilities
and resources for the implementation of protection
mandates given by the Security Council to United
Nations peacekeeping operations in a timely and
efficient manner. That must also be done while
refraining from using the concept of the protection of
civilians as a pretext for military intervention in armed
conflicts by the United Nations, especially considering
the limited resources that are currently available to
peacekeeping operations to fulfil their original
mandates and the existing legal challenges in
identifying who the civilians that peacekeepers would
protect are and how to differentiate between them and
insurgents in some areas of operations.
In that context, the role of peacekeeping missions
as protection actors needs more clarification, including
from the conceptual and operational aspects. Further
in-depth political discussion on how to enable
peacekeepers to better fulfil their protection tasks is
needed, bearing in mind that peacekeepers cannot
protect everyone everywhere.
The Non-Aligned Movement condemns Israel’s
continued violations against Palestinian civilians in the
occupied Palestinian territory in breach of international,
international humanitarian and international human
rights law, as well as United Nations resolutions. The
Movement stresses the need to provide protection for

10-64592

S/PV.6427

Palestinian civilians in the West Bank, the Gaza Strip
and Jerusalem against grave human rights violations by
Israel, including the use of excessive and
indiscriminate force, which has killed or injured
thousands of Palestinian civilians, including children,
and has caused vast destruction of property,
infrastructure and agricultural land.
Also in that context, the Secretary-General’s
report expands, in an unjustified manner, the definition
and scope of the term armed conflict to include in that
definition situations that are not considered armed
conflicts according to the United Nations Charter and
international law. In the meantime, the report ignores
some other situations that are internationally
recognized as clear violations of international and
international humanitarian law, such as the tragic
incident of the humanitarian flotilla attacked on the
high seas despite its humanitarian nature.
Let me conclude by reiterating the importance of
the role of the Security Council, with regard both to
more effective involvement in the protection of
civilians in conflict situations and to focusing on the
importance of accountability and the need to
investigate violations of international humanitarian law
and putting an end to impunity. The Non-Aligned
Movement believes that the Council should alter its
practice and attach priority to providing protection to
civilian populations in imminent danger in conflict
situations at an early stage, and separate those actions
from Council discussions on the controversial political
dimensions of the conflict. In that way, as many lives
of affected civilians trapped between combatants in
conflict areas as possible could be saved.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): Mr. President, let me
begin by joining previous speakers in extending our
appreciation to you for convening this open debate.
We thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2010/579). We are also grateful to the UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, the UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, the
High Commissioner for Human Rights and the Director
General of the International Committee of the Red
Cross for their respective briefings.

10-64592

My delegation associates itself with the statement
just delivered by the representative of Egypt on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Notwithstanding the pronounced focus on the
issue of the protection of civilians in armed conflicts
over the past decade, the deplorable fact remains:
civilians continue to fall victim to violence. Persistent
violations occur that include deliberate targeting of
civilians, the indiscriminate and excessive use of force,
sexual and gender-based violence, and attacks against
relief workers and humanitarian aid convoys, all in
violation of international law, human rights law and
refugee law.
However, we States Members of the United
Nations are adamant about respecting and promoting
the core principles of the Organization. Human life and
human dignity must be at the forefront of our
consideration, be that in time of peace or, more
importantly, in time of war. That is the core goal of the
United Nations. That objective has led us to evoke and
build an elaborate architecture for the protection of
civilians. That in turn has laid the foundation for the
further proliferation of initiatives and measures at the
regional and global level.
Allow me to express three points on the
Secretary-General’s first report to stem from resolution
1894 (2009).
First, the Council’s framework requires a
comprehensive approach that embodies the three pillars
of the United Nations, namely, human rights,
development and security. The report makes a strong
case for the link among human rights, humanitarian
relief and security efforts. However, there is little
mention of development efforts in the report. We can
argue that development is not within the purview of the
Council. For that matter, neither are human rights and
humanitarian issues. They are not, strictly speaking,
within the Security Council’s mandate. Thus, because
we wish to see consistency in the application of the
three pillars mentioned earlier, we hope that the next
report will also highlight the development aspect. We
Members of the United Nations must have a complete
picture of the situation on the ground.
Capacity-building to resolve and deter possible
conflicts is an important part of the normative
framework to protect civilians. For that reason, we
support the report’s recommendation to increase
funding for humanitarian and development actors in

37

S/PV.6427

the context of the drawdown of United Nations
peacekeeping and other relevant operations.
Secondly, peacekeepers need to be provided with
the resources required to fulfil their mandated tasks.
The United Nations should provide a well-defined
benchmark for the ratio of peacekeepers to civilians in
the assigned areas of deployment. And there is a need
to provide peacekeeping missions with appropriate
guidelines on the protection of civilians.
We need to continue this dialogue across regions.
In line with paragraph 34 of resolution 1894 (2009), on
consultation and cooperation across the regions, we
recently collaborated with the Government of Norway
to organize a regional workshop in Jakarta on
international humanitarian law and the protection of
civilians. It was the first of a series of regional
workshops, with two others planned for 2011, one in
Africa and the other in Latin America. The goal was to
enhance understanding of the application of
international humanitarian law in light of the
contemporary challenges we face.
Thirdly, the Geneva Conventions are the
underpinnings of international humanitarian law. The
report alludes to cases where humanitarian relief work
is impeded, which has led to mounting demands that
Member States be made accountable. We note that
approach, but accountability will fail to bear fruit
unless Member States have the capacity to deliver on
their responsibilities. Such capacity can be delivered
through international cooperation. That is the logic of
cooperation and accountability.

38

States that have capacity must be held
accountable. The report clearly describes that Israel has
not fully lifted its so-called bureaucratic restrictions
that continue to impede the implementation of a
humanitarian response commensurate with the existing
humanitarian need. Israel has the capacity to fulfil its
international obligations, and therefore Israel must be
held accountable.
We value the Security Council’s continued efforts
to protect civilians in situations of armed conflict in a
way
consistent
with
its
Charter-mandated
responsibilities. We believe that while the best
protection from armed conflict is found in the
prevention and resolution of conflict, in the absence of
peace we must remain vigilant as to the impact of
conflict on the civilian population. We must do our best
to protect civilians and minimize human suffering and
death.
Having said that, let me conclude by stressing
that Indonesia values human rights, we value security
and we value development. That triangle of goals must
be preserved and promoted so that we can
unremittingly honour civilians in armed conflict.
The President: There are still a number of
speakers remaining on my list for this meeting. I intend,
therefore, with the concurrence of Council members, to
suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.15 p.m.

10-64592
