United Nations

A/53/PV.78

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-third Session

78th plenary meeting
Thursday, 3 December 1998, 3.00 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Opertti . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Uruguay)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Mra (Myanmar),
Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Agenda item 18
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
Report of the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples (A/53/23 (Parts
I–IX))
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/53/368,
A/53/130 and Corr.1)
Draft resolutions (A/53/L.58, A/53/23 (Part II),
Chapter III, para. 12)
The Acting President: I call on the Rapporteur of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to
introduce the Committee’s report.
Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic), Rapporteur of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples: I have the

98-86608 (E)

honour to present to the General Assembly for its
consideration the report of the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples, covering its work during 1998, as
contained in document A/53/23, parts I–IX.
The report is being submitted in accordance with
paragraph 11 of resolution 52/78, regarding the
implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. The
Assembly requested the Special Committee to continue to
seek suitable means for the full implementation of the
Declaration and, in particular, to formulate specific
proposals for the elimination of the remaining
manifestations of colonialism. It also called upon the
Committee to continue to examine the implementation of
the Declaration by Member States, pay special attention
to the small Territories, particularly by dispatching regular
visiting missions, to enable them to exercise their right to
self-determination and independence, and to enlist
worldwide support for the achievement of the objectives
of the Declaration. Furthermore, in keeping with General
Assembly resolution 46/181, entitled “International
Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism”, the Special
Committee was also mandated to undertake a series of
activities, including organizing seminars in the Caribbean
and the Pacific regions, alternately, during the Decade.
During the last year, the Special Committee held
extensive consultations, keeping in mind the particular
and specific requests of the General Assembly just

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned, within one month of the date of the meeting, to the Chief of the Verbatim
Reporting Service, Room C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a
consolidated corrigendum.

General Assembly
Fifty-third session
outlined. The Committee reviewed the implementation of
the Declaration with a view to formulating a series of
recommendations to enhance the pace of decolonization and
promote political, economic, social and educational
advancement of the peoples in the remaining Territories. To
do so, it acceded to the requests of Spain to participate in
its proceedings on the question of Gibraltar, of Brazil and
Sao Tome and Principe in the consideration of the question
of East Timor, and of the delegations of Argentina, Brazil
and Paraguay in the proceedings on the question of the
Falkland Islands (Malvinas).
With regard to the question of the list of Territories to
which the Declaration is applicable, the Committee decided
to continue to review this issue at its next session, subject
to any directives given by the General Assembly.
Having resolved to rationalize the organization of its
work, the Committee kept its formal meetings to a
minimum. The members held 17 meetings between
February and May and also convened a session from 29
June to 13 July. It maintained the arrangement by which its
Subcommittee and its Working Group were replaced by an
Open-ended Bureau. In the time-frame agreed to, the
Special Committee discharged the responsibilities assigned
by the Assembly and submitted its recommendations on all
items entrusted to it, which are contained in parts II–IX of
the report before the General Assembly contained in
document A/53/23.

78th plenary meeting
3 December 1998
1998, the Committee heard representatives of 29
organizations, as detailed in the report presented to the
Assembly. Following the consideration of this item, the
Committee adopted a draft resolution, contained in
document A/AC.109/2131, which, inter alia, reaffirms the
inalienable right of the people of Puerto Rico to selfdetermination and independence, and expresses the hope
that the Government of the United States will assume its
responsibility of expediting this process. It also requests
the Rapporteur to present a report to the Special
Committee next year on the implementation of this draft
resolution.
The Special Committee also decided to consider an
item entitled “Matters relating to the small Territories”
and took into account the provisions of relevant
resolutions — including resolution 52/78, paragraph 11
(c), which requests the Special Committee to pay special
attention to the small Territories, in particular through the
dispatch of regular visiting missions. During the period
under review, this question was given extensive
consideration, as noted in chapters X to XII of the present
report.

In particular, I would like to draw the Assembly’s
attention to document A/53/23, part II, paragraph 12, which
contains the draft resolution on the dissemination of
information on decolonization, adopted by the Special
Committee and recommended to the General Assembly for
adoption. The Special Committee also considered carrying
out a critical review of its work and may wish to convene
a meeting in the near future to do so. The Acting Chairman
presented a paper, which is annexed to the report of the
Special Committee (A/AC.109/L.1886), to facilitate the
consultations on the intended approach for such an
assessment.

In regard to its programme of work for 1999, the
Special Committee considered the question of holding a
series of meetings away from Headquarters, as authorized
by the General Assembly. It decided that it would
consider accepting invitations as might be received in
1999, and thereafter, request the Secretary-General to seek
the necessary budgetary provision in accordance with
established procedure. Following the guidelines on the
pattern of conferences, in particular resolution 52/214 of
22 December 1997, and taking into account its probable
workload for 1999, the Special Committee decided to
strive to fulfil its mandate by keeping its meetings to a
minimum. This would entail holding its plenary meetings
in February/March 1999 and up to 30 meetings in
June/July. The Bureau expects to hold some 20 meetings
between February and July 1999. This would not preclude
any ad hoc meetings that may be warranted and is subject
to any directives given by the General Assembly.

By adopting the suggestions put forward by the
Chairman relating to the organization of its work, the
Special Committee decided to take up as appropriate an
item entitled “Special Committee decision of 15 August
1991 concerning Puerto Rico”, and to consider that issue in
its plenary. A number of recommendations were received
from organizations that expressed their wish to be heard by
the Special Committee on this subject. This request was
acceded to by the Committee, and on 10 and 11 August

I draw the Assembly’s attention to the question of
cooperation and participation of the administering Powers
in the work of the Special Committee. I would like to
report that the delegations of New Zealand and Portugal
continued to participate in the related aspect of the
Committee’s work and that the delegation of France
participated in the consideration of the question of New
Caledonia. Though the delegations of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and the United

2

General Assembly
Fifty-third session
States of America, did not participate in the work of the
Committee, as a result of informal consultations held during
the fifty-first session of the General Assembly and the
adoption of resolutions 51/224 and 52/77 on small
Territories, both administering Powers expressed their
desire to continue an informal dialogue with the Special
Committee.
The Special Committee continues to call upon the
administering Powers to cooperate or continue to cooperate
with the United Nations by receiving visiting missions in
the Territories under their administration. The Special
Committee recommends that the General Assembly again
request the administering Powers to cooperate or continue
to cooperate with the Special Committee in the discharge of
its mandate.
The Special Committee has also decided that the
participation of representatives of Non-Self-Governing
Territories in its work should continue. Further, it
recommends to the General Assembly that the Committee
should continue to be represented at seminars, meetings and
conferences organized by United Nations bodies and other
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations
active in the field of decolonization.
During the year, the Chairman of the Special
Committee held consultations with the President of the
Economic and Social Council to consider appropriate
measures for coordinating policies and activities of the
specialized agencies in implementing the relevant
resolutions; this is accounted for in chapter VII of the
present report. In its consideration of the Territories
concerned, the Special Committee took into account the
relevant resolutions adopted by the Commission on Human
Rights, including resolutions on the question of Western
Sahara and the situation in East Timor. It also continued to
follow the work of the Committee on the Elimination of
Racial Discrimination and to monitor related developments
in the Territories.
The Committee maintained contact with the
Organization of African Unity and the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM) during the year, and it continues
to follow the work of the South Pacific Forum and the
activities of non-governmental organizations which have a
special interest in decolonization. The Acting Chairman
represented the Special Committee at the Ministerial
Meeting of the Coordinating Bureau of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries, held in Cartagena de Indias,
Colombia, in May as well as the Ministerial Meeting of the

78th plenary meeting
3 December 1998
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Durban in
August.
The Special Committee held a regional seminar at
Nadi, Fiji, in June 1998 in implementation of the Plan of
Action for the International Decade for the Eradication of
Colonialism. The outcome is presented in chapter II of
the report. The question-and-answer session promoted at
that meeting was particularly useful in promoting an open
and frank discussion of issues. The Committee has also
adopted a resolution which makes recommendations to the
General Assembly on the question of the publicity to be
given to the work of the United Nations in the field of
decolonization, outlined in chapter III of this report.
In accordance with its mandate, the Special
Committee intends to continue to pursue the speedy and
unconditional end of colonialism in all its forms during
1999. It will endeavour to examine its own work critically
and assess the effectiveness of its activities and the areas
in which it can improve. In particular, it is gratified that
the informal consultations held with the administering
Powers — the United Kingdom and the United States —
and the European Union, concluded in an agreement on
the consolidated draft resolution on small Territories and
the draft resolution on economic and other activities
which affect the peoples of Non-Self-Governing
Territories, respectively. The Assembly may wish to
renew its appeal to all States, the specialized agencies and
other organizations of the United Nations system to
comply with the various requests addressed to them by
the General Assembly and the Security Council.
The Special Committee has approved a tentative
programme of meetings for 1999 and commends it to the
Assembly for approval. It also suggests that the Assembly
would examine the question of the implementation of the
Declaration by taking into account the various
recommendations reflected in the present report and
would endorse the proposals outlined in order to enable
the Special Committee to carry out the tasks it envisages
for 1999.
As the International Decade for the Eradication of
Colonialism approaches its last two years, much has been
achieved, but much remains to be done. The Special
Committee will make a renewed and concerted effort to
meet its goals by working closely with the Territories, the
administering Powers, the specialized agencies and other
organizations of the United Nations system, the nongovernmental organizations and the wider international community.

3

General Assembly
Fifty-third session

78th plenary meeting
3 December 1998

We call upon each of them to cooperate fully with the
Special Committee to formulate concrete mechanisms,
appropriate procedures and legislation to complete the
processes required for the implementation of the
Declaration by the populations of the remaining Non-SelfGoverning Territories by the end of this decade and achieve
our ultimate goal of ushering in, in the twenty-first century,
a world free from colonialism.

Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, introducing the report of the Special Committee.
In its report, the Special Committee has made a number
of recommendations to the Assembly for its consideration
and action. These recommendations represent the
considered contribution of the Committee to the efforts of
the United Nations to eradicate the last remnants of
colonialism from the face of the earth.

Before concluding, allow me to express to all the
members of the Special Committee and in particular Acting
Chairman Ambassador Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla of Cuba,
as well as Vice-Chairman Ambassador Moctar Ouane of
Mali, my appreciation for their assistance, support and
cooperation.

Today I am speaking, on behalf of the sponsors, to
introduce draft resolution A/53/L.58 for consideration by
the General Assembly. This draft resolution addresses the
issue of the implementation of the Declaration adopted by
the Assembly 38 years ago and refers specifically to the
responsibility entrusted by the Assembly to the Special
Committee for monitoring the fulfilment of the letter and
the spirit of the Declaration by the parties concerned.

Finally, may I extend the Committee’s appreciation
and gratitude also to the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi
Annan, for giving priority to and establishing a stand-alone
Decolonization Unit in the Department of Political Affairs
and giving it substantive responsibilities for the programme
on decolonization. I also thank Ms. Maria Maldonado,
Chief of the Decolonization Unit, as well as Mr.
Mohammad Sattar, Secretary of the Special Committee,
along with their respective substantive and technical
secretariats, in both the departments of Political Affairs and
General Assembly Affairs, for their professional advice and
assistance in facilitating my task as Rapporteur.
On behalf of the Committee, I commend the report to
the attention of the General Assembly.
The Acting President: I now call on the
representative of Cuba to introduce draft resolution
A/53/L.58.
Mr. Rodríguez Parrilla (Cuba) (interpretation from
Spanish): It is a great honour for me to address the General
Assembly as it begins its consideration of the question of
the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. In my
capacity as Acting Chairman of the Special Committee on
the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples during the current year, I have been
privileged to serve the Special Committee and conduct its
deliberations, the results of which are duly reflected in the
report contained in document A/53/23, parts I–IX.
The General Assembly has just heard a statement by
the Rapporteur of the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the

4

When the Special Committee was established by
General Assembly resolution 1654 (XVI), the Assembly
requested it to examine the application of the Declaration,
to make suggestions and recommendations on the
progress and extent of the implementation and to report
thereon to the Assembly. The Assembly also directed the
Special Committee to carry out its task by using all the
means at its disposal within the framework of the
procedures and modalities that it adopted for the proper
discharge of its functions. The Assembly invited the
authorities concerned to afford the Special Committee
their fullest cooperation in carrying out its tasks and
requested the specialized agencies concerned to assist the
Special Committee in its work within their respective
fields.
Thirty-eight years later, the Special Committee
continues to carry out conscientiously the mandate it
received from the Assembly in 1961. Despite the
significant progress achieved, the decolonization process
has not been concluded.
By the terms of the draft resolution, the General
Assembly would recall and reaffirm previous resolutions
on decolonization, including resolution 43/47, which
declared the decade that began in 1990 as the
International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism in
all Territories that have not yet exercised their right to
self-determination, including independence. The Assembly
would also reaffirm its determination to continue to take
all steps necessary to bring about the complete, speedy
and unconditional eradication of colonialism and the
faithful observance by all States of the relevant provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations, the Declaration on

General Assembly
Fifty-third session
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
By adopting this draft resolution, the Assembly would
approve the report of the Special Committee covering its
work during 1998 and the programme of work envisaged
for 1999. In this connection, the Special Committee would
continue to seek suitable means of ensuring the immediate
and full implementation of the Declaration and also carry
out actions approved by the Assembly in connection with
the International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism.
The Special Committee would continue to formulate
proposals for the elimination of the remaining
manifestations of colonialism and would report to the
General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session.

78th plenary meeting
3 December 1998
Territories. The Assembly would also call upon the
administering Powers that have not participated in the
work of the Special Committee to do so at its 1999
session. I should like to point out that during 1998 New
Zealand and Portugal continued their cooperation with the
Special Committee. Furthermore, for the first time, France
attended meetings of the Special Committee and provided
valuable information regarding the historic signing of the
Nouméa Accord and its implications for New Caledonia.
As Acting Chairman of the Special Committee, I carried
out consultations with the administering Powers regarding
sending future visiting missions to the Territories, and I
remain hopeful that our future dialogue with the
administering Powers will include an agreement on this
point.

The Special Committee has indicated that it will
endeavour to look at its own work critically, carrying out
an assessment of the effectiveness of its activities and the
areas in which it can make improvements. Such a review is
made all the more necessary as we approach the end of the
International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism.
The commitment of the Special Committee and the United
Nations to fulfilling the aims of the Decade so as to
achieve a world free of colonial domination must be
expressed in concrete, purposeful efforts. The principles of
the Charter regarding Non-Self-Governing Territories are as
relevant today as they were at the inception of the United
Nations, and great strides have already been made in the
implementation of the 1960 Declaration. Nevertheless, more
can be done in the future to accelerate the process of
decolonization. The goals of the 1960 Declaration are
achievable, and they require the cooperation of the
administering Powers with the Special Committee. We hope
that in 1999 such cooperation will take us a long way
towards achieving those goals.

On many occasions the Special Committee has
expressed its readiness to engage in constructive dialogue
with the administering Powers, as it considers that their
cooperation is indispensable for progress towards the full
implementation of the 1960 Declaration. During 1998
members of the Special Committee had the opportunity to
hold informal consultations that proved useful in reaching
significant agreed recommendations that were submitted
to the General Assembly, including recommendations
regarding New Caledonia, Tokelau and Guam.

By the terms of the draft resolution, the Special
Committee would also continue to pay special attention to
the small Territories, in particular by dispatching visiting
missions to secure first-hand information and to ascertain
the wishes and aspirations of these Territories’ inhabitants.
It would also take steps to enlist worldwide support from
Governments and from national and international
organizations for the achievement of the objectives of the
1960 Declaration and other relevant resolutions of the
United Nations.

Lastly, the draft resolution requests the SecretaryGeneral to provide the Special Committee with the
facilities and services required to carry out its mandate in
implementing the resolutions and decisions on
decolonization adopted by the General Assembly and the
Special Committee.

By the terms of the draft resolution, the Assembly
would call upon the administering Powers to continue to
cooperate with the Special Committee in the discharge of
its mandate and continue to receive visiting missions to the

Draft resolution A/53/L.58 also requests the
Secretary-General, the specialized agencies and other
organizations of the United Nations system to provide
economic, social and other assistance to the Non-SelfGoverning Territories. Such assistance is necessary above
all for the small island Territories, which are affected by
their small size, small populations, geographic
remoteness, limited natural resources and vulnerability to
natural disasters.

The States members of the European Union have
informally presented to the sponsors various amendments
to draft resolution A/53/L.58, and although we have
begun consultations in that regard, the lack of adequate
time made it impossible to consider those amendments in
depth. Given the scope of the amendments for a text that
has existed for more than five years, some of which have
direct implications for the programme of work of the

5

General Assembly
Fifty-third session

78th plenary meeting
3 December 1998

Special Committee of 24, the recommendations would have
to be duly discussed within the Special Committee itself in
order for it to take the appropriate decisions.

My delegation commends the Committee of 24. Its
success in the task assigned to it is universally recognized
and appreciated by all.

The draft resolution that we are presenting this year is
therefore substantively similar to the texts that the General
Assembly has adopted by broad majority over the last few
years.

Despite this success, however, we still have many
Non-Self-Governing Territories today under one form of
colonial administration or another. Indeed, precisely
because of the nature of most of these Territories, which
are basically small in size and population, as well as less
endowed with natural resources, the role of the United
Nations in ensuring that they attain their independence by
the end of this decade has become more critical.

The sponsoring delegations welcome the European
Union’s initiative with a view to moving towards greater
concertation on these issues, and we hope that this will
mark the beginning of a constructive and transparent
process in that direction. The General Assembly can rely on
the greatest possible willingness and constructive spirit on
the part of the Special Committee.
I would like to point out that during 1998 the Special
Committee received appropriate substantive and technical
support from the Secretariat and has had at its disposal
adequate resources to carry out its activities. In this respect,
I would like to express to the Secretary-General, on behalf
of the Special Committee, our appreciation and our
satisfaction with the arrangements made to assist the
Special Committee in the fulfilment of its mandate. In order
for the Special Committee to continue to work smoothly, it
is essential for such services and facilities to continue to be
provided.
In conclusion, I would like to ask all Member States
to consider positively the recommendations contained in the
draft resolution before them on the implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples. This would be an expression of
support for the principled efforts of the United Nations to
put an effective, speedy and unconditional end to
colonialism in all its forms and manifestations.
Mr. Ayewoh (Nigeria): The consideration by the
General Assembly at its fifty-third session of agenda item
18, “Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples”, could not
have come at a better time. The historic Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, which was adopted in 1960, has tremendously
changed the membership and composition of the United
Nations, as well as the conduct of relations among States.
My delegation attaches great importance to this agenda
item, partly out of its historical experience as a former
colonial territory and also out of a principled position
regarding the rights of peoples to control their own destiny.

6

My delegation believes that these factors
notwithstanding, it is only fair and just that the
administering Powers give the indigenous peoples of these
Territories the opportunity to decide whether or not they
wish to be independent. This should be done under
internationally recognized due process with the close
supervision of the United Nations.
The declaration of this decade as the International
Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism underscores the
fervent desire of the General Assembly to put the issue of
colonialism behind it within a reasonable time-frame.
In this regard, my delegation wishes to reiterate its
support for the work of the Special Committee on
Decolonization. We will continue to cooperate with it in
its endeavour to implement its objective of bringing an
end to the era of colonialism by the year 2000. We
welcome the measures adopted for the dissemination of
information on decolonization in the Non-Self-Governing
Territories and commend the efforts of the United Nations
in the coordination of development assistance to these
Territories by the specialized agencies. We deplore the
activities of some foreign economic and other interests
which are impeding the full implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence in these
Territories.
Experience has taught all of us, especially those of
us from formerly colonized countries, that for
decolonization and self-government to be of any value to
colonial peoples, it must be pursued simultaneously with
concrete social, economic and political development
measures. Assistance should be given to the colonial
Territories to help establish the sound economic
foundations and good political education necessary to
carry the responsibilities of self-government. The United
Nations specialized agencies should therefore increase

General Assembly
Fifty-third session
development assistance programmes to these Territories,
especially in human resource development.
As we approach the new millennium, let all the
peoples of the world rededicate themselves to the complete
eradication of colonialism. The Nigeria delegation has
worked and will continue to work with the United Nations
and its agencies to ensure the full implementation of
General Assembly resolution 46/181 on the International
Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism. We will
continue to cooperate closely with other delegations to
ensure the attainment of this noble goal.
Mr. Ovia (Papua New Guinea): I thank you, Sir, for
giving me the opportunity to make some general comments
regarding all the items before the General Assembly for
consideration today, and especially those under the mandate
of the Special Political Committee on Decolonization, the
Committee of 24.
Papua New Guinea’s position and views regarding all
these issues are well known to the members of the General
Assembly and therefore I do not intend to repeat them
again at this time.
I would, however, like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute to and congratulate the Chairman of the Special
Political and Decolonization Committee (the Fourth
Committee), Mr. Pablo Macedo, and his Bureau for the
exceptional efforts they have made in completing the work
of that Committee in record time. I stand to be corrected
here, but to the best of my knowledge, this year is the one
of the few times, if not the first — at least in the short time
I have been at the United Nations — in which that
Committee has completed its work expeditiously.
I must also pay tribute to the diplomatic skills and
leadership of Mr. Opertti in ensuring that the work of the
Committee was on schedule. I am now thinking aloud here
in wondering whether the fact that he and Mr. Macedo
come from the same region of the world has anything to do
with this speed. May I also add here that the Acting
Chairman of the Committee of 24, Ambassador Bruno
Rodríguez Parrilla, also comes from that region.
Secondly, I would like to also take the opportunity to
thank all the members of the Fourth Committee for their
efforts and cooperation in working through the issues of
mutual interest to all our countries. In this regard, I would
like to make special mention of the good cooperation
shown by all the administering Powers, and especially the
Governments of New Zealand on Tokelau; the Government

78th plenary meeting
3 December 1998
of Portugal; the Republic of France on New Caledonia;
and, although informally, the Government of the United
States on the question Guam; as well as the Acting
Chairman and members of the Special Political
Committee for all their efforts. My delegation would like
place on record our great appreciation and further express
the hope that we will continue to work together in the
same spirit in the future towards a positive and eventual
resolution of the status of the remaining Non-SelfGoverning Territories, of course taking into full account
and consideration the expressed and legitimate will of the
peoples of the Territories concern.
As is clearly shown by all the draft resolutions to be
adopted by consensus today, including the omnibus draft
resolution before the Committee today, my delegation is
of the view that we, the Members of the United Nations,
the administering Powers and members of the Committee
of 24 alike, must allow and include in any negotiations
and dialogue on the future of those Territories the
affected peoples concerned. We will make much progress
towards ending the last vestiges of colonialism, as clearly
demonstrated by some of the consensus draft resolutions
before us today, if we continue in this trend.
Alternatively, as many of us would agree today, our
Organization must allow for the greater engagement of
the peoples of these Territories by sending periodic, if not
regular United Nations visiting missions to each of these
Territories to ascertain the full wishes of the peoples
concerned.
Also in the same vein, my delegation would like to
pay high tribute to the Secretary-General and his Special
Rapporteurs for their positive efforts with regards to a
number of the Non-Self-Governing Territories under their
focus. From our delegation’s assessment, there is good
and positive progress being made on these fronts as well.
I am sure this is our common objective and the
ultimate goal of our Organization and we must all
persevere with those final efforts, which sometimes are
the most difficult, to bring to fruition our desired goals.
May I also add here that, as “reform” is the buzz
word in the corridors of this Assembly, it makes good
economic, if not common sense for us to work together
in resolving the outstanding issues in the shortest possible
time in order that we may save money and time for our
Organization.
In conclusion, my delegation pays tribute to all the
members of this Assembly and makes a further call on all

7

General Assembly
Fifty-third session
interested parties to devote those last efforts, including the
political will to cooperate fully with the Committee of 24
and the General Assembly, to achieving our mandated
objectives.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item.
I should like to inform members that the General
Assembly will take action on the two draft resolutions on
agenda item 18 after all the reports of the Special Political
and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee) have
been considered.
I should also like to draw members’ attention to a
typographic error in the text of draft resolution A/53/L.58.
At the end of the third line of the second preambular
paragraph, the resolution number should read “52/78”,
instead of “57/78”.
Reports of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee)
The Acting President: The General Assembly will
consider the reports of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee) on agenda
items 81 to 87, 88 and 18, 89 and 12, 90 as well as 18.
I request the Rapporteur of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee, Mr. Bernard Tanoh-Boutchoué
of Côte d’Ivoire, to introduce the reports of the Special
Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
in one intervention.

78th plenary meeting
3 December 1998
5 October and 19 November, it held 24 meetings and
adopted a total of 25 draft resolutions and three draft
decisions, and concluded its work on Thursday, 19
November 1998, one day before the deadline set by the
General Assembly.
It is my great pleasure and honour to introduce the
reports of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee to the General Assembly for consideration and
approval.
The first report, submitted under agenda item 18,
entitled “Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples”, is contained in document A/53/594. The
Committee adopted five draft resolutions, including a
consolidated draft resolution dealing with 11 separate
Territories. These draft resolutions appear in paragraph 34
of the report. The Fourth Committee recommends them to
the General Assembly for adoption.
I should like to inform the General Assembly that
paragraph 32 of the report contained in document
A/53/594 does not match the original text submitted for
publication. I therefore wish to read out the text of that
paragraph as adopted by the Fourth Committee. The new
text reads as follows:
“At the same meeting, on the proposal of the
Chairman, the Committee decided to recommend to
the General Assembly the adoption of a consolidated
draft resolution incorporating the draft resolution on
Guam which had been adopted (see para. 31), as
section VI of the draft resolutions on the questions
of American Samoa, Anguilla, Bermuda, the British
Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, Montserrat,
Pitcairn, St. Helena, the Turks and Caicos Islands
and the United States Virgin Islands, adopted on 13
October (see para. 26), with the following changes
(see para. 34, draft resolution IV):”.

Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoué (Côte d’Ivoire), Rapporteur of
the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth
Committee) (interpretation from French): At its fifty-third
session, the General Assembly, upon recommendation of
the General Committee, allocated to the Special Political
and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee) for
consideration 12 agenda items: items 18, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85,
86, 87, 88, 89 and 12 and 90.

Of course, a corrigendum on the new paragraph will be
issued by the Secretariat.

At its meeting on organization of work, held on 17
September 1998, the Fourth Committee decided, in order to
rationalize its work and to make full and effective use of
the conference services and facilities, to have a single
general debate on all agenda items relating to the question
of Non-Self-Governing Territories and other related matters.
It spared no effort to complete its work by Friday, 20
November, as requested by the General Assembly. Between

The second report, on agenda item 81, entitled
“Effects of atomic radiation”, is contained in document
A/53/595. The Fourth Committee considered the report of
the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of
Atomic Radiation (A/53/46), as well as the reports
submitted by the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) (A/53/478) and the World Health Organization
(WHO) (A/53/483) on this question and adopted a draft

8

General Assembly
Fifty-third session
resolution on this subject without a vote. The draft
resolution appears in paragraph 6 of the report. The Fourth
Committee recommends it to the General Assembly for
adoption.
The third report, issued as document A/53/596, relates
to agenda item 82, entitled “International cooperation in the
peaceful uses of outer space”. The Committee adopted
without a vote the draft resolution that appears in paragraph
10 of the report and recommends it to the General
Assembly for adoption.
The fourth report, issued as document A/53/597,
relates to item 83 of the agenda, entitled “United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East”. The Committee adopted seven draft resolutions
on this item relating to various aspects of the mandate of
the Agency, appear in paragraph 22 of the report, and
recommends them to the General Assembly for adoption.
The fifth report, relating to agenda item 84, entitled
“Report of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli
Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian
People and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories”, is
contained in document A/53/598. The Committee adopted
five draft resolutions, which appear in paragraph 21 of the
report. It recommends the five draft resolutions to the
General Assembly for adoption.
I wish to emphasize here that, generally speaking, the
Fourth Committee welcomed, when it was considering this
item, the signing of the Wye River Memorandum on 23
October 1998 between Israel and the Palestinian National
Authority and expressed the wish that a final and lasting
peace would be achieved for the mutual benefit of the two
parties.
The sixth report, on agenda item 85, entitled
“Comprehensive review of the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects“, is contained
in document A/53/599. The Fourth Committee adopted a
draft resolution under this agenda item, which appears in
paragraph 8 of its report, and recommends it to the General
Assembly for adoption.
The seventh report, submitted under agenda item 86,
entitled “Questions relating to information”, is contained in
document A/53/600. The Committee adopted without a vote
draft resolutions A and B, which appear in paragraph 8, as
well as the draft decision in paragraph 9. It recommends the
two draft resolutions and the draft decision to the General
Assembly for adoption.

78th plenary meeting
3 December 1998
The eighth report, issued as document A/53/601,
relates to agenda item 87, entitled “Information from
Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article
73 e of the Charter of the United Nations”. The draft
resolution on this item appears in paragraph 7 of the
report, and the Fourth Committee recommends it to the
General Assembly for adoption.
The ninth report, issued as document A/53/602,
relates to agenda items 88, entitled “Economic and other
activities which affect the interests of the peoples of the
Non-Self-Governing Territories”, and 18, entitled
“Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples”. By a
recorded vote of 120 votes in favour to 2 against, with 3
abstentions, the Committee adopted a draft resolution on
agenda item 88 entitled “Economic and other activities
which affect the interests of the peoples of the Non-SelfGoverning Territories”. The Committee also adopted a
draft decision entitled ”Military activities and
arrangements by colonial Powers in Territories under their
administration” by a recorded vote of 74 votes in favour
to 44 against, with 2 abstentions. The Fourth Committee
recommends to the General Assembly for adoption the
draft resolution and the draft decision, which appear in
paragraphs 11 and 12 of the report respectively.
The tenth report, issued as document A/53/603,
relates to agenda items 89, entitled “Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized
agencies and the international institutions associated with
the United Nations”, and 12, entitled “Report of the
Economic and Social Council”. The Committee adopted
a draft resolution on agenda item 89 by a recorded vote
of 85 votes in favour to none against, with 41 abstentions.
It recommends that draft resolution, which appears in
paragraph 7 of its report, for adoption by the General
Assembly.
The eleventh and final report relates to agenda item
90, “Offers by Member States of study and training
facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing
Territories”, and is contained in document A/53/604. The
Committee recommends the draft resolution appearing in
paragraph 6 of that report for adoption by the Assembly.
On behalf of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee), I commend to the
General Assembly for consideration and approval all the
reports I have just introduced.

9

General Assembly
Fifty-third session
Let me take this opportunity to thank and pay special
tribute to all delegations and all others who have
contributed to the success of the work of the Special
Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
at this session. I congratulate all the members of the
Committee on the skill and spirit of cooperation they
demonstrated with a view to achieving mutually satisfactory
solutions, enabling the Committee to complete its work in
an effective and constructive manner.
In particular, I thank the Chairman of the Committee,
Mr. Pablo Macedo of Mexico, whose diplomatic skill and
experience enabled the Committee to conclude, on time and
in an extremely effective way, its work on the agenda items
allocated to it by the General Assembly. The Chairman
benefitted from the valuable support of the Vice-Chairmen,
Mr. Ferden Çariçhi of Turkey, Mr. Chun Hae-Jin of the
Republic of Korea and Mr. Tomáš Hrbác of Slovakia, with
whom as Rapporteur I had the pleasure of working as part
of the Bureau of the Committee.
I want also to thank Mr. Mohammad Sattar, the
Secretary of the Committee. It was truly a pleasure to work
with him and his dynamic, supportive, capable team; thanks
to them, the Committee’s work was carried out in a climate
of genuine cordiality.
My thanks go also to the Under-Secretary-General for
General Assembly Affairs and Conference Services, Mr. Jin
Yongjian, for his kind assistance to the Committee, and to
Mr. Vadim Perfiliev, Director of the General Assembly and
Economic and Social Council Affairs Division, for his help
and cooperation.
The Acting President: If there is no proposal under
rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it that the
General Assembly decides not to discuss the reports of the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth
Committee) that are before it today.

78th plenary meeting
3 December 1998
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its vote
only once, i.e., either in the Committee or in plenary
meeting, unless that delegation’s vote in plenary
meeting is different from its vote in the Committee.”
May I also remind delegations that, also in
accordance with General Assembly decision 34/401,
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should
be made by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Special
Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth
Committee), I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same
manner as was done in the Committee, unless the
Secretariat is notified to the contrary in advance.
This means that where recorded votes were taken,
we too will take recorded votes. Likewise, I would hope
that we may proceed to adopt without a vote those
recommendations that were adopted without a vote in the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth
Committee).
Agenda item 81
Effects of atomic radiation
Report of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee) (A/53/595)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth
Committee) in paragraph 6 of its report (A/53/595).
The Committee adopted the draft resolution without
a vote. May I consider that the Assembly wishes to do
the same?

It was so decided.
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 53/44).
The Acting President: Statements will therefore be
limited to explanations of vote or position. The positions of
delegations regarding the recommendations of the Special
Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
have been made clear in the Committee and are reflected in
the relevant official records. May I remind members that by
paragraph 7 of decision 34/401 the Assembly agreed that

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 81?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 82

“When the same draft resolution is considered in
a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a

10

General Assembly
Fifty-third session
International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer
space
Report of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee) (A/53/596)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth
Committee) in paragraph 10 of its report.
The Committee adopted the draft resolution without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 53/45).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration
of agenda item 82?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 83
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East
Report of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee) (A/53/597)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on the seven draft resolutions recommended by
the Special Political and Decolonization Committee in
paragraph 22 of its report. After all the votes have been
taken, representatives will have an opportunity to explain
their votes.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled “Assistance
to Palestine refugees”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central

78th plenary meeting
3 December 1998
African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Denmark, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Libyan Arab
amahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru,
hilippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel
Abstaining:
Micronesia (Federated States of), United States of
America
Draft resolution I was adopted by 157 votes to 1,
with 2 abstentions (resolution 53/46).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Solomon Islands
informed the Secretariat that it had intended to vote
in favour.]
The Acting President: We now turn to draft
resolution II, entitled “Working Group on the Financing
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East”.

11

General Assembly
Fifty-third session
The Special Political and Decolonization Committee
adopted draft resolution II without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 53/47).
The Acting President: We turn next to draft
resolution III, entitled “Persons displaced as a result of the
June 1967 and subsequent hostilities”.
A recorded vote has been requested.

78th plenary meeting
3 December 1998
Against:
Israel, United States of America
Abstaining:
Micronesia (Federated States of)
Draft resolution III was adopted by 156 votes to 2,
with 1 abstention (resolution 53/48).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Solomon Islands
informed the Secretariat that it had intended to vote
in favour.]

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central
African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark,
Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, nited
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela,
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe

12

The Acting President: We turn next to draft
resolution IV, entitled “Offers by Member States of grants
and scholarships for higher education, including
vocational training, for Palestine refugees”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Canada, Cape
Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts

General Assembly
Fifty-third session
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, United States of
America, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Israel
Draft resolution IV was adopted by 160 votes to none
with 1 abstention (resolution 53/49).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Solomon Islands
informed the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The Acting President: We turn next to draft
resolution V, entitled “Operations of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East”.

78th plenary meeting
3 December 1998
Latvia, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United States of America
Abstaining:
Micronesia (Federated States of), Zambia
Draft resolution V was adopted by 157 votes to 2,
with 2 abstentions (resolution 53/50).

A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central
African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark,
Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,

[Subsequently, the delegation of Solomon Islands
informed the Secretariat that it had intended to vote
in favour.]
The Acting President: We come now to draft
resolution VI, entitled “Palestine refugees’ properties and
their revenues”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Canada, Cape
Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba,

13

General Assembly
Fifty-third session
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Samoa,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United States of America
Abstaining:
Micronesia (Federated States of)
The draft resolution was adopted by 156 votes to 2,
with 1 abstention (resolution 53/51).
[Subsequently, the delegation of the Solomon Islands
informed the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The Acting President: We now turn to draft
resolution VII, entitled “University of Jerusalem Al-Quds'
for Palestine Refugees”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

14

78th plenary meeting
3 December 1998
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Canada, Cape
Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United States of America
Abstaining:
Micronesia (Federated States of), Zambia
The draft resolution was adopted by 156 votes to 2,
with 2 abstentions (resolution 53/52).

General Assembly
Fifty-third session
[Subsequently the delegation of the Solomon Islands
informed the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration
of agenda item 83?

78th plenary meeting
3 December 1998
Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, United
Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United States of America

It was so decided.
Agenda item 84
Report of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli
Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian
People and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories
Report of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee) (A/53/598)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on the five draft resolutions recommended by the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee in
paragraph 21 of its report. After all the votes have been
taken, representatives will again have the opportunity to
explain their vote.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled “Work of
the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices
Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian People and
Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Azerbaijan,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belize, Benin, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Central African
Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Djibouti, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Philippines, Qatar, Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka,

Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Bahamas, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium,
Bolivia, Bulgaria, Burundi, Cameroon, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Ecuador, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Grenada, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway,
Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation,
Samoa, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Swaziland, Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Zambia
The draft resolution was adopted by 86 votes to 2,
with 67 abstentions (resolution 53/53).
The Acting President: We turn now to draft
resolution II, entitled “Applicability of the Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons
in Time of War, of 12 August 1949, to the occupied
Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem, and the other
occupied territories”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

15

General Assembly
Fifty-third session
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central
African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark,
Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United States of America
Abstaining:
Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of)
The draft resolution was adopted by 155 votes to 2,
with 2 abstentions (resolution 53/54).
The Acting President: Now we shall turn to draft
resolution III, entitled “Israeli settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem, and the occupied
Syrian Golan”.

16

78th plenary meeting
3 December 1998
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African
Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark,
Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France,
Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, Micronesia (Federated States of), United
States of America
Abstaining:
Marshall Islands, Swaziland
The draft resolution was adopted by 150 votes to 3,
with 2 abstentions (resolution 53/55).

General Assembly
Fifty-third session
The Acting President: We turn next to draft
resolution IV, entitled “Israeli practices affecting the human
rights of the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including Jerusalem”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African
Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark,
Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France,
Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe

78th plenary meeting
3 December 1998
Against:
Israel, United States of America
Abstaining:
Cameroon, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Zambia
The draft resolution was adopted by 151 votes to 2,
with 4 abstentions (resolution 53/56).
The Acting President: We turn last to draft
resolution V, entitled “The occupied Syrian Golan”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Canada, Cape
Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Syrian
Arab Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,

17

General Assembly
Fifty-third session
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Vanuatu,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel

78th plenary meeting
3 December 1998
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 85?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 86

Abstaining:
Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Swaziland, United States of America, Uruguay,
Zambia
Draft resolution V was adopted by 150 votes to 1,
with 6 abstentions (resolution 53/57).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Swaziland, who wishes to speak in
explanation of vote on the resolution just adopted.
Mr. Dlamini (Swaziland): My delegation has
reviewed its position on this item and this resolution. In
view of the fact that Jerusalem is a place of spirituality
where everybody has got to be happy and praise almighty
God, everybody there must be protected and enjoy human
rights.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration
of agenda item 84?
It was so decided.

Questions relating to information
Report of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee) (A/53/600)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on the two draft resolutions recommended by
the Special Political and Decolonization Committee in
paragraph 8 of its report and on the draft decision
recommended by the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee in paragraph 9 of the same report.
We turn first to draft resolution A, entitled
“Information in the service of humanity”.
The Special Political and Decolonization Committee
adopted draft resolution A without a vote. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution A was adopted (resolution 53/59 A).
The Acting President: We now turn to draft
resolution B, entitled “United Nations public information
policies and activities”.

Agenda item 85 (continued)
Comprehensive review of the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects
Report of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee) (A/53/599)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee in
paragraph 8 of its report.
The Committee adopted the draft resolution without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 53/58).

18

The Special Political and Decolonization Committee
adopted draft resolution B without a vote. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution B was adopted (resolution 53/59 B).
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on the draft decision, entitled “Increase in the
membership of the Committee on Information”.
The Special Political and Decolonization Committee
adopted the draft decision without a vote. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item
86?

General Assembly
Fifty-third session
It was so decided.
Agenda item 87
Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories
transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the
United Nations
Report of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee) (A/53/601)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee in
paragraph 7 of its report.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central
African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,

78th plenary meeting
3 December 1998
Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
None
Abstaining:
France, Israel, Monaco, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America
The draft resolution was adopted by 156 votes to
none, with 5 abstentions (resolution 53/60).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 87?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 88 and agenda item 18 (continued)
Economic and other activities which affect the
interests of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing
Territories
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
Report of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee) (A/53/602)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee in
paragraph 11 of its report and the draft decision
recommended by the Committee in paragraph 12 of the
same report.
We turn first to the draft resolution, entitled,
“Economic and other activities which affect the interests
of the peoples of the Non-Self Governing Territories”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:

19

General Assembly
Fifty-third session
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon,
Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Denmark, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United States of America
Abstaining:
France, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland
The draft resolution was adopted by 154 votes to 2,
with 5 abstentions (resolution 53/61).

20

78th plenary meeting
3 December 1998
The Acting President: We now turn to the draft
decision, entitled “Military activities and arrangements by
colonial Powers in Territories under their administration”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cameroon, Central African Republic,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Ghana, Grenada, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation,
Samoa, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom

General Assembly
Fifty-third session
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Uzbekistan
Abstaining:
Belarus
The draft decision was adopted by 99 votes to 54, with
1 abstention.
[Subsequently, the delegation of Samoa informed the
Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour].
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration
of agenda item 88?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item 18.
Agenda item 89 and agenda item 12 (continued)
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples by the
specialized agencies and the international institutions
associated with the United Nations

78th plenary meeting
3 December 1998
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central
African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Samoa, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe

Report of the Economic and Social Council
Report of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee) (A/53/603)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee in
paragraph 7 of its report.
The draft resolution is entitled “Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples by the specialized agencies and the
international institutions associated with the United
Nations”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,

Against:
None
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Netherlands, Norway,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic
of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, San
Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Uzbekistan
The draft resolution was adopted by 112 votes to
none, with 51 abstentions (resolution 53/62).

21

General Assembly
Fifty-third session
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration
of agenda item 89?

78th plenary meeting
3 December 1998
Draft resolution I is entitled “Question of Western
Sahara”. The Special Political and Decolonization
Committee adopted draft resolution I without a vote. May
I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?

It was so decided.
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 53/64).
The Acting President: The Assembly has concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 12.

The Acting President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Question of New Caledonia”.

Agenda item 90
Offers by Member States of study and training facilities
for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories
Report of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee) (A/53/604)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee in
paragraph 6 of its report.
The Committee adopted the draft resolution without a
vote. May I consider that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 53/63).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration
of agenda item 90?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 18 (continued)
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
Report of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee) (A/53/594)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on the four draft resolutions recommended by
the Special Political and Decolonization Committee in
paragraph 34 of its report and on the draft decision
recommended by the Committee in paragraph 35 of the
same report.
We turn first to the four draft resolutions contained in
paragraph 34 of the report.

22

The Special Political and Decolonization Committee
adopted draft resolution II without objection. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 53/65).
The Acting President: Draft resolution III is
entitled “Question of Tokelau”.
The Special Political and Decolonization Committee
adopted draft resolution III without objection. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution 53/66).
The Acting President: Draft resolution IV is
entitled “Questions of American Samoa, Anguilla,
Bermuda, the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands,
Guam, Montserrat, Pitcairn, St. Helena, the Turks and
Caicos Islands and the United States Virgin Islands”. The
Special Political and Decolonization Committee adopted
draft resolution IV. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution 53/67).
The Acting President: We turn now to the draft
decision contained in paragraph 35 of the report. The
Special Political and Decolonization Committee adopted
the draft decision, entitled “Question of Gibraltar”,
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do likewise?
The draft decision was adopted.
The Acting President: We have thus concluded this
stage of our consideration of agenda item 18.
The Assembly has thus concluded its consideration
of all the reports of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee).

General Assembly
Fifty-third session
Agenda item 18 (continued)
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
Draft resolutions (A/53/L.58, A/53/23 (Part II),
Chapter III, para. 12)
The Acting President: The General Assembly will
now take action on the draft resolutions submitted under
this item.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/53/L.58 and the draft resolution contained in paragraph
12, part II, chapter III, of the report of the Special
Committee (A/53/23).
The Assembly will first take a decision on draft
resolution A/53/L.58, entitled “Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African
Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino,

78th plenary meeting
3 December 1998
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining:
Azerbaijan, Belgium, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Hungary, Israel, Latvia,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Netherlands, Republic of Korea,
Russian Federation, Turkey
Draft resolution A/53/L.58 was adopted by 144 votes
to 2, with 18 abstentions (resolution 53/68).
The Acting President: The Assembly will next take
a decision on the draft resolution contained in paragraph
12 of part II, chapter III, of the report of the Special
Committee (A/53/23), entitled “Dissemination of
information on decolonization”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Canada, Cape
Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland,
Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,

23

General Assembly
Fifty-third session
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Samoa,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, Uruguay,
Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining:
France, Micronesia (Federated States of), Russian
Federation
The draft resolution was adopted by 156 votes to 3,
with 3 abstentions (resolution 53/69).
The Acting President: I now call on the
representative of the United Kingdom, who wishes to speak
in explanation of vote after the voting. May I remind him
that explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): I regret that my
delegation has found it again necessary to vote against
resolution 53/68, on the implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, and resolution 53/69, on the dissemination of
information on decolonization.
The latter text does contain elements which, as an
administering Power, the United Kingdom welcomes. In
particular, we note the recognition that self-determination
does not automatically equate independence and that there
are other options available. However, we believe that the
continuing financial crisis means that the obligation this text
places on the Department of Political Affairs and

24

78th plenary meeting
3 December 1998
Department of Public Information to publicize
decolonization issues is a serious waste of scarce
resources. This resolution is therefore unacceptable to us.
The United Kingdom also regrets that the resolution
on the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
continues to contain outdated language and assumptions
that do not reflect reality in the United Kingdom’s NonSelf-Governing Territories. We do not accept that the
presence of military bases could in any way constitute an
obstacle to the granting of independence or impede their
inhabitants from expressing their views on selfdetermination. Similarly, the text of the resolution
suggests the administering Powers are guilty of
“economic exploitation” and even of “violations of basic
human rights”. We reject such claims, which are wholly
without foundation.
My delegation also finds unacceptable the continued
references to “colonialism”, “colonial rule” and “colonial
countries”. We do not accept that such terminology
accurately reflects the present-day relationship between
the United Kingdom and its overseas Territories. And the
presence of such language in this text is particularly
regrettable, given the improvements made to other
resolutions on decolonization issues in recent years. We
hope that the drafters of the two resolutions before us will
in future follow the trend set in these other resolutions.
We stand ready to work with them to that end.
My delegation joins with others in recognizing that
decolonization is one of the great success stories of the
United Nations. We pay tribute to those who have worked
successfully and with goodwill in this field, and we will
of course continue to fulfil our Charter obligations with
regard to the United Kingdom’s overseas Territories.
We also welcome the Special Committee of 24’s
readiness to engage constructively with the administering
Powers. However, the United Kingdom continues to take
issue with the need for a decolonization programme of the
kind espoused by the Committee. The United Nations has
more pressing goals, affecting vastly greater numbers of
the world’s population and more relevant to today’s
needs. The activities and structure of this Organization
should reflect the world’s present and future priorities, not
those of the past.
In conclusion, the two draft resolutions submitted to
this General Assembly do not reflect or advance the
wishes and interests of the peoples of the remaining

General Assembly
Fifty-third session
United Kingdom overseas Territories; and those wishes and
interests remain the paramount consideration in my
Government’s policy towards them.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of vote.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item 18?
It was so decided.
Programme of work
The Acting President: Before turning to the next
speaker, I should like to draw members’ attention to the

78th plenary meeting
3 December 1998
announcement in the Journal concerning the
commemoration of the fiftieth anniversary of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, to be held on 10
December, with three plenary meetings of the General
Assembly scheduled for 10.00 a.m., 3.00 p.m. and 9.30
p.m.
I should like to share with members information on
some aspects concerning the logistics of the organization
of the General Assembly meetings devoted to the
commemoration.
The opening of the commemoration and the award
of human rights prizes will be held in the General
Assembly Hall at 10 a.m. For logistical reasons, the
commemoration will continue that same morning and for
the rest of the day in Conference Room 4, where all
statements by member States and observers will be heard.
In this connection, members will recall that
yesterday, at its 76th plenary meeting, the General
Assembly decided to limit statements in the
commemoration to five minutes in view of the very large
number of speakers already inscribed.
The meeting rose at 5.15 p.m.

25
