A/63/PV.51

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-third session

51

st plenary meeting
Monday, 17 November 2008, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. D’Escoto Brockmann . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nicaragua)

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Agenda items 107, 44 and 112
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Draft resolutions (A/63/L.22, A/63/L.25 and
A/63/L.27)
Integrated and coordinated implementation of and
follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Draft resolutions (A/63/L.28 and L.29)
Strengthening of the United Nations system
Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/125)
Note by the Secretary-General (A/63/140 and
Add.1)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In connection
with agenda item 44, members will recall that the
report of the Secretary-General contained in document
A/63/83 was discussed at the 36th plenary meeting, on
3 November 2008. Members will also recall that, at the
same meeting, the Assembly took action on draft
resolution A/63/L.15.
Under agenda item 112, the Assembly has before
it a report of the Secretary-General, document
A/63/125, and two notes by the Secretary-General:
documents A/63/140, transmitting the report of the
Joint Inspection Unit, and document A/63/140/Add.1.

I now call on the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, who will introduce draft
resolution A/63/L.22.
Mr. Valero (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela has submitted draft resolution A/63/L.22,
entitled “The world financial and economic crisis and
its consequences”, because it is concerned by the
profound impact of the financial crisis on the world
economy and, in particular, its effects on developing
countries and the attainment of internationally agreed
development objectives, including the Millennium
Development Goals.
After extensive meetings with a wide range of
countries, a new draft resolution was drawn up, the text
of which was circulated informally for the first time
among all delegations on 5 November. The draft
resolution was submitted to the Secretariat on
6 November and officially circulated in all official
languages on 11 and 12 November under the title “The
world financial and economic crisis and its
consequences” contained in document A/63/L.22. It
was placed under item 107 of the General Assembly’s
agenda, entitled “Follow-up to the outcome of the
Millennium Summit”.
This draft resolution is sponsored by a significant
number of countries, as follows: Algeria, Argentina,
Belize, Bolivia, Brazil, Cuba, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Gabon, Haiti, Honduras, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Solomon Islands, Jamaica,
Malaysia, Myanmar, Nicaragua, Paraguay, Saint

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

08-60527 (E)

*0860527*

A/63/PV.51

Vincent and the Grenadines, the Seychelles, the Sudan,
Syria, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and
Trinidad and Tobago.
I am speaking in this General Assembly on behalf
of all of the sponsoring countries, whom I thank for the
constructive spirit that they demonstrated with their
contributions and which made possible an enhanced
draft resolution that reflects the concerns of all
countries regarding the current financial crisis.
The need for a United Nations summit on the
financial crisis is undeniable; that has been recognized
by numerous world leaders. In this regard, I would like
to recall that during the eighteenth Ibero-American
Summit, held in San Salvador from 29 to 30 October, a
special communiqué concerning the world economic
environment was adopted. In it, all heads of State and
Government of Latin America and the Caribbean, as
well as Spain and Portugal, agreed to “carry out
consultations to examine the opportunity to convene
with urgency a meeting of heads of States and
Government, in the context of the United Nations,
given the gravity of the financial crisis”. In the United
Nations, we have held consultations on the draft
resolution with the Group of Latin American and
Caribbean States, the Group of 77 and China, and we
have had discussions with the representative of France
in its role as presidency of the European Union, as well
as with representatives from numerous Member States.
Informal consultations also took place where
Member States had the opportunity to express their
points of view. In addition, meetings were requested
with countries belonging to the Organization of the
Islamic Conference, the Group of African States, the
Group of Arab States, the Forum of Small States and
the Group of Asian States, in order to get their
comments and suggestions so as to produce a fully
inclusive draft resolution.
This draft resolution is intended to promote a
necessary debate that broaches, in a responsible
manner, the unprecedented financial and economic
crisis that is affecting all countries. This draft
resolution draws attention to the impact that the crisis
is having on the poorest and most vulnerable in the
world.
The financial crisis, which began in the United
States of America, has spread throughout all regions of
the world, and its effects are devastating. The growth
of gross domestic product in developed countries has

2

stopped or been reduced. The economic recession that
has affected some countries also has a negative impact
on emerging economies and the poorest countries. The
increase in unemployment, the drop in commodity
prices, the reduced demand for exported goods and the
drop in remittances, among other factors, are drawing
millions more people into the grip of poverty, hunger
and suffering.
This crisis shows no respect for borders. The
States represented in the United Nations must
responsibly address the implications of this crisis and
propose alternatives to achieve an international
economic and financial system that is fair and humane
and benefits all the peoples of the world.
The United Nations is the most authoritative and
representative world body to consider a global crisis of
this nature. The solution to this crisis must be the result
of contributions from each of the 192 countries
belonging to this Organization. None should be
excluded from this historic debate.
The draft resolution we are introducing today
calls for
“... a comprehensive review of the international
financial system, including the functioning of the
international financial institutions, particularly
the Bretton Woods institutions, with a view to
articulating a policy framework for transforming
the international financial system into an
equitable,
inclusive,
democratic
and
development-oriented system that reflects the
interests of all Member States”. (A/63/L.22,
para. 1)
The draft resolution requests that during the
sixty-third session of the General Assembly, the
President of the General Assembly, Father Miguel
d’Escoto Brockmann, should “... in close consultations
with Member States ... finalize the organizational
arrangements for the United Nations Summit”
(para. 2). This process, in accordance with the draft
resolution, must include a high-level meeting within
the Economic and Social Council.
The Doha Review Conference proposes to
examine the implementation of the Monterrey
Consensus and reaffirm the commitments reached in
matters of official development assistance, among
other matters. This meeting will be uniquely important
in tackling financing for development at a time when it

08-60527

A/63/PV.51

might be affected by the world financial and economic
crisis.
We hope that the Follow-up International
Conference on Financing for Development, organized
by His Highness the Emir of Qatar, Sheikh Hamad bin
Khalifa Al-Thani, will be an auspicious one that brings
us closer to a more dignified and fair world.
The summit that this draft resolution proposes
seeks, for its part, to approach in a comprehensive
manner the multidimensional consequences of the
financial and economic crisis. As our draft resolution
maintains, it is a matter of historic dialogue between
world heads of State and Government to articulate
“... a policy framework for transforming the
international financial system into an equitable,
inclusive, democratic and development-oriented
system that reflects the interests of all Member
States.” (para. 1)
The Doha Conference and the summit to consider
the financial crisis deal with issues that have their own
unique features, but they are both initiatives aimed at
strengthening the role and authority of the United
Nations in the international context.
In the extensive consultations carried out by the
sponsors, we can affirm that our draft resolution has
broad-ranging support and that a majority of countries
are prepared to back it. Some delegations, however,
have requested more time to consider the draft.
Therefore and in order to achieve a broad consensus,
the sponsors have decided to wait a few days to take
action on it. We hope that the Assembly will adopt this
draft resolution by consensus and that it will become a
proposal for all the Member States.
Allow me to say a few words as representative of
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, where the
Bolivarian revolution continues to make progress.
The President of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, Hugo Chávez Frías, on 25 October 2008, in
the city of Maracaibo, called upon the United Nations
to convene a summit of Presidents to discuss the world
financial crisis and its effects on the countries in the
region.
In this framework, President Hugo Chávez Frías
has also called on the countries that make up the
Bolivarian Alternative for the Americas: Bolivia, Cuba,
Dominica, Honduras and Nicaragua, as well as all

08-60527

countries of the countries of the Caribbean Community,
the Dominican Republic and the countries that make up
Petrocaribe, to examine the measures to be taken in
order to jointly address the effects of the financial
crisis. This is a regional initiative, the results of which
will enhance the agenda of the world summit we are
proposing.
We believe that, in the process of preparing for
the summit, intergovernmental meetings, events and
initiatives, including participating experts, intellectuals
and social movements, must also be held. In this
respect, we welcome your initiative, Sir, to convene an
expert group to support this initiative.
The world’s conscience must be mobilized to
create a model for life founded on justice, freedom,
equality and solidarity among human beings.
Venezuela trusts that the summit will be an historic
meeting at which a fairer, more humane international
financial system that is fully committed to
development and the needs of the poorest people will
be created.
Allow me to conclude by saying that the
humanist values of equality, solidarity and social
justice await a new dawn.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Switzerland to introduce
draft resolutions A/63/L.25 and A/63/L.27.
Mr. Maurer (Switzerland): I will speak first on
draft resolution A/63/L.27, entitled “Promoting
development through the reduction and prevention of
armed violence”, and subsequently on draft resolution
A/63/L.25, entitled “Legal empowerment of the poor
and eradication of poverty”.
Armed violence affects all societies to different
degrees, whether they are at war, in a post-conflict
situation, or suffer from everyday forms of criminal or
political violence.
In recent years, more than 740,000 people have
died directly or indirectly from armed violence every
year, due to both conflict and criminal violence. More
tragically, 490,000 people die every year in
non-conflict settings from a violent death, according to
the report entitled “Global Burden of Armed Violence”,
published this year by the Small Arms Survey.
In non-conflict settings, the economic cost of
armed violence in the world in terms of lost

3

A/63/PV.51

productivity due to violent deaths is $95 billion a year
and could reach as high as $163 billion. This represents
the equivalent of 0.14 per cent of the annual global
gross domestic product. Armed violence, therefore,
constitutes a serious obstacle to development and could
undermine the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals.
Likewise, there is widespread recognition that
social and economic development can have a positive
impact on the reduction of armed violence. With this in
mind, the Government of Switzerland hosted a summit
on armed violence and development in Geneva in
June 2006. At the conclusion of the summit, 42 States
from all the regions of the world adopted the Geneva
Declaration on Armed Violence and Development,
which has been circulated as a United Nations
document (A/63/494).
In 2007 and 2008, the Geneva Declaration and
the interrelation that it establishes between the
reduction and prevention of armed violence and
development were discussed in four regional meetings
for the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean,
Africa, Asia-Pacific as well as Central and SouthEastern Europe and the Caucasus. As a result, the
Geneva Declaration has been endorsed by 102
countries from all regions of the world.
Today, Switzerland, on behalf of the sponsors, is
honoured to introduce draft resolution A/63/L.27,
“Promoting development through the reduction and
prevention of armed violence”, in which some of the
core values of the 2006 Geneva Declaration are
reflected. The draft resolution has been carefully
crafted by a core group of 13 States that lead the
implementation of the Geneva Declaration on Armed
Violence and Development. The text of the draft
resolution has been broadly consulted.
The core group members, representing the major
regions of the world, are Brazil, Finland, Guatemala,
Indonesia, Kenya, Morocco, the Netherlands, Norway,
the Philippines, Spain, Switzerland, Thailand and the
United Kingdom. Switzerland acts as the core group’s
coordinator. We thank all the sponsors for their
support. As of the beginning of the meeting this
morning, 53 countries have sponsored the draft
resolution. We would also like to underline that the list
of sponsors is still open.
The draft resolution, “Promoting development
through the reduction and prevention of armed

4

violence”, reflects a careful balance of its twin
objectives to reduce armed violence for better
development and to propose development strategies
that lead to a reduction of armed violence. The balance
is reflected in both the preambular and operative
paragraphs of the draft resolution.
In its preambular paragraphs, the draft resolution
refers to such United Nations documents as the
Millennium Declaration, the 2005 World Summit
Outcome, the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat
and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects, as well as the annual
resolution of the General Assembly entitled
“Relationship between disarmament and development”.
In its operative paragraphs, the draft resolution
stresses the need for a coherent and integrated
approach to prevent armed violence with a view to
achieving sustainable peace and development. By
requesting the Secretary-General to seek the views of
Member States on the interrelation between armed
violence and development, the draft resolution aims at
bringing together the views and experiences of
Member States on this important issue. On the basis of
the report of the Secretary-General to the General
Assembly at its sixty-fourth session, the way forward
will be carefully considered.
The aforementioned core group on the draft
resolution organized meetings open to all delegations
in which the membership as a whole had the
opportunity to provide input with regard to the draft
presented today. It was only late last week that the core
group was informed that some delegations within the
Arab Group had raised concerns with regard to some of
the formulations in the preamble. In a letter to all
sponsors on Friday afternoon, I informed them of the
proposed changes and asked them to agree in silent
procedure. None of the sponsors objected. In order to
accommodate concerns and further broaden support for
the draft resolution, the following small revisions are
proposed.
In
the
fourth
preambular
paragraph,
“Acknowledging the Geneva Declaration on Armed
Violence and Development” should read “Taking note
of the Geneva Declaration on Armed Violence and
Development”. The fifth preambular paragraph,
“Reaffirming that development, peace, security and
human rights are interlinked and mutually reinforcing”
should read “Reaffirming that development, peace and

08-60527

A/63/PV.51

security, and human rights are interlinked and mutually
reinforcing”, with a footnote added stating: “See
resolution 60/1”. I understand that the revision is being
circulated in writing to all delegations in the Hall as I
speak.
The challenges of addressing the interrelation
between armed violence and development should not
be underestimated. By taking up those challenges and
by seeking the views of Member States on how to
address the interrelation between armed violence and
development, the draft resolution can allow for the
consideration of that important issue, which in turn
will be a contribution towards the achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals. The support today of
all Member States for the draft resolution, as orally
amended, is highly appreciated.
While I have the floor, please allow me also to
introduce draft resolution A/63/L.25, entitled “Legal
empowerment of the poor and eradication of poverty”.
Even as we are well into the twenty-first century,
half of the world’s population still lives in makeshift
shelters in squatter settlements. We all know that when
people’s rights over their land and homes are insecure,
they cannot leverage those assets. Nearly all of the
almost 500 million working poor, who earn less than
$1 a day, labour in the unofficial economy. Informal
work accounts for over half of total employment in
developing countries, and for as much as 90 per cent in
some South Asian and African countries.
Worldwide, approximately 40 per cent of children
in developing countries are not registered by their fifth
birthday and, in the least developed countries, that
number can be as high as 71 per cent.
While theoretically they may have access to
justice, the poorest bear the brunt of the insufficient
number of judges, the backlog of cases in courts and
the unaffordable cost of accessing the formal legal
system.
In July 2007, during the high-level segment of the
Economic and Social Council, our ministers recognized
that the empowerment of the poor is essential for the
effective eradication of poverty and hunger. In doing
so, Member States reflected on an ongoing debate
about the role of the poor in the development process,
recognizing that the poor are essential actors in any
meaningful effort to eradicate poverty. The poor should

08-60527

not only be associated with the development process,
but empowered to influence and drive it.
The legal empowerment of the poor is crucial to
eradicating poverty. Secure property rights boost
business investment and farmers plough more back into
their land. The introduction of effective property rights,
managed by functioning institutions, helps developing
countries to progress.
It is necessary to eliminate the negative aspects of
informality, while at the same time ensuring that
opportunities for livelihood and entrepreneurship are
not destroyed and promoting the protection of workers
and economic units in the informal economy and their
incorporation into the mainstream economy.
After several years of dialogue among experts
and the exchange of experience at the regional level,
Guatemala, Switzerland and 14 other countries —
Benin, Brazil, Canada, Finland, Honduras, Iceland,
Indonesia, Madagascar, Mexico, Nigeria, Norway,
Peru, Spain and the United Republic of Tanzania —
wish to bring the issue to a more formal and
multilateral level by introducing this draft resolution in
the General Assembly today. We are convinced that all
Member States have valuable experience and insight to
contribute to this important issue.
The preambular paragraphs of the draft resolution
set the issue squarely within the multilaterally agreed
policy framework for development and eradication of
poverty, with which we are all familiar, including the
United Nations Millennium Declaration and the
Monterrey Consensus. While that framework and the
responsibilities ascribed to individual countries, as well
as the international community, are taken as a basis,
the legal empowerment of the poor is presented as an
essential element of an effective approach to the
eradication of poverty and hunger.
A significant input to the discussion on the role of
the poor in the development process is the report of the
Commission on Legal Empowerment of the Poor,
which was launched in 2005 to study the interaction
between the poor and their national institutions and the
extent to which the poor actually benefit from those
institutions. In is report “Making the Law Work for
Everyone”, published in July 2008 with the support of
the United Nations Development Programme, the
Commission drew preliminary conclusions based on
22 national consultation processes and the work of five
technical groups.

5

A/63/PV.51

The draft resolution takes note of that report as a
contribution
to
the
ongoing
discussion
of
empowerment of the poor. The draft resolution then
requests the Secretary-General to report on that
important subject matter, bearing in mind not only the
report of the Commission on Legal Empowerment of
the Poor, but also the experience of the United Nations
and of Member States. The Secretary-General is
requested to present his findings to the General
Assembly under the agenda item entitled “Eradication
of poverty and other development issues”.
While the draft resolution is largely procedural,
this week the sponsors will convene informal
consultations with the aim of having it adopted by
consensus under agenda item 107 at a meeting of the
General Assembly on 24 November.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa to introduce
resolution A/63/L.28.
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of Brazil, France,
Indonesia, Norway, Senegal, South Africa and
Thailand.
Mr. Tommo Monthe (Cameroon), Vice-President,
took the Chair.
In Oslo in March 2007, the ministers for foreign
affairs of the aforementioned countries drew attention
to the urgent need to broaden the scope of foreign
policy as traditionally understood. The ministers
launched an initiative to use diplomacy to promote
global health. They pointed to the fact that investment
in health is fundamental to economic growth and
development and that threats to health might
compromise a country’s stability and security. Health
needs a stronger strategic focus on the international
agenda.
In their agenda for action, the seven foreign
ministers identified a number of areas where policy
positions adopted can make a significant difference to
the prospect for global health. In strengthening the
capacity for global health, key issues are capacity for
preparedness, the control of emerging infectious
disease and the human resources for health, including
the shortage and misdistribution of trained health
workers. In facing the threats to global health, health
protection before, during and after conflict is a key
issue, along with handling natural disasters and other

6

emergencies and responding to HIV/AIDS. As we seek
to make globalization work for all, health is
intrinsically linked to development and combating
poverty, trade policies and agreements and improved
governance.
The initiative was launched here in New York last
year and sparked great interest among a large group of
foreign ministers gathered for the sixty-second session
of the General Assembly. We are grateful for the
support the initiative has enjoyed from the SecretaryGeneral and the Director-General of the World Health
Organization.
We recently enjoyed a very fruitful debate on
globalization and health in the Second Committee.
There will be several high-level events highlighting
global health issues in the months ahead. The
Economic and Social Council annual ministerial
review next summer will highlight the issues of global
health and the necessity to enhance coordination within
the United Nations system.
Indeed, the draft resolution being presented here
today is carried by a strong current of growing political
awareness. There are health-related initiatives being
taken in a number of other international bodies, as well
as in national and regional contexts.
But the challenges are daunting as well. It is
incumbent upon us all, as diplomats and foreign policy
operatives, to do our utmost to reach the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs). At present, progress
towards the health-related MDGs is lagging behind. We
need sustained political will to change this situation
and give the highest priority to saving the lives of
women and children, with a particular focus on
sub-Saharan Africa.
Including global health and foreign policy in the
General Assembly’s agenda next year and being able to
raise awareness of these issues on the basis of a
comprehensive report and recommended action from
the Secretary-General will be a good starting point for
taking up our common responsibility in these fields.
I have the honour to present to the members of
the General Assembly, on behalf of all the sponsors,
draft resolution A/63/L.28, entitled “Global health and
foreign policy” for their consideration and adoption as
a plenary item under agenda item 44. In addition to the
sponsors listed in document A/63/L.28 — Andorra,
Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, the Central African

08-60527

A/63/PV.51

Republic, Chile, Finland, France, Greece, Guatemala,
Hungary,
Indonesia,
Ireland,
Israel,
Japan,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Norway, Portugal, San
Marino, Senegal, South Africa, Thailand and the
United Republic of Tanzania — the following
delegations have also sponsored the draft resolution:
Maldives, Mali, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia and
Sweden.
We invite all interested delegations to join the
sponsorship in this very important effort on global
health and foreign policy.
The Acting President (spoke in French): I now
give the floor to the representative of the United
Republic of Tanzania to introduce draft resolution
A/63/L.29.
Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania):
Further to the letter sent on behalf of the United
Republic of Tanzania and Norway, as contained in
document A/63/538, I have the honour to introduce on
behalf of those two countries, as well as the sponsors,
under agenda item 44, the draft resolution contained in
document A/63/L.29, entitled “International Labour
Organization Declaration on Social Justice for a Fair
Globalization”.
The International Labour Organization (ILO)
Declaration was unanimously adopted at the ninetyseventh session of the International Labour Conference
in Geneva this past June 2008. It builds upon the report
of the World Commission on the Social Dimension of
Globalization by reaffirming ILO’s values and role in
addressing social justice in the present context of
globalization.
The Declaration comes at a time when some
2 billion people continue to seek out a living on less
than $2 per day. Recent reports indicate that an
additional 100 million people may be pushed below
this threshold by the current financial and economic
crisis. Against this backdrop, it is important to ensure
that there is a strong social dimension to globalization
whereby the benefits rather than the negative
consequences are felt by all.
The ILO Declaration provides a means of
addressing implementation of the decent work agenda
at the country level and highlights the importance of
creating more and better jobs. It institutionalizes the
concept of decent work and stresses inseparable,
interrelated and mutually supportive objectives based

08-60527

on employment creation, social protection, social
dialogue and rights at work. The Declaration deepens
the ILO’s obligation to develop programmes which
help facilitate full employment and social justice.
In order to effectively tackle the compounding
economic and social challenges of the world, it is
important for us, as Government representatives here at
United Nations Headquarters, to espouse the decisions
taken by our respective Governments at different
forums to maintain policy coherence.
Since 1999 when the decent work agenda was
originally presented, various conferences and summits
have taken place to underscore its importance. The
2005 World Summit was the first affirmation by heads
of State and Government at the United Nations in
support of a fair globalization and of making the goals
of full and productive employment and decent work for
all a central objective of our relevant national and
international policies, as well as our national
development strategies.
Other meetings — such as the 2004 African
Union summit in Ouagadougou, the 2005 Summit of
the Americas in Argentina, the 2005 Council of the
European Union (EU), the 2008 EU/Asia-Europe
Forum Summit, various summits of the Group of Eight,
the Declaration recently adopted at the High-level
Meeting on Africa’s Development Needs and others —
have all reaffirmed the importance of well-designed
economic and social policies towards the fulfilment of
decent work for all. The ILO Declaration builds upon
and enriches the decisions taken at these and other
major conferences and summits and adds to the work
undertaken by the broader United Nations system on
the wider issues of social justice.
The draft resolution before the General Assembly
acknowledges the important adoption of the ILO
Declaration on Social Justice for a Fair Globalization.
It reaffirms in its preambular paragraphs the
interrelated issues and decisions taken in various
resolutions, and underscores the importance of forging
decent work possibilities, particularly in view of the
present financial and economic crisis. The operative
paragraphs call for the continued promotion of the
decent work agenda by the United Nations system
through the use of the Toolkit for Mainstreaming
Employment and Decent Work, and further calls upon
Member States to consider expanding the use of the
Toolkit at the national level in order to help identify

7

A/63/PV.51

appropriate and conducive areas for promoting decent
work possibilities throughout the various ministries.

development efforts, is just one illustration of the lack
of an enabling international environment.

I should add that the United Republic of Tanzania
has been working to apply the Toolkit at the national
level, and we are finding it to be an extremely useful
tool for bringing together our various ministries to
coherently address employment challenges.

The 2005 World Summit embraced a broader
concept of internationally agreed development goals,
not just limited to the Millennium Development Goals.
Those can be reached only through the implementation
of the broader set of commitments undertaken at the
major United Nations conferences and summits.
Further, the different goals and targets adopted at these
conferences and summits can be achieved only if they
are pursued together in an integrated manner.

The operative section also recognizes the
inclusive and cross-cutting principles contained in the
ILO Declaration and thereby requests the SecretaryGeneral to consider the Declaration when reporting on
related items in the economic and social fields.
Through our unanimous adoption of the
document, each of our Governments has signed on to
share in the ambitions and objectives contained in the
ILO Declaration. The United Republic of Tanzania,
Norway and all the other sponsors believe that the
present draft resolution would help facilitate policy
coherence throughout the broader United Nations
system in the areas of promoting decent work, fair
globalization and social justice. The Declaration
elevates the decent work agenda to a new and more
profound level in this twenty-first century. We would
like to call upon all Member States to review the
present draft resolution and we would welcome further
joint support through more sponsorships.
Mr. Topdar (India): We welcome the opportunity
to participate in this joint debate on the various agenda
items relating to the integrated and coordinated
implementation of and follow-up to the outcomes of
the major United Nations conferences and summits in
the economic, social and related fields. We thank the
Secretary-General for his report on these issues.
United Nations conferences and summits held
since the 1990s have generated an unprecedented
global consensus on a shared vision of development.
However, what is of concern is the lack of similar
consensus in the matter of implementing that vision.
Implementation remains hampered, first, by a
continuing lack of adequate resources and, further, by
the absence of an enabling international environment. I
do not need to repeat facts to highlight the lack of
resources, such as the continuing fall in official
development assistance flows or the net outflow of
resources from developing to developed countries. The
ongoing financial crisis, which did not originate in
developing countries but is impairing their

8

In this regard, we have repeatedly emphasized the
importance of development-oriented international
economic, financial and trade policies to assist
developing countries in their development initiatives.
Globalization, with its enhancement of the flow of
capital and goods without sufficient attention to its
adverse impacts, has made the need for such prodevelopment policies imperative and most urgent. This
has been amply demonstrated by the current financial
crisis, coupled with the food crisis and higher risks to
energy security.
To ensure that international policies are prodevelopment, the concerns of developing countries
must be effectively taken on board in the formulation
and implementation of those policies. Unfortunately,
current institutional structures do not permit this, even
though developing countries are those most affected.
We are heartened by the near-global consensus on
the need for an urgent and fundamental reform of the
international financial and economic architecture. Such
reform must enhance the voice and participation of
developing countries in the decision-making and normsetting processes. In order to make this process as
inclusive as possible, the United Nations, with its
unique position and legitimacy, should play a key role.
Trade must assist countries in their development
efforts. An early development-oriented outcome of the
Doha Development Round of trade negotiations that
does not sacrifice the livelihood concerns of millions
of poor and marginal farmers is of paramount
importance. We also need to accelerate the
implementation of the development mandate of the
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual
Property Rights. We must ensure that rewards for
innovators are balanced with benefits for humankind,
in particular in areas such as public health, sharing the
benefits of the uses of genetic resources and affordable

08-60527

A/63/PV.51

environment-friendly technologies that are crucial for
addressing climate change and other related issues.
The Economic and Social Council has a crucial
role to play in fostering a comprehensive development
agenda for the United Nations through an integrated
and coordinated implementation of commitments. The
Council has an acknowledged role as a principal body
for coordination, policy review, policy dialogue and
recommendations on issues of economic and social
development. The strengthening of the Economic and
Social Council in 2006 and the incorporation of new
elements in its functioning, were useful steps in this
regard. We highlight in particular the importance of the
new mandate given to the Council in 2006 to undertake
the regular and periodic review and assessment of
international economic and development policies and
their impact on development. We must enhance the
capacities of the Economic and Social Council in order
to enable it to effectively implement this mandate,
including carrying out periodic reviews of the policies
of international financial institutions from a
development perspective.
It is satisfying that the annual ministerial review
of the Economic and Social Council has become an
important event to review efforts to achieve the
Millennium Development Goals and learn through the
sharing of experiences. The review must have an added
focus on evaluating the implementation of the global
partnership for development. The Development
Cooperation Forum, which held its first session earlier
this year, must consolidate its unique role in overseeing
trends in international development cooperation. The
Council should also continue to discuss topical and
emerging issues and provide policy inputs and
guidance. Only through such an integrated approach
can the development agenda be maintained at the core
of United Nations efforts.
Strengthening the United Nations system without
the comprehensive reform of the Security Council is
inconceivable. The reform of the Security Council
must include an expansion in the permanent and
non-permanent categories and an improvement in its
working methods. Let us recall that at the 2005 World
Summit we pledged early reform of the Security
Council, identifying it as an essential element of our
overall efforts to reform the United Nations. The
continued delay in reforming the Security Council
illustrates the fundamental deficiency in implementing
decisions that have been adopted.

08-60527

Consultations in the Open-ended Working Group
have outlived their utility. We are happy that there has
been unanimous recognition of this fact, and in
decision 62/557, adopted on 15 September 2008, the
General
Assembly
agreed
to
commence
intergovernmental negotiations in informal plenary,
based on proposals of Member States, within a defined
time frame. We fully support the decision of the
President of the General Assembly to commence these
negotiations on 21 November 2008. This is entirely in
line with decision 62/557, and we look forward to the
negotiating process producing concrete results.
The United Nations system also cannot be
strengthened without revitalizing the General
Assembly. This must be not simply a technical process
concerned with the agenda and the technical means
employed, but also a political process in which the
General Assembly takes important political decisions
on comprehensively reforming the Security Council, on
issues of peace under certain circumstances, on having
an actual say in the election of the Secretary-General,
and so forth. An important part of such reform would
be to increase the accountability of the Secretariat to
the Member States and the efficiency of the Secretariat
itself.
Before concluding, I wish to highlight the fact
that we are now in the process of negotiating the
outcome document of the Doha International
Conference on Financing for Development. It is
important that we do not perpetuate an endless cycle of
commitments without implementation, and the Doha
outcome document will focus appropriately on means
of implementation.
Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, I wish to express my thanks
to my colleague, the Permanent Representative of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, for introducing draft
resolution A/63/L.22 on the financial crisis and its
consequences, which represents a unique opportunity
for the “G 192” — the 192 Members of the United
Nations — to achieve the essential global participation
in political, economic and financial decision-making.
As a sponsor of the draft resolution, my country
associates itself fully with the statement made by the
representative of Venezuela.
For decades, the developing countries have seen
demands and exhortations of every sort imposed upon
us, particularly with regard to good governance.

9

A/63/PV.51

However, today we are meeting to discuss a crisis
arising from nothing but the bad management of a few.
At a conservative estimate, this has cost more than
$3 trillion. The mantra of the free market and the
theory that it should function without Government
regulation has been contradicted by the massive
intervention of Government bodies to staunch the
financial crisis, at the request of the very proponents of
the system. Ironically, it now turns out that State
intervention and market regulation are the answer.
The implosion of the capitalist system, with its
disastrous consequences spreading like wildfire
throughout the world, are undeniable reasons that the
answer to — or better yet, replacement of — this
moribund model should henceforth be on an equally
global scale. There must be a global and
comprehensive response sustained by the principle of
human primacy over the production of goods. To that
end, the future social, economic and cultural
integration of nations and peoples must become a
global objective.
To the delegation of Nicaragua, it is clear that,
unfortunately, we are among those who have had
neither a voice nor a vote in decisions on economic,
financial and trade policies, yet are bearing the heavy
cost of a crisis not of our making. Hundreds of millions
of people living in poverty are paying that price with
their lives.
The draft resolution before us proposes what
rightly should always have obtained, given that we,
more than 130 developing countries accounting for two
thirds of the members of the General Assembly,
provide 75 per cent of global economic growth.
The facts clearly demonstrate the inability of the
system and institutions created 60 years ago to lead the
world in the twenty-first century; neither can a small
group of countries claim to do so, be they “G” plus any
other number. The values of democracy are universal
and applicable in all spheres, including with respect to
formulating economic and financial policies.
Democratization is an imperative for the development
of the nations of the world, so that at last all of us may
enjoy the advantages of economic, social and cultural
development.
Lastly, I appeal to Member States to support the
draft resolution, as only with the support of the G192,
within the framework of the United Nations and on an
equal footing, can we work to create a new order, with

10

institutions and economic and financial policies that
will not just put an end to this crisis, but ensure that it
will not happen again. Only thus shall we demolish the
model postulated on the domination of some over
others.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Eight years after its adoption, implementing
the Millennium Declaration remains an uncontested
priority of the international agenda.
Implementing the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs), increasingly urgent challenges in
development financing, combating the negative impact
of climate change and issues such as the food crisis and
the tremendous problems in the area of global health
are justifiably the focus of United Nations attention.
Russia supports the work of the Organization in
those areas, since specific steps to advance sustainable
socio-economic developments throughout the world are
also needed to counter threats to peace and security
effectively.
The political momentum needed at the
Millennium Summit of the United Nations to
implement the MDGs has not only not faded but has
been strengthened, as borne out by the high-level event
of the General Assembly on 25 October. In the global
economic and financial crisis, achieving progress in the
implementation of the MDGs will require reinvigorated
efforts by the international community. The United
Nations must play a leading political and organizing
role. In that regard, Russia supports the idea of holding
a United Nations summit in 2010 on implementing the
internationally agreed development goals, and we are
grateful to the President of the General Assembly for
initiating the consultative preparatory process for that
event.
The MDGs remain steadfastly the focus of the
international development agenda. Attention to them
must only grow as we approach 2015. Similarly,
today’s debate in the General Assembly confirms the
diverse ways to ensure development and increased
well-being throughout the world. We are confident that
during the upcoming consultations we will reach
consensus on all the parameters for holding the
summit, including its thematic scope.
Regarding the theme of financing for
development, we are pinning our hopes on the success
of the Doha Conference and its final adoption of a

08-60527

A/63/PV.51

politically comprehensive and practical document that
reflects the approaches of all Member States. We
believe that all countries interested in strengthening the
role of the United Nations in global affairs will
demonstrate, during the final stages of the negotiating
process on the outcome document, political will, a
sober and pragmatic approach and the ability to
concentrate on the most important aspects, as well as
flexibility and willingness to compromise.
We agree that health issues are completely
justifiably occupying an increasingly prominent place
in the United Nations. Russia supports greater attention
to health on the Organization’s agenda and for the
President of the General Assembly to include it among
his priorities. In so doing, we advocate that it receive
coordinated, consistent and unified consideration
within the various areas of the United Nations
involving the United Nations Organization and its
specialized agencies, with an effective division of
labour among them and under the coordination of the
Economic and Social Council.
The United Nations agencies must also make
further efforts with regard to food security. Effectively
countering the food crisis is a joint responsibility,
requiring agreed and decisive action by the whole
international community that is comprehensive and
includes both short- and long-term measures, to be
implemented with close international coordination. We
welcome the efforts already made in that regard within
the United Nations and its specialized agencies.
The United Nations must not remain on the
sidelines in dealing with the consequences of the
global financial and economic crisis. We need a
considered and balanced approach on a consensus basis
on the format and specific parameters of the
Organization’s involvement in future work in that area.
At this time, it is important not only to handle
critical issues and to minimize the negative impact of
the crisis, but also to make maximum use of new
opportunities from a long-term perspective. The crisis
has confirmed the need to reorganize the entire
international financial architecture to ensure its
openness and fairness, as well as its effectiveness and
legitimacy. Reform of the international financial
system — an issue made more urgent by the crisis — is
being and will be discussed in very different formats.
Naturally, attention is chiefly fixed on the outcome of
the recent Group of Twenty summit, which is to play

08-60527

an important part in
economic cooperation.

coordinating

international

At the same time, we see a key role for the
United Nations, with its unique legitimacy and
unifying capability, in ensuring agreement and
consistency in the operation of a reformed international
financial system for development. From the United
Nations we can expect a strong political gesture and
specific steps, linking reform efforts with general
development challenges.
In that regard, we support Venezuela’s initiative
to convene a high-level meeting during the sixty-third
session of the General Assembly to conduct a
comprehensive analysis of the international financial
system, which is in line with strengthening
multilateralism and solving fundamental economic
problems. The successful implementation of that
initiative will require the broadest support of Member
States, reflected in a balanced consensus resolution
agreed during open-ended consultations. We are
confident that during those consultations we will take
due account of the conclusions of the Group of Twenty
summit and the Doha Conference on Financing for
Development. It is also very important that today’s
draft resolution (A/63/L.29) call for a substantive role
for the Economic and Social Council in preparing the
relevant recommendations for the General Assembly.
The challenges of the United Nations in
following up the outcomes of the Millennium Summit
are not fully captured by the above-mentioned areas.
Further conflicts in world politics, owing to worsening
regional crises, the terrorist threat, the risk of the
spread of weapons of mass destruction and the
standstill in disarmament, are threatening international
stability and require an appropriate response.
Recognizing the need to strengthen joint
initiatives in global politics — there being no
alternative but to solve our problems through
multilateral diplomacy — should help reinforce the
fundamental role of the United Nations as the sole
mechanism for maintaining international peace and
global security and helping to promote collective
regulation of international relations in dealing with
problems holding us back from sustainable socioeconomic development and implementation of the
MDGs. That is fully in line with the political
provisions of the Millennium Summit.

11

A/63/PV.51

Mrs. Núñez Mordoche (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): Expressions of concern over the current
global financial and economic crisis and the damage it
causes to financial, commercial and economic
international relations, particularly its negative impact
on underdeveloped economies, are heard daily
everywhere. Almost all world leaders are forced to
make reference to the subject in their public
statements.

For that reason our country is honoured to
sponsor, along with an important number of nations,
draft resolution A/63/L.22, tabled by the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela and entitled “The world
financial and economic crisis and its consequences”.
Its main objective is to convene a United Nations
summit to review those matters, particularly the work
of the Bretton Woods institutions, which have been
discredited in the eyes of the world.

Undoubtedly, that crisis is a direct consequence
of the current international economic order, governed
by neoliberal globalization that up to now has favoured
the most powerful countries, which are at the core of
the world monetary and financial system, and has had
considerable effect on Third World countries. The
principles of deregulation and many of the recent
financial developments to date have been based on the
false hypothesis that market forces balance. However,
the obvious chaotic situation that we are facing is clear
proof that that theory is not viable, which our countries
have been warning for many years.

We hope that the aforementioned draft resolution
will be able to count on the support of the
overwhelming majority of the Member States of this
Organization, so as to start with the inclusive,
transparent and democratic process so necessary today,
concerning world financial and economic operations.

No one can deny that financial globalization is
today threatening mankind’s actual wealth. Besides,
the vulnerable dollar, the financial imbalances and the
economic recession in the United States belie the myth
of the soundness and reliability of current international
financial institutions and seriously question the
foundations of the present day capitalist system. The
economic crisis continues its inexorable progress,
despite the desperate bailout plans designed by the
most intransigent detractors of State intervention in
economic affairs. Nonetheless, even amid the
seriousness of the situation, the attempts to perpetuate
the current order of things continue proliferating in
meetings and closed-door discussions among the most
powerful countries, which are only attempting to make
cosmetic alterations to the international financial
system, hoping to keep it under their absolute control
and to continue marginalizing the vast majority of
world nations from participating in global economic
and financial decision-making.
The scandalous lack of democracy and
transparency in the international financial system and
its main institutions is more evident than ever. What
we need today is a profound reform of the system with
the participation of all nations of the world as equals
and that will place the interests of developing countries
finally at the core of the new international economic
order we are fighting for.

12

We commit ourselves to working steadfastly to
achieve that purpose, from now until that summit is
held. It will undoubtedly constitute an unprecedented
event in the history of the United Nations. We take the
opportunity to call upon all nations to join in the farreaching initiative.
Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): It is my
honour to speak in my national capacity. My country
wishes to make the following brief remarks with regard
to draft resolution A/63/L.27 tabled by Switzerland,
entitled “Promoting development through the reduction
and prevention of armed violence”. France, like all
European Union States, enthusiastically supported the
declarations adopted in Geneva in June 2006 and
September 2008, which are the basis of Switzerland’s
draft resolution. We continue to fully support the
relevance of the declarations.
At the same time, we very much regret the
addition of a preambular paragraph in the draft
resolution that does not figure in any of the Geneva
declarations and which refers to a symbiotic
relationship between disarmament and development.
We challenge that link as being presented too
systematically, because in reality it is a complex
relation. My country continues to have reservations on
an overly simplistic presentation of that difficult issue.
At the same time, we do not wish to withdraw our
support of the Swiss initiative because of that one
issue, because the general thrust of the draft resolution
has not been changed. As a result, France will associate
itself with the consensus for adopting the Swiss draft
resolution (A/63/L.27).

08-60527

A/63/PV.51

Mr. Argüello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): The
delegation of the Argentine Republic is addressing the
General Assembly to express its firm support for the
draft resolution submitted by the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela, entitled “The world financial and
economic crisis and its consequences” (A/63/L.22).
The initiative from Caracas to urgently convene a
world summit to examine the reasons, significance and
alternatives with regard to the current situation is a
symbolic appeal from the developing countries, which
seek explanations and alternative solutions to the
existing market-based philosophy with regard to
bringing about integration in global society.
It is clear that the recent bailout measures for the
banking systems adopted by the authorities of the
central economies are based on that same
epistemological paradigm, namely a formula that
assigns the market a monopoly when it comes to the
allocation of resources and undermines the role that
could be played by Governments. We must look at the
fundamental causes of the current financial disaster in
order to achieve a new international financial system
based on sensible and fair policies that protect
production and seek economic development and social
inclusion.
Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria) (spoke in French): It is
our honour to sponsor the resolution entitled, “The
world financial and economic crisis and its
consequences” (A/63/L.22). We are convinced that the
initiative comes at an opportune time, allowing the
United Nations to react to the international financial
crisis, whose multidimensional consequences have a
global impact. The global nature of the crisis and its
consequences require global responses through
inclusive decision-making mechanisms.
My delegation thus takes note of the conclusions
reached at the summit of the Group of Twenty on
15 and 16 November 2008, where it was decided that a
response to the crisis could only be multilateral and
collective. From my delegation’s viewpoint, draft
resolution A/63/L.22 fully meets those concerns. In
fact, the United Nations offers a universal and
legitimate framework to assess the impact of the
financial crisis and to allow all countries to participate
in seeking appropriate solutions.
The convening of a summit by the United Nations
to assess the current financial crisis would undoubtedly
contribute to a more in-depth analysis on the

08-60527

underlying reasons for the crisis and assist in creating a
political framework that will allow us to convert the
international financial system into a system that is fair,
democratic, non-exclusive and one that takes the
interests of all Member States into account.
My delegation also believes that the draft
resolution is a complementary initiative to the ongoing
process for the Follow-up Conference on Financing for
Development, which will be held soon in Doha, and the
ongoing process of the Group of Twenty, which will
start meeting again in the spring.
We are absolutely convinced that the proposal
summit will allow us to improve the quality of
relations between the United Nations and the financial
institutions and make them more operational.
Finally, Algeria hopes that the General Assembly
will adopt this draft resolution by consensus, given its
constructive scope and inclusive nature.
The Acting President (spoke in French): We
have heard the last speaker in the debate on these
items.
I should like to inform members that the sponsors
of draft resolutions A/63/L.22, A/63/L.25, A/63/L.28
and A/63/L.29 have asked for decisions on those texts
to be deferred until a later date to be announced.
We will now take a decision on draft resolution
A/63/L.27, as orally revised. Before giving the floor to
the representative of the United States, who wishes to
speak in explanation of position, I should like to
remind delegations that explanations of vote or
position are limited to 10 minutes and should be made
by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Smolik (United States of America): The
United States fully supports implementation of the
United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and offers many
assistance programmes in this regard. In addition to our
own export control activities, we assist other States in
fully implementing the Programme of Action, in areas
such as export controls, brokering regulations,
destruction of excess weapons and stockpile security.
The United States also places a high priority on
promoting human rights, countering the causes of
conflict and supporting post-conflict initiatives.
However, the United States does not believe that

13

A/63/PV.51

additional legally binding instruments on small arms
and light weapons or associated issues, as called for by
the Geneva Declaration, are required to make an
impact on these issues, which are important to us all,
nor are such legally binding instruments likely to be
successful in accomplishing their desired goals. The
United States prefers to focus on concrete actions that
address the underlying problems, rather than expending
limited
resources
on
negotiating
additional
instruments.

Pakistan participated in the consultations to negotiate
the text of the Geneva Declaration. At that time, we
proposed certain amendments that were not accepted
and therefore we had no choice but not to attend the
summit on 7 June 2006. Prior to the regional meeting
in Bangkok in May 2008, we participated in informal
consultations in Geneva, but, again, our views were not
accommodated. During the informal consultations held
in New York earlier this month, we were presented
with a virtual fait accompli.

The Programme of Action’s strength is in its
implementation by participating States, not in
additional associated legally binding instruments.
While the United States supports working in
partnership with other stakeholders in reducing armed
violence and illicit weapons proliferation, we cannot
support the Geneva Declaration as a whole. Although
the United States does not intend to break consensus, it
cannot support the draft resolution.

However, it is heartening to see that the sponsors
of the resolution have demonstrated flexibility by
replacing “acknowledging” the Geneva Declaration
with “taking note” of it in the fourth preambular
paragraph. Similarly, the change in the fifth preambular
paragraph is welcome. However, we are convinced that
the eighth preambular paragraph is unnecessary. The
terms, goals, targets and measurable indicators are
vague and open to convenient interpretation. Similarly,
we should not declare something to be a complement to
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), which were
decided at the level of heads of State and Government.
It is also ironic that even the goals and indicators for
MDGs agreed at the summit level have not yet been
developed, especially for MDG 8. So, instead of
creating another road map, we should set our priorities
right and do first things first.

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take action on draft resolution A/63/L.27, entitled
“Promoting development through the reduction and
prevention of armed violence”, as orally revised. The
following additional countries have become sponsors
of the draft resolution: Albania, Bulgaria, Denmark,
Haiti, Jordan, Luxembourg, Mexico, Poland, the
Republic of Moldova, Slovenia, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia and Turkey. [Subsequently, the
delegation of Turkey informed the Secretariat that it
had sponsored the draft resolution in error.]
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/63/L.27, as orally revised?
Draft resolution A/63/L.27, as orally revised, was
adopted (resolution 63/23).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of position on the resolution
just adopted, I would remind delegations that
explanations of vote or position are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): In a spirit of
accommodation, the Pakistan delegation decided to go
along with the consensus on the draft resolution
entitled, “Promoting development through the
reduction and prevention of armed violence”
(A/63/L.27). However, that should not be construed as
our endorsement of the Geneva Declaration. In 2006,

14

Mr. Aly (Egypt): I am taking the floor to explain
Egypt’s position on draft resolution A/63/L.27. The
delegation of Egypt joined the consensus on A/63/L.27
in keeping with its conviction that addressing armed
violence and promoting development represent areas
where the United Nations should play a central role.
We express our appreciation to the sponsors of the
draft resolution for addressing our key concerns
regarding the earlier draft.
While the fifth preambular paragraph of the
resolution reaffirms the Millennium Summit’s
identification of development, peace and security and
human rights — the main three pillars of the work of
the United Nations — as interrelated and mutually
reinforcing, Egypt wishes to stress that any reference
to the Charter of the United Nations should begin by
the reaffirmation of the principles of the United
Nations, particularly those emphasized in the
Millennium Declaration. That includes the United
Nations principles reflected in paragraphs 5 and 6 of
the Declaration, reaffirming the importance of, inter
alia, non-interference in the internal affairs of States,

08-60527

A/63/PV.51

the territorial integrity of States, the right to selfdetermination, the right to self-defence, the peaceful
settlement of disputes and the promotion of friendly
relations among States. Objectively speaking, it would
also have been helpful to highlight the importance of
addressing the root causes of conflict and the crucial
role of multilateralism in addressing challenges related
to conflict and armed violence, including, in particular,
through the implementation of relevant resolutions
adopted by the General Assembly.
On the other hand, we welcome the reference
made in the draft resolution to the United Nations
Programme of Action on Small Arms, since the
Programme represents a consensual, well-balanced
basis for addressing the impact of illicit arms transfers
on armed violence in the context of conflict.
Acknowledging the procedural nature of this draft
resolution and the importance of the report that draft
requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General
Assembly at its sixty-fourth session, which might shed
greater light on the wide range of views on the
interrelationship between armed violence and
development, Egypt decided to join the consensus on
the draft resolution.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position. The General
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda items 44, 107 and 112.
Programme of work
The Acting President: Before proceeding
further, I would like to draw the attention of the
General Assembly to document A/INF/63/4/Rev.2,
which contains the Assembly’s programme of work and
schedule of plenary meetings for the period from
18 November to 16 December 2008 and which was
distributed to delegations this morning. As mentioned
in that document, the specific meeting focused on
development under agenda item 107, “Follow-up to the
outcome of the Millennium Summit”, originally
scheduled for Monday, 24 November, has been
postponed until Monday, 15 December 2008, in order
to better reflect ongoing developments, including the
Follow-up International Conference on Financing for

08-60527

Development to Review the Implementation of the
Monterrey Consensus, to be held in Doha from
29 November. I would like to remind members that the
lists of speakers on the items listed in document
A/INF/63/4/Rev.2 are open.
I would also like to make a few announcements
concerning the programme of work of the General
Assembly. Members will recall that the Assembly held
the debate on agenda item 45, “Culture of peace”, at its
46th to 50th plenary meetings, on 12 and 13 November
2008. May I also recall that the Assembly took action
on draft resolution A/63/L.24/Rev.1 at the 50th plenary
meeting, on 13 November 2008. However, at the
request of the sponsors, action on draft resolution
A/63/L.23 was postponed until a later date to be
announced.
I would now like to remind members of the
programme of work of the plenary for tomorrow
morning, Tuesday, 18 November 2008. The Assembly
will take up, as the first item, the report of the Second
Committee on agenda item 48, “Follow-up to and
implementation of the outcome of the 2002
International
Conference
on
Financing
for
Development and the preparation of the 2008 Review
Conference”. As the second item, the Assembly will
resume its consideration of sub-item (l) of agenda item
114, “Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Inter-Parliamentary Union”, in order to take action on
draft resolution A/63/L.26. Thereafter, the Assembly
will proceed to consider agenda item 102,
“Notification by the Secretary-General under Article
12, paragraph 2, of the Charter of the United Nations”,
as the third item; and agenda item 9, “Report of the
Security Council”, jointly with agenda item 111,
“Question of equitable representation on and increase
in the membership of the Security Council and related
matters”, as the fourth item. Members are requested to
consult the Journal of the United Nations for further
details.
Before we conclude the meeting, I would like to
remind delegations that His Excellency Mr. Evo
Morales Ayma, President of Bolivia, will address the
General Assembly at 12.30 p.m.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

15
