S/PV.8952

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

8952nd meeting

Monday, 24 January 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Heimerback. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Norway)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Xing Jisheng
Mr. De Rivière
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mr. Tirumurti
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kimani
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in Libya
Letter dated 15 December 2021 from the Chair of the Security Council
Committee etablished pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2021/1058)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (S/2022/31)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-23708 (E)
*2223708*

S/PV.8952

The situation in Libya

that spirit, briefers are further encouraged to limit their
initial remarks to 7 to 10 minutes.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda

Everyone is also encouraged to wear a mask at all
times, including while delivering remarks.

The agenda was adopted.

I give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.

The situation in Libya
Letter dated 15 December 2021 from the Chair
of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning
Libya addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2021/1058)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(S/2022/31)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Libya to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs; and Ms. Elham Saudi, co-founder
and Director of Lawyers for Justice in Libya.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2021/1058, which contains the text of a
letter dated 15 December 2021 from the Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya addressed to
the President of the Security Council, and to document
S/2022/31, which contains the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo;
Ambassador Tirumurti, Permanent Representative of
India, in his capacity as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya; and Ms. Saudi.
Recalling the Security Council’s latest note by
the President (S/2017/507) on its working methods,
I wish to encourage all speakers, both members and
non-members of the Council, to deliver their statements
in five minutes or less. Note 507 also encourages
briefers to be succinct and to focus on key issues. In
2/21

24/01/2022

Ms. DiCarlo: I thank you, Madam President, for
the opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
latest developments in Libya.
Since the last briefing to the Council on
24 November 2021 (see S/PV.8912), growing
polarization among political actors in disputes over key
aspects of the electoral process ultimately resulted in
the postponement of the 24 December elections, despite
the advanced stage of technical preparations by the
High National Election Commission. In announcing
the postponement, the Commission cited shortcomings
in the legal framework for the elections, contradicting
court rulings on candidacies, and political and security
concerns. The Commission referred the matter to the
House of Representatives.
In response, on 28 December 2021, the House of
Representatives established a road map committee
to elaborate a new political path towards national
elections. On 17 and 18 January, the Speaker of the
House of Representatives convened Parliament and
announced that the new road map would define the
timetable and process for the holding of elections in
coordination with relevant institutions. The road map
committee is delivering its preliminary report today
and the Parliament is expected to deliberate on it today
or tomorrow.
On 5 December 2021, the Secretary-General
appointed Ms. Stephanie Williams as his Special
Adviser on Libya. The Special Adviser is working
closely with the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL), as well as with Libyan regional and
international stakeholders.
Since her arrival in Libya on 12 December,
the Special Adviser has undertaken wide-ranging
consultations in Tripoli, Benghazi, Misratah and Sirte.
She has met members of the Presidency Council, the
Government of National Unity, the High National
Election Commission, the House of Representatives,
the High State Council and the Supreme Judicial
Council, as well as candidates for the presidential and
parliamentary elections. She has also consulted with
22-23708

24/01/2022

The situation in Libya

relevant political, security and civil society actors from
across the country.
Clearly, Libyan stakeholders hold different views
regarding the path that can take the country to free, fair,
inclusive and credible national elections and a peaceful
transition. Discussion in the House of Representatives
and among political actors is also increasingly focusing
on the status of the Government of National Unity.
Special Adviser Williams has reiterated to Libyan
interlocutors that the focus of the political process
should remain on the holding of parliamentary and
presidential elections, to be held in the shortest possible
time frame.
In all her meetings, the Special Adviser highlighted
the 2.8 million Libyans who have registered to vote.
She called on all stakeholders to respect the will of the
Libyan people. She also encouraged them to continue to
focus on the holding of presidential and parliamentary
elections as soon as possible and to adhere to the timeline
agreed to in the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum road
map, which was endorsed by the Security Council.
Earlier this month, the Special Adviser held talks
with the authorities in Tunisia, Turkey, Egypt and the
Russian Federation. She also had exchanges with the
African Union, the European Union, the League of
Arab States and many other international stakeholders.
The Special Adviser stressed that it was critical for
the international community to remain united in its
support for the timely holding of presidential and
parliamentary elections.
Since our most recent briefing to the Council (see
S/PV.8912), there have been ongoing dialogue initiatives
among political, security and economic actors from
across Libya. We have seen reports of consultations
between the Speaker of the House of Representatives
and the President of the High State Council, as well
as among presidential candidates from western and
eastern Libya.

S/PV. 8952

based on the recommendations of the independent
financial audit and of the bank completed in July last
year. The Governor and Deputy Governor of the bank
shared with the economic working group of the Berlin
Process their agreed overview of the way forward on
reunification. Those are welcome developments.
We also welcome the renewed efforts, particularly
by the Presidency Council, to advance national
reconciliation based on the principles of transitional
justice. Together with the African Union, we remain
committed to supporting a rights-based reconciliation
process that should advance in parallel to the ongoing
Libyan-owned and Libya-led dialogue tracks.
The ceasefire has continued to hold; however,
political uncertainty in the run-up to the elections
negatively impacted the overall security situation,
resulting in shifting alliances among armed groups
affiliated with certain presidential candidates.
Similarly, unfulfilled demands made to the Government
of National Unity by the Petroleum Facilities Guard
(PFG) in western Libya recently resulted in the
shutdown of oil production, causing the National Oil
Corporation to declare force majeure on 20 December.
Oil production was restored on 9 January following
negotiations between the PFG and the Government of
National Unity.
As part of the efforts to implement the ceasefire
agreement, the 5+5 Joint Military Commission travelled
to Ankara and Moscow in December to discuss the
implementation of their action plan for the withdrawal
of foreign forces and mercenaries with Turkish and
Russian authorities, including the establishment of
communication and information-sharing mechanisms.
Those welcome steps build on similar mechanisms
already established with Chad, the Niger and the Sudan,
which were discussed with the African Union.

On the security track, there been meetings among
various armed groups. The Chief of General Staff of
the western military forces under the Government of
National Unity and the acting General Commander of
the Libyan National Army also met in Sirte, where they
were joined by military chiefs and heads of military
departments from both sides.

Meanwhile, the second group of international
monitors from the UNSMIL ceasefire monitoring
component deployed to Tripoli in December to
replace the first group, deployed in October. Despite
serious logistical and security challenges. UNSMIL
continues working on the establishment of the ceasefire
monitoring hub in Sirte. In that regard, we look forward
to the approval by the Government of National Unity to
proceed with the needed work on accommodation and
office facilities in Sirte.

On the economic track, further steps were taken
towards reunification of the Central Bank of Libya

The human rights situation in Libya remains
very worrying. Over the reporting period, UNSMIL

22-237083/21

S/PV.8952

The situation in Libya

documented incidents of election-related violence and
attacks based on political affiliation, as well as threats
and violence against members of the judiciary involved
in proceedings on the eligibility of electoral candidates,
and attacks against journalists, activists and individuals
expressing political views. Such incidents are an
obstacle to creating a conducive environment for free,
fair, peaceful and credible elections.
We are particularly concerned at the fact that
women and men working to protect and promote
women’s rights continue to be targeted by hate speech,
defamation and incitement to violence. Some of the
disturbing social media posts that posed a threat to the
safety and security of those persons were removed after
UNSMIL brought them to the attention of social media
platforms. Arbitrary detention in facilities operated by
State and non-State actors continues across the country,
with many detainees subjected to serious human rights
abuses. According to statistics provided by the Libyan
authorities, more than 12,000 detainees are being held
in 27 prisons and places of detention across Libya.
Thousands of additional detainees, including children,
do not appear in official statistics and are held illegally,
often in inhumane conditions.
The situation of migrants and refugees in
Libya remains highly concerning. Large numbers
of migrants and refugees attempting to cross the
Mediterranean Sea and returned to Libya continue to
be detained in inhumane and degrading conditions,
with restricted humanitarian assistance. Thousands are
unaccounted for.
A joint UNSMIL-Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights report published in
November documents the fact that hundreds of foreign
nationals were expelled in recent months to the Sudan
and Chad from Libya’s eastern and southern borders,
without due process. In many instances, the expelled
individuals were placed in extremely vulnerable
situations across remote stretches of the Sahara Desert,
without sufficient food, water, safety or medical care.
The United Nations remains ready to work with the
Libyan authorities on a long-term national response
to migration and refugee management, in line with
international law, to include addressing human
rights concerns.
I am, however, pleased to report improvements
in the overall humanitarian situation in 2021. The
United Nations recorded a 30 per cent decrease in the
4/21

24/01/2022

number of people in need of humanitarian assistance,
from 1.3 million at the start of 2021 to 803,000 by the
year’s end. Of the 278,000 Libyans internally displaced
one year ago, about 100,000 returned home in 2021.
However, challenges persist in finding durable solutions
for those still displaced and for returnee communities
that lack basic services.
Political and institutional divisions in the absence
of an approved national budget resulted in limited
improvements in basic infrastructure and service
delivery in 2021. The humanitarian response plan for
Libya, extended through May 2022, is supporting the
most vulnerable and refugee and migrant populations
but requires additional funding.
Libya is at a delicate and fragile juncture on its
path to unity and stability. We welcome and support
the positive developments taking place across the
three intra-Libyan dialogue tracks and recognize
the challenges that must be overcome. We need to
collectively nurture those positive steps. It is critical
that the international community remain united in its
support for elections, guided by the aspirations of the
Libyan people, to be governed by elected institutions.
As so many Libyans have told us, the way forward
towards a stable and united Libya is through the ballot
box, not the gun. We must stand with them.
The President: I thank Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Tirumurti.
Mr. Tirumurti: In accordance with paragraph 24 (e)
of resolution 1970 (2011), of 26 February 2011, I have
the honour to report to the Security Council on the work
of the Committee established by the same resolution.
The report covers the period from 25 November 2021 to
24 January 2022, during which time the Committee held
two informal consultations and conducted additional
work by silence procedure.
Allow me to begin by noting that the annual report
on the work of the Committee for 2021 is available in
document S/2021/1058.
During the informal consultations held on
1 December 2021, the Committee heard a presentation
by the Coordinator of the Panel of Experts on the
interim report of the Panel, submitted to the Committee
on 22 November 2021 in accordance with resolution
2571 (2021), and discussed the recommendation
contained therein. The interim report, which highlights
aspects related to the implementation of the travel
22-23708

24/01/2022

The situation in Libya

ban, assets freezes, the arms embargo and measures
in relation to attempts to illicitly export petroleum,
including references to incidents of non-compliance, was
submitted to the Security Council on 15 December 2021.
During the informal consultations held on
16 December 2021, which was organized in response to
a communication received from the Libyan Investment
Authority (LIA), a listed entity, the Committee received
a briefing from the LIA on issues pertaining to assetfreeze implementation. Remarks were also made by the
representative of Libya. In the interactive discussion
that followed, Committee members emphasized the
importance of preserving the integrity and value of
the Libyan frozen assets for the benefit of the Libyan
people. As to the arms embargo, the Committee received
a vessel-inspection report from European Union Naval
Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI.
In relation to the assets freeze, the Committee
received two notifications from Bahrain invoking
paragraph 21 of resolution 1970 (2011). The Committee
acknowledged receipt of one of the notifications, while
a response to the other is still under consideration.
With regard to the travel-ban measure, the Committee
extended for a second time a six-month exemption
request, granted for humanitarian purposes, to three
individuals on the Committee’s list — Ms. Safia Farkash
Al-Barassi, Ms. Aisha Al-Qadhafi and Mr. Mohammed
Al-Qadhafi. The Committee received a travel
notification from Ms. Aisha Al-Qadhafi, under the
aforementioned travel-ban exemption. The Committee
also received a letter from Libya pertaining to the
previously approved travel-ban exemption and limited
assets-freeze exemption for Mr. Abu Zayd Umar Dorda;
a response is under consideration.
Concerning the sanctions list, the Committee
received a third communication from the focal point
for de-listing established pursuant to resolution 1730
(2006), in connection with the submission of a de-listing
request by an individual. The focal point process is
still ongoing.
In conclusion, I would like to recall my intention to
work proactively to organize a visit of the Committee
to all the agreed areas of Libya, subject to logistical
and security arrangements, as mentioned in the
Committee’s annual reports for 2018, 2019, 2020 and
2021 (see S/2018/1176, S/2019/972, S/2020/1256 and
S/2021/1058, respectively). I would also like to reiterate

S/PV. 8952

the Committee’s commitment to contributing to
promoting peace and stability in Libya.
The President: I thank Ambassador Tirumurti for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Saudi.
Ms. Saudi: My name is Elham Saudi. I am a
Libyan woman, a mother, a lawyer and a human rights
defender who has been working for peace and justice in
Libya for over 10 years. Today I address the Security
Council as Director of Lawyers for Justice in Libya
(LFJL), a non-governmental organization dedicated to
strengthening the rule of law and human rights in Libya.
In 2012, LFJL travelled across Libya speaking
with thousands of Libyans about their aspirations for
their country’s constitution and transition to a stable
democracy. In 2021, 10 years on, we performed another
consultation. Much remained the same: a desire for
peace, a determination to achieve lasting reconciliation
and a constitution that protects human rights and
prevents a return to dictatorship.
Some things changed. Perceptions of justice have
become more urgent. Accountability for war crimes and
human rights violations is now a paramount demand.
When LFJL last briefed this Council in 2019 (see
S/PV.8611), it was during the peak of the war in Tripoli.
Since then, those hostilities have ended, a fragile
ceasefire has been adopted, a Unity Government
has been appointed and a road map to elections has
been drafted – all under the auspices of the United
Nations. This progress may be invaluable, but it is also
reversible as long as impunity prevails for crimes and
violations of a decade of wars fought outside of any
conventions. This impunity empowers those that the
Security Council often calls “spoilers” and has enabled
the failure of those elections that are enshrined in this
Council’s resolutions and to which the 2.8 million
Libyans who registered to vote aspired.
My briefing today focuses on three main areas:
the electoral process; the accountability deficit and the
renewal of the mandate of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL).
Libya’s elections were intended to restore
legitimacy to Libyan politics. If we are to ensure
a legitimate outcome, the process must itself be
considered legitimate. Elections must be rooted in a
clear, unpoliticized and, thus, incontestably legitimate

22-237085/21

S/PV.8952

The situation in Libya

24/01/2022

legal basis — and a constitutional basis that provides
for continued progress after election day.

support — financially, logistically and politically — the
Office of the Prosecutor.

Earlier this month, the Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General said that it is possible and needed to
have an electoral event before the end of June. Focusing
on the dates for the elections, instead of a clear process
to facilitate them, risks once again compromising due
process for the sake of perceived political expediency.

Beyond the ICC, recent developments demonstrate
the impact of States exercising universal jurisdiction
over universal crimes. Where States put in place the
legal and institutional frameworks to prosecute crimes
against humanity irrespective of where, by whom and
against whom they are committed, such frameworks
help to make the world a smaller place for perpetrators,
and often, they are the only avenue available to victims.
This is the case for Libya, and Libya appreciates the
efforts undertaken by some states to investigate
international crimes committed in the country.

A mediation process that learns the lessons
from Libya’s last few years should focus on creating
milestones, including the requirements of an
electoral law, a code for conducting the elections and
a constitutional basis that appropriately sequences
presidential and legislative elections, in line with a
broader road map for the newly elected authorities to
conclude Libya’s transitional period effectively. If the
Special Adviser’s mediation process can get those right,
then the election dates will naturally follow, and they
will be elections that are far easier to manage, protect
and successfully deliver.
Accountability is far too often portrayed as an
obstacle to practical politics, but the last year of Libya’s
electoral process has shown why accountability is
in fact a prerequisite to political progress. Poorly
defined and fundamentally weak vetting criteria
applied to candidates in the delayed elections
resulted in individuals implicated in corruption, war
crimes, crimes against humanity and human rights
violations, including persons who have been indicted
by the International Criminal Court (ICC) or who have
command responsibility over persons indicted by the
Court being accepted as candidates.
In its October 2021 report, the United Nations
Independent Fact-Finding Mission on Libya (FFM)
concluded that there are reasonable grounds to believe
that war crimes and crimes against humanity have been
committed in the country. The lack of accountability for
such crimes enshrines impunity, prevents sustainable
peace and hinders any political progress.
Individual criminal accountability can break
this circle of impunity and deter future crimes. The
Council recognized this when it referred the situation
in Libya to the ICC. Prosecutor Khan made clear in
his recent address to the Council (see S/PV.8948)
that the situation in Libya is a priority for his Office
precisely because it is a Security Council referral.
However, with that referral, comes a responsibility
for the Member States and the United Nations itself to
6/21

The Chair of the FFM stated that those responsible
for crimes and violations in Libya include all parties to
the conflict — and that includes third States, foreign
fighters and mercenaries. This has also been confirmed
by reports from non-governmental organizations.
There is therefore an imperative on States to consider
all perpetrators, whether from Libya or not and whether
operating in Libya or outside it.
The Security Council also showed a commitment
to accountability by setting up the sanctions committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011). Sanctions
have so far been the only direct consequence for a
few alleged perpetrators of human rights violations.
However, unless applied transparently and consistently,
including by sanctioning third States for breaching
the arms embargo by supplying Libyan parties with
arms, sanctions can be perceived as arbitrary and
insufficient. Additionally, when deployed in isolation
instead of within a wider strategy or policy, sanctions
do not provide victims with redress or reparation, nor
do they provide accountability for gross human rights
violations and serious international crimes.
Given Libya’s accountability deficit, and the wider
challenges created by a decade of conflict, Libya’s
civil society has had to fill many vacuums. This comes
at a high cost. The systematic crackdown on civil
society by all parties in Libya, including by the current
Government of National Unity, has seen civil society
organizations, and especially those working on human
rights and peacebuilding, harassed and prevented from
carrying out their work. Members of civil society have
been threatened, disappeared, tortured and killed
in retaliation for their work or public presence. The
Council, as well as Member States that have been
22-23708

24/01/2022

The situation in Libya

supporting Libyan parties, must demand the protection
of Libya’s civil society.
Particularly targeted are women human rights
defenders and women exercising their right to
participate in political or public life. They face
reprisals both offline and online, with systematic and
coordinated smear campaigns against them that cause
them to retreat from public life. We welcome the recent
open debate (see S/PV.8949) on the theme: “Protecting
participation: addressing violence targeting women in
peace and security processes.” It is an important first
step, and we look forward to seeing concrete steps by
the Council to implement recommendations made in
that debate.
I deeply hope that the next civil society
representative who briefs the Council will be able
to take their rightful seat at this table and speak out
without having the threat of reprisals be a factor in their
decision to do so.
The Council is due to review UNSMIL’s mandate
today. The Mission plays an important role in mediation
and the political process. However, as the independent
strategic review of UNSMIL recommended, the
approach and structural mechanism of UNSMIL should
consider not only the political track, but also economic,
security, humanitarian and human rights priorities,
mindful of the interlinkages between them.
Mainstreaming human rights involves more than
tokenistic meetings with civil society or the insertion of
appropriate language to a political deal forged behind
closed doors. It is about applying a human-rights-based
approach that ensures that the process protects, enshrines
and promotes the human rights of every Libyan and
ensures inclusivity, including by empowering victims
and allowing them to play an active role. Without
mainstreaming human rights, UNSMIL sacrifices the
rights of Libyans in pursuit of unsustainable and shortsighted notions of political progress.
It is therefore vital to the prospects of Libya’s fragile
ongoing political processes that structural mechanisms
applying more comprehensive and transparent oversight
of UNSMIL’s activities in order to hold it accountable
to the Libyan people and the Council are worked into
future iterations of its mandate.
As we look ahead to another challenging year in
Libya, we call on the Security Council and Member
States to do five things.

S/PV. 8952

First, they must support an electoral process rooted
in a legitimate legislative and constitutional framework
and that identifies and pursues the key steps needed
to create a secure and conducive environment for
Libya’s elections.
Secondly, they must demand accountability of all
parties to the conflict, including third States, foreign
fighters and mercenaries, including by providing all
necessary financial, logistical and political support
to the ICC and by facilitating universal jurisdiction
investigations in Member States.
Thirdly, they must apply sanctions fairly,
transparently and consistently, in accordance with
human rights standards and due process and in
coordination with other accountability mechanisms,
in order to contribute to judicial accountability and
redress for victims.
Fourthly, they must protect women and civil society.
They must demand that Libyan authorities ensure an
enabling environment for women and civil society, in
particular, human rights defenders and peacebuilders,
including by supporting Libya’s efforts to create a
national action plan on women, peace and security.
Finally, they must adopt and implement the
recommendations of the independent strategic review
of UNSMIL in order to strengthen the Mission’s
effectiveness and ensure that it can deliver its mandate
fully across all tracks, especially the human rights and
international humanitarian law track, including by
providing UNSMIL with the resources, capacities and
support needed.
I would like to end not with my words, but with
those of a representative of the families of the victims
of the mass graves discovered in Tarhuna, whom we
recently interviewed. He said:
“Can you imagine seeing people killed in front of
your eyes? Then you cannot sleep for days … If
the law is not applied, then revenge becomes the
only answer and then blood will reach to our knees.
If there is justice, then peace will prevail and the
cycle of revenge will stop.”
It is for them and for every victim and family in
Libya that the Council must act.
The President: I thank Ms. Saudi for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.

22-237087/21

S/PV.8952

The situation in Libya

Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and Ms. Saudi
for briefing the Council today. I also thank Ambassador
Tirumurti for his update. I would also like to take this
opportunity to thank the Secretary-General’s Special
Adviser on Libya, Ms. Stephanie Williams, for her
tireless work and extensive outreach across Libya.
As we have heard today and as is set out in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2022/31), Libya is at a
critical juncture. The delay of the elections planned
for last December was disappointing. We must
maintain momentum.
In that regard, I would like to make three
points today.
First, I reaffirm the United Kingdom’s full support
for the United Nations-facilitated and Libyan-led and
owned political process. Successful free, fair and
inclusive elections will continue to be a crucial step in
this process. The Libyan people have made clear their
aspirations to have a say in who governs them. However,
if we are to move forward and avoid continued delays and
uncertainty, it is vital that the challenges that prevented
elections from going ahead in December are addressed.
In that connection, I listened carefully to Ms. Saudi’s
remarks on the importance of accountability.
It is important that we all continue to support the
work of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) to bring together the political, security
and economic tracks in support of Libya’s stability,
sovereignty and national unity. That is why we have
proposed a draft resolution to renew UNSMIL’s mandate.
Secondly, we continue to call for the full, equal and
meaningful inclusion of women and youth in the peace
and wider political process. We note that approximately
1 million of the 2.8 million registered voters are female.
However, of the 98 individuals who registered to stand
in the presidential elections last December, just two
were women. A process that represents only half the
population is not a sustainable or inclusive one. Women
must be able to participate as both candidates and
voters without fear of reprisals or intimidation. I am
grateful to those women who put themselves forward to
represent their communities despite those challenges.
Finally, it is more important than ever that
international actors withdraw all foreign forces and
mercenaries from Libya without further delay. We
recommend the 5+5 Joint Military Commission’s
8/21

24/01/2022

action plan as an important initial step, but it is now
incumbent on all to support its implementation. We
encourage further progress on a plan to monitor and
verify the presence and withdrawal of all foreign forces
and mercenaries.
As ever, the United Kingdom stands ready to
work with Libya and our international partners in
order to build a more peaceful, stable future for the
Libyan people.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): I thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under
Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs, and Ambassador Tirumurti, Permanent
Representative of India and Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011) concerning Libya, for their comprehensive
briefings. We also listened carefully to Ms. Saudi’s
briefing and welcome the participation of Ambassador
Taher Elsonni, Permanent Representative of Libya, in
today’s meeting.
At the outset, we stress the importance of the
international community’s commitment to protecting
the future of the State of Libya and supporting the
brotherly Libyan people. Throughout the past decade,
Libya has faced many difficult challenges that have
prolonged the suffering of its people. However, in
the light of recent progress and current international
momentum, we see today an opportunity to achieve the
security and stability that we all seek in Libya.
In that context, we would like to focus on
three points.
First, we stress that there is no alternative to a
political and diplomatic settlement in Libya. We welcome
in this regard all Libyan efforts to achieve those goals.
We also commend the United Nations endeavours in
supporting the implementation of the agreed political
outcomes of the second Berlin Conference and the
Libyan Political Dialogue Forum, which is supported
by resolutions 2570 (2021) and 2571 (2021).
However, in the context of recent developments in
Libya that have prevented the holding of presidential
and parliamentary elections, we emphasize our respect
for Libya’s decision. The United Arab Emirates hopes
that the causes of the postponement will be addressed
in a manner that meets the aspirations of the Libyan
people. We also call on all parties and local actors to
adopt dialogue as a means to reach national consensus
22-23708

24/01/2022

The situation in Libya

built on the legal and procedural rules of the elections
and to respect and abide by their results. We stress, in
that regard, the need to ensure the full, fair and equal
participation of Libyan women and youth.
Secondly, my country emphasizes the importance
of the pivotal work carried out by the 5+5 Joint Military
Commission, under the auspices of the United Nations,
to achieve stability and peace in Libya. We stress the
need to ensure the implementation of the signed action
plan for the withdrawal of foreign forces, fighters
and mercenaries from Libya in a concurrent, phased,
gradual and balanced manner.
We also welcome the establishment of the
communication and coordination mechanism agreed by
the Commission, together with Libya’s neighbouring
countries, in Cairo in November 2021 to support the
plan. We look forward to the Joint Military Commission
continuing to play its constructive and consensual role
on that important track.
In the light of the current situation, we call for a
continuation of efforts to seriously address the issue
of the withdrawal of foreign forces and mercenaries,
given its significance to the security track. That will
also reflect positively on the political track and support
the economic track, and provide wider scope for
strengthening efforts to combat cross-border terrorists
and armed groups while controlling illegal migration.
In that context, we welcomed the meeting held in
Sirte on 11 December 2021, which brought together
the Libyan parties concerned to discuss the ways and
means of unifying the military and security institutions
and integrating armed formations.
Finally, the United Arab Emirates renews its full
support for the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya. We commend the role played by the Mission
in coordinating and mediating the various political
and security mechanisms and initiatives led by the
Libyans. We call on the Mission to take into account
the importance of adopting a balanced approach that
prioritizes all areas in Libya.
In conclusion, we emphasize our full support for
all Libyans and the importance of fully committing
to upholding Libya’s sovereignty, independence and
national unity. We hope that efforts will be pooled to
end divisions and that all parties will be able to turn the
page of the past so that Libyans can reach a consensus
solution through dialogue, based on Libyan national
reconciliation, to achieve the aspirations of the brotherly

S/PV. 8952

Libyan people for building a united Libyan State that
enjoys sustainable peace, stability and prosperity.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I too would like to
thank our briefers: Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo,
Ambassador Tirumurti and, especially, our civil society
briefer, Ms. Elham Saudi. She delivered several very
important messages to us this morning and we will
reflect on her cogent and very courageous remarks.
Let me begin by noting that we look forward to
the substantive renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) at the end
of the month. The Mission continues to do vital work on
the ground in Libya.
At the first meetings of the Libyan Political Dialogue
Forum in November 2020, participants representing the
full spectrum of Libyan society committed to a road map
leading to democratic, inclusive and credible national
elections. Libyans and the international community
reaffirmed that solemn commitment in Berlin, Tripoli
and once again in Paris, in November 2021. Since then,
2.8 million Libyans have registered to vote, showing
their determination to decide their own future and turn
the page on a lost decade of conflict and instability.
We call on all Libyan stakeholders to address the
underlying issues that have held back progress in the
electoral process to date and to swiftly commit to
holding free, fair and inclusive elections, as soon as
possible. The international community and the United
Nations stand ready to support the Libyan authorities.
I commend the critical work carried out by the High
National Election Commission in preparing the country
for a Libyan-led and Libyan-owned electoral process
against a challenging backdrop. That crucial work
now continues.
As Ms. Asma Khalifa told the Security Council
in September 2021 (see S/PV.8855), and as we heard
earlier once again from Ms. Saudi, Libyan women
have been repeatedly failed by all actors in Libya. We
should not accept the fact that only those who have not
been in conflict get a chance to shape the peace. As
Libyans continue on the path to peace, the full, equal,
meaningful and safe participation of women and the
inclusion of youth in all areas of Libya’s political,
economic and security sectors must be secured. Libyan
women must be included in the political discussions
that will determine the future of their country, Libya.

22-237089/21

S/PV.8952

The situation in Libya

The ceasefire agreement of October 2020 cleared
the space for a political process. We commend the
progress made to date on its implementation. The
coastal road between Sirte and Misratah has remained
open, allowing the Special Adviser on Libya to travel
and engage with a diverse group of Libyans. The
deployment in October and December 2021 of the first
United Nations ceasefire monitors marked an essential
step forward, and we hope for further progress on
that track.
We are concerned, however, about ongoing security
threats, including those resulting from competition
among armed groups. The unity of Libya must be
safeguarded, and that includes unifying the security
sector. We reiterate our call for the withdrawal of all
foreign fighters, forces and mercenaries. That will
require close consultation with Libya’s neighbours and
a United Nations-supervised and gender-responsive
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process.
We commend the 5+5 Joint Military Commission for
its close and ongoing cooperation with neighbouring
States, the African Union and UNSMIL.
The impact of a decade of conflict in Libya has
been devastating, including, most tragically, for Libya’s
children. We are appalled by reports of killings, maiming
and abductions of children, despite the ceasefire. The
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
estimates that more than a quarter of a million children
in Libya are in need of humanitarian assistance. We
call on all parties to comply with their obligations
under international humanitarian law and international
human rights law, pursue accountability for violations
and ensure unimpeded humanitarian access across the
country. In that regard, we also continue to support
the important work of the Independent Fact-Finding
Mission on Libya.
Child migrants and refugees arbitrarily detained in
Libya face deplorable conditions and abuse. We urge
the Libyan authorities to seek alternatives to detention
that prioritize the needs and rights of migrants and
refugees, including children. Last week, we marked
the twenty-fifth anniversary of the children and armed
conflict mandate. Surely, the rights of children in Libya
should be safeguarded, as a step towards ensuring the
hope and prosperity of an entire future generation.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I have the honour to make
this statement on behalf of the three African members
10/21

24/01/2022

of the Security Council (A3), namely, Gabon, Ghana
and Kenya.
We thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary
DiCarlo, Ambassador Tirumurti, in his capacity as
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya, and
Ms. Elham Saudi for their briefings. We also welcome
Ambassador Taher Elsonni, Permanent Representative
of Libya, and look forward to his perspective.
Libya is an African country. We are joined by
bonds of geography and fraternity. In the past decade,
unfortunately, we have also been joined by the profound
insecurity caused to the Sahel and West Africa by
the collapse of security and order in Libya. Tens of
thousands of Africans have been brutally murdered
by terrorist and militant groups whose actions and
capabilities are directly tied to the events that have
taken place in Libya.
When the A3 calls for a Libyan-led peace process,
we do so as Africans conscious that many, if not most,
external interventions have rarely brought peace and
security to the people of our continent. We recall
the wars, coups and other security crises of the past
few decades that have been caused by our territories
and even people being used to wage proxy struggles
between distant Powers. When the Libyan crisis started
a decade ago, Africa advised that it was imperative
for the people of Libya to seek national dialogue and
reconciliation. We were categorical that military
solutions would bring no resolution and we looked at
the intervention by external forces as complicating the
chances of peace, not increasing them. We still hold
that position.
National dialogue and reconciliation are the key
to lasting peace in Libya today. While we believe that
elections are one of the essential steps to peace and
stability, we know from experience that they can divide
rather than unite a country — especially a country as
bitterly divided as Libya has been. It is critical to peace
that the elections deliver an outcome with political
legitimacy in every part of the country. Otherwise,
they may be a recipe for increased mistrust, division
and perhaps even a resumption of violent conflict.
We also urge that the elections, which should
be free, fair and inclusive, benefit from the further
implementation of the Libya Political Dialogue Forum
road map, which provides for a constitutional basis
under its first objective. A constitutional basis that
22-23708

24/01/2022

The situation in Libya

would deliver elections that enjoy legitimacy must be
premised on agreements that emerge from dialogue
and reconciliation. We are therefore glad to note
and encourage the continued talks among relevant
stakeholders in Libya, including under the House of
Representatives road map committee.
We also call on the United Nations to provide
sufficient technical support, in the most transparent
manner, for the holding of elections to provide results
with greater legitimacy.
The African Union has committed to walk
with Libya in the process of promoting national
reconciliation. National reconciliation should run
parallel to all tracks and stages of the peace process.
We encourage the African Union to invigorate that
support, especially during this decisive period. We also
encourage the Secretary-General to involve African
High Representatives in that dynamic for a better
interaction with African organizations and stakeholders.
As Libya invests heavily in its peace process with
international support, we fear that such support could be
undermined by foreign interference and interests. One
mark of such interference is the continued destabilizing
presence of mercenaries, foreign fighters and foreign
forces. In that regard, we urge the full implementation
of the ceasefire agreement, including the withdrawal
of foreign fighters and mercenaries and corresponding
security sector reforms. We also emphasize the
importance of implementing the comprehensive action
plan agreed by the 5+5 Joint Military Commission on
8 October.
We further urge the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya (UNSMIL) to ensure that the implementation
of the ceasefire agreement is done in coordination with
neighbouring States, other affected States and relevant
regional mechanisms in order to mitigate the negative
effects of its movement into the region.

S/PV. 8952

be paid to the need for corresponding disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration efforts, both in Libya
and the region. We also call for adherence to the arms
embargo by all concerned and encourage international
support in that regard.
The A3 notes that the situation in Libya has, over
time, created a cross-border support infrastructure
conducive to global terrorist actors and their facilitators
in the region. There is an urgent need to strengthen the
capacity of Libya and other neighbouring countries to
effectively tackle that growing threat.
We further note that all Libya’s frozen assets are
to be preserved and eventually returned to and for
the benefit of the people of Libya. We underscore the
need for the implementation of the relevant sanctions
to be done in liaison with the Libyan authorities.
Additionally, it is important to undertake periodic
reviews of those sanctions to ascertain that they respond
to their intention.
Even as we stand with our Libyan brothers and
sisters in their tireless efforts to restore peace, political
stability and prosperity, we remain acutely aware
of the plight of many thousands of African migrants
and refugees on their soil. We condemn the abhorrent
treatment that those migrants and refugees are being
subjected to as they make their way to Europe.
It is appropriate that the European Union and other
actors in the international community seek to address
the root causes of that migration, but it is also crucial
that all such actors uphold the human rights of those
Africans who are migrating now on the Mediterranean
and its bordering shores to the south and the north. We
condemn their interception at sea and return to Libya.
Those that aid such interceptions must desist from
such inhumane actions and be guided by the relevant
international laws and norms.

We highlight the African Union’s call for cooperation
between key stakeholders in the development and
implementation of the plan for the withdrawal of foreign
forces in order to ensure that their withdrawal does not
adversely impact stability in the region.

On the United Nations Support Mission in Libya,
the A3 appreciates the important work it is doing in
support of the peace process, especially at this critical
time. In particular, we commend the Special Adviser
to the Secretary-General on Libya for the role she has
played since taking up office.

Another mark of foreign interference is the
accumulation and flow of sophisticated weaponry and
illicit small arms and light weapons in Libya and the
Sahel region from foreign origins. In implementing the
ceasefire agreement, we call for particular attention to

We also appreciate the effort of UNSMIL to support
the inclusion of women and youth in the peace process.
Their participation in that process is essential to the
reconstruction of the county for sustainable peace. We
therefore support the renewal of the UNSMIL mandate

22-2370811/21

S/PV.8952

The situation in Libya

24/01/2022

for a substantial period to enable the Mission to fully
focus on the critical assignment at hand.

recommendations of the independent strategic review
conducted in 2021.

Finally, we reaffirm our solidarity with the people
of Libya and reaffirm our respect for Libya’s territorial
integrity and sovereignty.

Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Let me welcome UnderSecretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs Rosemary DiCarlo and thank her for the
detailed information provided and commend her for
the very consistent engagement with Libya. I thank
also Ms. Elham Saudi for her remarks. She showed the
high spirit of resilience and the important role women
civil society representatives play. I thank also her for
the recommendations. Let me also thank Ambassador
Tirumurti for his report (see S/2021/1058).

Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I thank Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo for her briefing and thank Mr. Tirumurti for
his report (see S/2021/1058). I also thank Ms. Elham
Saudi for her intervention.
Brazil would like to express its concern about three
main issues.
First, we are concerned about the postponement
of the presidential and parliamentary elections of
24 December. Delays in that crucial step jeopardize
advances made over the years. The Libyan people,
especially the 2.8 million officially registered voters,
deserve the right to choose their representatives in free,
fair and inclusive elections. It must be guaranteed that
the election results will be respected. The elections must
take place alongside the construction of a constitutional
framework that preserves the balance between Libyan
political forces, that ensures the participation of women
and that furthers stability.
The second issue to be addressed concerns the
destabilizing effects of the presence of mercenaries and
other foreign combatants in Libya. Brazil welcomes the
announcement of the withdrawal of 300 foreign fighters
from eastern Libya and supports the return of the
remaining forces to their countries of origin, in line with
the action plan of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission.
My third point of concern resides in the realization
that the human rights situation in Libya remains
unsettling. Reports of violations, especially against
migrants and refugees, are commonplace, as are
incidences of violence and threats against journalists
and activists from civil society, the excessive use
of force and arbitrary detentions. Those cannot go
unanswered. Brazil appeals to the Libyan authorities
not to let those responsible go unpunished.
From the beginning, the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) has played an important
role in promoting dialogue among Libyan stakeholders.
In a few days, the Council will take a decision on its
mandate. Brazil believes that UNSMIL must have the
necessary conditions — which include the appointment
of a Special Representative of the Secretary-General
based in Tripoli — to fulfil its mission, in line with the
12/21

The Special Adviser on Libya, Stephanie Williams,
has been steering United Nations engagement in Libya
for the past six weeks. We applaud her engagement
with all the stakeholders and actors inside Libya and
in the region. Albania supports the United Nationsled efforts through the Berlin process. The renewal of
the mandate of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL) later this week will be an opportunity
for the members of the Security Council to reaffirm
their commitment to the Libyan-led and Libyan-owned
inclusive political process facilitated by the United
Nations. We believe that can be achieved through the
implementation of the strategic review of the Mission.
This day one month ago, the international
community was prepared to celebrate Libya’s first
step towards the establishment of democracy, after
more than 10 years of political and security instability.
The Libyans’ aspirations for free, fair, inclusive and
credible presidential and parliamentary elections of
24 December 2021 were, unfortunately, not met.
There can be no alternative to holding elections
through credible electoral processes in a reasonable
and realistic future. Elections are the only way for
the country to distance itself from the past and meet
the current challenges of building a united, sovereign,
stable and prosperous Libya and the only way for
the Libyan people to decide their future themselves.
Those who stand in the way and deny the right of the
Libyans to hold elections must be held accountable.
The members of the Security Council should be united
in affirming the international commitment to help
Libyans overcome the decade-long crisis and engage
with the Libyans in support of their spirit of national
unity and reconciliation.
For that to happen successfully, political
uncertainties must be avoided and the full
22-23708

24/01/2022

The situation in Libya

implementation of the ceasefire of 23 October
2020 should continue. Moreover, the withdrawal of
mercenaries, foreign fighters and foreign forces should
be seen as an important confidence-building measure.
In the meantime, we should carry on supporting
the work of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission (JMC),
while urging the implementation of its action plan. It
is crucial to underscore that those processes are firmly
under the JMC control. We hope that coordination
between the authorities of the west and those of the east
can continue pragmatically and on a concrete basis,
fully involving the 5+5 JMC in their activities.
The situation of human rights in Libya remains
deplorable, as stated in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2022/31), but also as we heard from
Ms. Saudi. The most vulnerable remain women and
girls and children. The unlawful detentions of children
in military facilities and the use of sexual violence
against women and girls are unacceptable, should
not be tolerated and are against Security Council
resolutions. Perpetrators must be held accountable and,
yes, accountability makes the world smaller for them.
We have similar concerns about the protection
of migrant and refugee children held in inhumane
conditions in detention centres. The October report
of the Independent Fact-Finding Mission on Libya
(A/HRC/48/83) documented evidence of child
recruitment and use, including cross-border recruitment,
as well as children detained in harsh conditions,
subject to beatings and torture. In that regard, Albania
welcomes the adoption last October of the Human
Rights Council resolution on technical assistance and
capacity-building to improve human rights in Libya
(A/HRC/48/L.25), extending the mandate of the FactFinding Mission to Libya for a further nine months.
When we speak about the future, we need to keep
in mind and highlight that economic recovery and good
governance, security and stabilization based on the
rule of law, human rights and gender equality are key
prerequisites for moving from a country in stagnant
crisis to one with real prospects of development and
progress. The Security Council must address these
major challenges in order to be able to move towards
achieving the common goal of stabilizing Libya through
sustainable political processes for the sake of and to the
benefit of the Libyan people. An active and in-country
mediation role by the United Nations remains crucial.

S/PV. 8952

To that end, we should ensure that the
recommendations of the strategic assessment be duly
implemented in the framework of UNSMIL’s mandate
renewal, beginning with the return of the Head of
Mission to Tripoli. And Albania supports the renewal
of the UNSMIL mandate by the Security Council.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): At the outset, I would like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for
her detailed briefing. I also thank Ms. Elham Saudi for
her briefing and welcome the presence of Ambassador
Taher Elsonni of Libya.
We regret to note that the presidential and
parliamentary elections could not be held as scheduled
on 24 December 2021, as an objective endorsed by the
Libyan people themselves. That could have been an
important milestone in the political process, carrying
forward the momentum generated by the signing of the
ceasefire agreement in October 2020. We hope that all
issues related to the elections and candidatures will be
resolved in time and the elections will be conducted
smoothly. It is important for the Security Council to
support the democratic aspirations of the Libyan people.
At the same time, we also note from the briefing
that challenges still remain. The involvement of
external forces in the internal affairs of Libya has
negatively impacted the progress on the political trac,
and there has been resurgence in terrorist activity.
Continued violations of the arms embargo are also
equally alarming.
As Libya embarks on its journey towards peace
and stability, it is incumbent upon the international
community to continue to provide the necessary
support so that the political progress achieved in the
country does not whittle away. In that regard, I would
like to make the following suggestions.
First, Libya’s most important priority is holding
the elections in a free, fair, inclusive and credible
manner. A unified call from the Security Council
would support that endeavour. We hope that the House
of Representatives of Libya will come to an agreement
soon to resolve its internal issues.
Secondly, the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of Libya needs to be safeguarded.
The peace process must be fully Libyan-led and Libyanowned, with no imposition or external interference.
Thirdly, the provisions of the ceasefire agreement
and the successive Security Council resolutions

22-2370813/21

S/PV.8952

The situation in Libya

need to be respected. It is important that the call of
the Libyan parties be honoured with regard to the
full and complete withdrawal of foreign forces and
mercenaries. In that context, we welcome the progress
made in the implementation of the action plan agreed
by the 5+5 Joint Military Commission. The recent
deportation of mercenaries from eastern Libya is a
welcome development.
Fourthly, it is important that the international
community focus its attention on the threat of terrorism
in Africa, in particular in the Sahel region. We must
ensure that terrorist groups and affiliated entities not be
allowed to operate unchallenged in Libya. The report of
the Secretary-General (S/2022/31) has highlighted the
presence of training camps of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant in southern Libya. It is critical for the
Security Council to focus and act upon the growing
threat of terrorism in Africa.
Fifthly, we need to plan for the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of armed groups and
non-State armed actors. Libya also needs an inclusive
and comprehensive national reconciliation process.
Finally, UNSMIL has played an important role in
Libya and has been one of the key factors in bringing
about the progress that we are witnessing now. We will
work with other members of the Security Council to
support UNSMIL and its mandate renewal.
To conclude, India has traditionally enjoyed close
and mutually beneficial bilateral ties with Libya, and
we remain committed to supporting Libya and the
Libyan people in their endeavour to bring about lasting
peace in the country.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary
DiCarlo for her briefing; our colleague Ambassador
Tirumurti for the report of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya, which he chairs; and
Ms. Elham Saudi for her valuable and informative
statements. We also welcome the representative of
Libya to this meeting.
Mexico deplores the fact that despite the repeated
appeals made by the Council, Libyan political actors
did not reach the agreements necessary for the holding
of the elections scheduled for 24 December 2021. We
would urge all parties to agree as soon as possible on
a new, viable date for the elections, in the context of
14/21

24/01/2022

the 18-month time frame established by the Libyan
Political Dialogue Forum for the transition.
My country acknowledges the work carried out
by the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) in preparing for the electoral process as well
as in support of the unification of Libyan institutions.
We commend the fact that initial steps have been taken
to consolidate the operations of the Central Bank of
Libya. In order for UNSMIL to be able to continue with
its work in support of the Libyan political process in a
predictable manner, we are in favour of renewing the
Mission’s mandate for a year.
Unfortunately, the power vacuum that has resulted
from the prolonged conflict continues to have a very
high human cost, which is unacceptable. We are also
deeply concerned at the fact that the number of migrants
in Libya who are victims of abuses or find themselves
in precarious situations continues to increase. Violence
against women and the security threats that internally
displaced persons face when they return to their homes
are also a great source of concern. For all those reasons,
it is extremely important to strengthen the capacities
of UNSMIL so that it can contribute more effectively
to the protection of vulnerable groups, in particular
women and children.
Given the political and security situation in the
country, I wonder whether UNSMIL has sufficient
personnel and the resources necessary for such complex
tasks as monitoring the ceasefire. As we have heard,
armed groups acting with impunity and obstructing
the unification of the security forces represent the
main threat both to the political process and to the
civilian population. Mexico reiterates its call for
efforts to be stepped up against the illegal trafficking
of weapons and for the implementation of measures
for the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
of militias. All States must abide by the obligations
imposed by the arms embargo.
Lastly, there must be a withdrawal of foreign
combatants, in coordination with neighbouring
countries. The accumulation and diversion of weapons
towards neighbouring countries is another very serious
threat that must be addressed urgently. That is why
we welcome the initial contacts between the Libyan
authorities and their counterparts in the region. We
hope that they continue and lead to positive results.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
thank the Under-Secretary-General, the Chair of the
22-23708

24/01/2022

The situation in Libya

Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya and Ms. Saudi
for their briefings.
Following the announcement of the postponement
of the presidential and parliamentary elections
scheduled to be held on 24 December, we deem it vital
to reschedule those elections without delay and to
respect the wishes of the Libyan people, who have been
mobilized for more than a year now with a view to the
holding of those elections.
Echoing the call of the Secretary-General, we urge
Libyan actors to work together in order to establish as
soon as possible a clear timetable for the holding of
the elections. Differences with regard to electoral laws
and the list of candidates for the presidential elections
must be resolved through dialogue and through the
courts. All parties must commit to respecting the
outcome of the elections. Candidates occupying public
positions must recuse themselves in order to ensure a
fair competition. We will also continue to support the
outstanding work being done by the High National
Election Commission and its Chair, which is subject
to extreme pressure but continues to be mobilized in
preparation for the elections.
France calls on the Council to work together to
maintain the impetus to hold elections in accordance
with the road map of the Libyan Political Dialogue
Forum, endorsed by resolution 2570 (2021). We fully
support United Nations mediation efforts in that regard.
The electoral process has made it possible for
remarkable progress to be made over the last year.
Libyan political actors from all regions have committed
to holding the elections and have begun a constructive
dialogue. The absence of electoral prospects, however,
could lead to further security instability and the
temptation of the resort to arms. The elections are
therefore necessary for the stabilization of Libya and
provide a singular opportunity to turn the page on a
decade of conflict and to bring about a lasting peace.
France calls on the Council to take action against
those who, in Libya and elsewhere, wish to perpetuate
the status quo and security instability. We would recall
in that regard that any individual or entity hampering
the transition, particularly the electoral process, is
susceptible to listing by the Sanctions Committee.
The implementation of the ceasefire agreement,
in particular the action plan of the 5+5 Joint Military

S/PV. 8952

Commission of October 2021, must also continue in
parallel. Together with the Libyan people, the United
Nations and the participants in the Paris conference for
Libya of 12 November, France calls for the withdrawal
of mercenaries, foreign fighters and foreign forces from
Libyan territory. It welcomes the first concrete step
of the withdrawal of 300 mercenaries as well as the
consultations of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission with
regional and international actors. It is now vital to make
progress on the implementation of a comprehensive
process for the withdrawal of mercenaries, foreign
fighters and foreign forces, steered and led by the
Libyan people together with the help of UNSMIL and
in coordination with the countries of the region.
In that regard, France calls upon Libyan actors
to establish as soon as possible a timeline for the
implementation of such a withdrawal. It encourages
the United Nations to support that effort through its
ceasefire monitoring componment and its support for
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process. France would recall that strict respect for the
arms embargo applies to everyone, and it will remain
vigilant with regard to its implementation.
Finally, we call for increased efforts to unify all
Libyan institutions, particularly military, security and
economic ones.
Those efforts can be undertaken only under the
auspices of a stable, legitimate and unified Government
capable of controlling its borders, fighting trafficking
and putting an end to corruption, which is why there
is the need for elections as soon as possible. It is
essential that an end be put to human rights violations,
particularly those of migrants, which we condemn.
We encourage the Libyan authorities to cooperate
with UNSMIL, the International Criminal Court and
the Human Rights Council Fact-Finding Mission in
order to combat impunity in Libya. We also encourage
UNSMIL to strengthen its protection mechanisms for
children and women in line with its mandate.
We are at a decisive moment for the future of Libya.
As we approach the renewal of UNSMIL’s mandate,
France calls on the members of the Security Council to
rise to meet these challenges and to preserve the spirit
of unity that presided over the Paris Conference.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing on the situation in

22-2370815/21

S/PV.8952

The situation in Libya

Libya. We are grateful to the Permanent Representative
of India, Mr. Tirumurti, for his report (see S/2021/1058)
on the activities of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011). We
highly value the work of our Indian colleagues in
that subsidiary body of the Council. We also listened
carefully to Ms. Elham Saudi.
The situation in Libya and the surrounding region
continues to be stable overall. At the Paris International
Conference for Libya on 12 November 2021, the
participants adopted a detailed outcome document that
follows in the footsteps of the decisions made at previous
multilateral meetings on the Libyan peace process. The
international community sent another very clear signal
to the Libyan sides on the need to follow the road map
of the political process.
We are carefully following the discussions under
way in Libya on rescheduling the presidential and
parliamentary elections. This process should not be
dragged out too much. We also believe that it is critically
important that representatives of all the leading
political forces be able to take part in elections. This
will make it possible to achieve unity in Libyan society
on the outcome of the future elections and avoid any
new, dangerous escalation of the military and political
conflict in the country. In this regard, we expect that
the Libyans will, in the very near future, resolve all
outstanding issues.
Owing to the pause on the political track, activities
in other areas have been slowed down as well. Work on
unifying Government institutions, including financial
institutions, has not been completed. Efforts are needed
to normalize the socioeconomic situation in the country.
There has also been no significant progress on the
military track either. Of course, it is good that there
have not been any active hostilities for over a year now.
However, the opposing sides have not taken any further
steps to prevent the possibility of an escalation of the
ongoing standoff. This threatens to undermine the
truce, with a new flare-up of violence triggered by an
intentional provocation or an unplanned incident.
We also believe that an important role in
consolidating the armed forces should be played by the
Libyan National Army. At the same time, we welcome
the fact that during its meeting in Geneva last October,
the 5+5 Joint Military Committee agreed on a plan
of action for a gradual, balanced and simultaneous
16/21

24/01/2022

withdrawal from Libya of all mercenaries, foreign
fighters and other forces.
We intend to continue to actively take part in
international efforts to promote the political settlement
in Libya, both through targeted engagement with the
Libyan sides and in multilateral frameworks. We are
concerned that starting in November 2021, the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), which
should be at the at the heart of these efforts, still has
no one in charge, even though the head of the Mission
should conduct good offices for Libyans to promote a
Libyan-led and Libyan-owned political process. We
believe that it is crucial for the Secretary-General to
present his proposals for candidates to this position as
soon as possible. It is essential for the United Nations
emissary to have a relevant mandate from the Security
Council. Unfortunately, for now, there is no such
individual.
We will proceed from what I just said in negotiations
on a draft Security Council resolution on the extension
of the mandate of the Mission. We believe that it is
important for the mandate to reflect the current goals of
the Libyan settlement, which will change very quickly.
In this regard, we suggest that our colleagues adopt a
flexible approach regarding the term of the mandate
renewal, and we will be ready to continue to engage in
a constructive discussion.
Mr. Xing Jisheng (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and
Ambassador Tirumurti, Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) and Permanent Representative of India, for
their briefings. I welcome the presence of Ambassador
Elsonni, Permanent Representative of Libya, at this
meeting. I have also listened attentively to the briefing
by Ms. Elham Saudi
On the report of the Secretary-General contained in
document S/2022/31 and the briefings we heard today,
China would like to make three points.
First, in relation to the steady progress in the
political transition, elections are important measures
in the Libyan political process. As the 24 December
election could not be held as scheduled, Libya is
currently working on a new election plan. The Libyan
people are looking forward to a coordinated and
unified national governance framework with durable
stability through elections so as to usher in a new stage
of national development.
22-23708

24/01/2022

The situation in Libya

The holding of elections in post-conflict situations
often faces many challenges. Realistic considerations
should be fully taken into account in order to make
full preparations in advance. China welcomes the
recent consultations on the elections by the House
of Representatives and the High State Council. It is
important to adhere to the principle of the process
being Libyan-led and Libyan-owned. We encourage all
parties to maintain the current momentum of dialogue
and consultation and reach broad political consensus
through peaceful means on important issues related
to the election so as to create good conditions for the
smooth holding of the election.
China supports the United Nations in continuing
to push dialogue among all Libyan parties forward.
The United Nations Support Mission in Libya should
continue to provide the necessary electoral support,
which is within its mandate.
Secondly, an all-out effort in maintaining security
and stability is needed. Foreign armed forces and
mercenaries in Libya should actively cooperate with
the 5+5 Joint Military Committee to withdraw as
soon as possible in a phased, balanced, orderly and
organized manner. In the process of withdrawal, close
coordination should be maintained with neighbouring
countries to avoid negative impacts on the security
situation in the Sahel and other regions.
Thirdly, with regard to comprehensive progress in
the peace process, the work on the economic track is
good for the Libyan people, so that they may enjoy the
peace dividend and consolidate the country’s security
and stability. China welcomes Libya’s launch of a
process for a unified central banking system and the
work performed by the United Nations Development
Programme for the economic reconstruction of Libya.
Reconciliation will help resolve the problems left
over from the conflict, heal the wounds of war and
promote harmonious coexistence. China welcomes
the establishment of the High National Reconciliation
Commission in Libya and looks forward to its making
full use of various means to actively conduct its work.
In addition, Libya has repeatedly expressed its serious
concerns about the loss of frozen assets and made
specific recommendations. The Security Council and
the Libyan sanctions committee should actively study
and respond to the recommendations in a timely manner.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
I thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her

S/PV. 8952

briefing today. We commend the work of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) and
Special Adviser Stephanie Williams during the past
month to get the political process back on track and get
Libya once again moving towards elections after the
postponement of their expected date of 24 December. We
thank Ambassador Tirumurti in particular for updating
the Council on the important work conducted by the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011), and I thank Ms. Elham Saudi
for her briefing and the critical work she does in Libya.
Today I would like to focus on two broad topics:
ensuring that Libyan voices are heard through a free and
fair election and encouraging the positive momentum
in Libya’s security situation.
A total of 2.8 million people have registered to
vote in Libya, more than 2.5 million of whom have
collected their voter cards. Those are people who,
clearly, are ready to vote and have demonstrated serious
commitment to elections. It is time for their will to be
respected. It is time to move beyond back-room deals
among a small circle of powerful individuals backed by
armed groups, carving up spoils and protecting their
positions. The Libyan people are ready to decide their
own future.
Libyan ownership of the electoral process is
foundational. Libya’s leaders must agree on a path
forward that is credible and inclusive and then wholly
commit to that path. Those vying to lead Libya must
see that the Libyan people will accept only leadership
empowered by elections and that they will tolerate
only so much delay. Given that expectation, Libya’s
political actors must redouble their efforts to solve the
difficult challenges surrounding elections and to do so
with urgency.
The mechanisms to reach solutions exist — the
Libyan Political Dialogue Forum road map remains
in place. All Libya’s leaders need is some courage
and a commitment to the security and prosperity of
the Libyan people. We believe that the High National
Elections Commission, which has performed admirably
in difficult circumstances, is a credible authority to
implement an election plan. We urge UNSMIL to
continue its strong support of the Commission, and
we urge Libyan candidates and political groups to
cooperate fully with it in order to ensure that electoral
regulations are followed.

22-2370817/21

S/PV.8952

The situation in Libya

I want to remind those who would interfere in
Libya’s elections or stoke violence that the Security
Council may impose sanctions on anyone, Libyan or
otherwise, who obstructs or undermines elections.
If need be, the Council can and must target election
spoilers in order to promote accountability.
While we need renewed effort in order to restore
momentum in the political process, encouraging
developments are happening on the security and
economic tracks. Tangible steps are being taken by
Libyan leaders to explore the reunification of the
Libyan military. The Central Bank of Libya is moving
forward with the implementation of a plan to reunify the
Bank. We support efforts to unify institutions, enhance
transparency and ensure the equitable distributions of
resources among all Libyans.
The United States remains encouraged by the
steady progress of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission
as it implements its comprehensive action plan for the
withdrawal of armed groups. We welcome the report
that UNSMIL ceasefire monitors have begun their
work and look forward to the full operationalization of
the ceasefire monitoring component.
We call on all States, including those on the
Council, to adhere to resolutions 2570 (2021) and 2571
(2021) and to support the immediate withdrawal of
all foreign forces and mercenaries. Unfortunately, we
continue to receive disturbing documented reports of
violence and abuses against migrants, asylum seekers
and refugees in Libya. Libyan authorities must close
illicit detention centres, end arbitrary detention
practices and permit unhindered humanitarian access
to affected populations.
Finally, the United States welcomes progress
towards the renewal of UNSMIL’s mandate. As noted
in the report of the independent strategic review, the
Mission needs to be strengthened in order to deliver on
its mandate. We credit the work of the United Kingdom
in steering the mandate negotiations and look forward
to adopting a draft resolution that gives UNSMIL the
tools and direction it needs to support the Libyan people.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Norway.
We thank Under Secretary-General DiCarlo for her
briefing and Ambassador Tirumurti for the periodic
report (see S/2021/1058) of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
18/21

24/01/2022

(2011). I also want to thank Ms. Elham Saudi for joining
us here in person today to share her insightful briefing
and recommendations to the Council.
First, Norway regrets that the elections were not
carried out on 24 December. That should not detract
from the political transition in Libya. Norway strongly
encourages the political actors to continue all endeavours
towards the transfer of power to democratically elected
institutions. Norway would like to see presidential
and parliamentary elections take place as soon as
possible. With 2.8 million Libyans having registered
as voters, their expectation to have a say in the future
of Libya is clear. Free, fair, and inclusive elections are
imperative for Libya’s progress. We urge the relevant
Libyan institutions and authorities, including the House
of Representatives, to contribute to the preparation of
elections in a constructive way. The process must be
Libyan-led and -owned.
We have seen positive political progress throughout
the past year, and we should protect those achievements.
The Libyan parties must agree on a road map towards
a new election date. It is imperative that we do not let
spoilers create alternative undemocratic tracks.
Let me also repeat our call for the full, meaningful
and equal participation of women in Libya’s political
process, including elections. Libyan women have the
right to play an equal part in shaping the future of their
country as voters and as candidates. The participation
of women is a crucial part of the democratic process
and the legitimacy of the Libyan Government.
Furthermore, as Ms. Saudi elaborated, let me
underline the importance of creating an enabling
environment for peacebuilders, human rights defenders
and civil society to carry out their work. Inclusive and
participatory political processes require that everyone
can engage safely and that civil society play an
essential role.
Norway commends the Libyan parties for
respecting the ceasefire agreement. Peace, stability
and the absence of violence for the Libyan civilian
population is of the utmost importance. We reiterate our
call for the withdrawal of mercenaries, foreign fighters
and foreign forces and once again stress the need for a
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process.
On the humanitarian situation, Norway is concerned
about the reported lack of protection of civilians and
continuing violations of the human rights of migrants,
22-23708

24/01/2022

The situation in Libya

refugees and asylum seekers. The reported situation of
people held in unlawful and arbitrary detention is also
highly worrisome, especially the reported continued
incidents of sexual violence and abuse of children.
Those unlawfully and arbitrarily detained, particularly
children, must be released immediately.
Norway gives our full support to Special Adviser
Stephanie Williams and the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL). A strong United Nations
role is critical. The mandate renewal for UNSMIL
this month is important. Norway also supports the
implementation of the recommendations from the
independent strategic review. We hope the Council
can agree on a substantial draft resolution to renew the
mandate for one year.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I wish once again to remind all speakers to limit
their statements to more than five minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
I now give the floor the representative of Libya.
Mr. Elsonni (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I
congratulate you, Madam President, and Norway on
your presidency of the Security Council for this month.
I would also like to take this opportunity to welcome the
new members who recently joined the Council. I also
thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing today,
and through her we thank the Secretary-General for his
quick response in appointing Ms. Stephanie Williams as
Special Adviser on Libya after the sudden resignation
of Mr. Ján Kubiš. We recall that it is very important to
closely follow the work done efficiently by the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), as the
matter does not simply pertain to appointments but
rather to efficiency in leadership.
We are closely following with interest the efforts
that Ms. Williams is making. In a short time, she has
succeeded in meeting with many political parties and
stakeholders. We wish her every success. We also
thank Ambassador Tirumurti for his briefing today.
We also thank Ms. Elham Sauid for her briefing, as she
represents part of the civil society. We reassure her that,
when the State achieves stability, the national judiciary
will be able to punish and subject to accountability
those who perpetrated war crimes and crimes against
humanity, as such crimes have no statute of limitations.

S/PV. 8952

In the light of the wide spread of the coronavirus
disease, we wish everyone safety and good health.
I hope that the mask I am wearing today will not
present an additional barrier in preventing my voice
from being heard, as we have started to feel that these
meetings are becoming repetitive and that the same
words are being repeated while the state of my country
remains unchanged.
Today marks a month after the date that everyone
was looking for, namely, the holding of general
elections. We were supposed to meet today to discuss
the results of those elections and move forward towards
a new phase that would reflect the voices of Libyans
and their right to select their leadership. Unfortunately,
it has been a disappointment to approximately
2.8 million Libyan men and women who were prepared
to participate in exercising their national right — in
connection with which there was an unprecedented
number of candidates, almost 100 presidential and
5,000 parliamentary candidates. Many had viewed the
elections as an opportunity to renew the legitimacy of
State institutions, unify them and rebuild the country
after years of violence, destruction and division.
However, the absence of a genuine consensus,
as well as instances of political tug-of-war, conflicts
of interest and interference by many foreign parties
regrettably prevented the realization of that aspiration.
That may have come as a surprise to some, but, in fact,
it was predictable. We warned about such a scenario,
dangers and challenges in the past when we spoke of a
clear difference of opinion among the various parties
and the absence of a minimum of consensus, especially
with regard to a legal and constitutional framework to
organize the elections.
In the light of the confidence crisis and in the
absence of a national Constitution, or even a consensual
constitutional foundation, as called for by most of the
political actors, it would be very difficult to successfully
conduct the elections, because they are supposed to
be a means of political participation and not a means
of manipulation and exclusion; a means to support
stability and not an end in itself that may lead to a
new conflict. In that context, and to avoid any political
vacuum, the Government of National Unity reaffirms
its commitment to the democratic transfer of power to
the elected bodies as soon as the new election timeline is
announced, thereby concluding all transitional phases,
pursuant to the road map, international conferences
and relevant Security Council resolutions. It is also

22-2370819/21

S/PV.8952

The situation in Libya

important to heed all voices calling for the need to
achieve maximum consensus among all parties, without
exception — especially with regard to consensus on the
constitutional track and electoral laws — so that we
can ensure the timely, transparent and fair presidential
and parliamentary elections, the results of which would
be upheld.
We reaffirm the commitment of the Government to
provide all the necessary facilities and preparations to
ensure the success of the electoral process, both through
its support for the High National Elections Commission
or through the various State bodies. We reiterate our
request to the United Nations to support, seriously
and more effectively, the electoral process and send its
assessment teams, as well as coordinate with the High
National Elections Commission to make the necessary
arrangements in due time for the upcoming events.
That will send a clear message to everyone concerning
the international community’s seriousness with regard
to the holding of elections, which everyone is eagerly
awaiting, without doubting them or their results.
We reiterate the importance of Libyan ownership
and leadership of any political process that will lead the
country towards stability and will impose the State’s
authority, while excluding all external dictates and
intervention. We therefore call on the Council to support
genuine national efforts currently seeking to overcome
the challenges that we just mentioned in order to
achieve a comprehensive national Libyan solution and
end all the interim volatile phases. Everyone knows that
the solution lies in returning legitimacy to the people
through a strong constitutional framework that will
clarify the structure of the State and its institutions.
With regard to Libyan leadership, ownership and
national sovereignty, we would like to mention the
military track. We commend the efforts of the 5+5 Joint
Military Commission and its continued meetings in
many Libyans cities, as well as the meetings that were
recently held among numerous military leadership
representatives — the aim of which is to begin
professionally and effectively unifying the military
institutions and establish the mechanisms necessary
for ending all forms of foreign presence within Libyan
territories, regardless of their names. That is the
demand of all Libyans in the name of sovereignty,
without which Libya will continue to be occupied and
its national will held hostage by others.
20/21

24/01/2022

In that regard, we recall the importance of all active
military forces on the ground throughout the country
to actively participate and engage in building security
and military institutions in a professional manner that
are not politicized and share a patriotic belief in the
civil nature of the State and the rule of law. In terms of
unifying sovereign State institutions, we have recently
followed the final meetings to unify the Central Bank
of Libya and the subsequent practical process to that
end. Those steps will contribute tangibly to reforming
the State’s financial and economic policies.
We reaffirm that, despite recent events, Libya
remains determined to regain its effective role at the
regional and international levels to strengthen mutual
cooperation and solidarity on the basis of equality,
respect for Libya’s sovereignty, territorial integrity and
people’s right to self-determination, in line with their
free will and without any foreign dictates. We therefore
look forward once again to the Security Council playing
a positive and more effective role in supporting Libyan
consensus, working to end all interventions in Libya
and correcting past mistakes. It must also apologize to
the Libyan people for the tragedies and violations they
have suffered, as those violations do not have a statute
of limitations.
Moreover, it must not shield spoilers, whether they
be persons, entities or even countries, some of which
continue to exclude others, abort the political process
and push Libya into chaos once again, because they
fear losing their influence, or they fear that the people
will take away their authority through a direct and free
democratic path.
In conclusion, we call on the Council to actively
participate in supporting all efforts to launch a national
reconciliation and transitional justice project. They
are two concurrent and essential tracks that were
unfortunately looked over in the past years, despite
being the main foundation to guarantee the success of
any political solution that would bring stability to the
country. We renew our call on the African Union to
support that goal. We have begun to see encouraging
steps as the guns were silenced. We saw several
meetings held among the various Libyan parties
throughout the country, especially the launching of
multiple dialogues among youth, as well as direct and
indirect debates through social media networks, which
included divergent political views revealing the national
awareness of the youth, who will carry the torch for the
advancement of the nation.
22-23708

24/01/2022

The situation in Libya

S/PV. 8952

The time has come to build bridges of trust instead of
reopening the wounds of the past. We must look ahead,
taking the best from our ancient and contemporary
history, and build on the positive aspects of previous
regimes and stop arguing over the negative aspects.
There is a need to be frank and open and to be ready for
offering apologies, reconciliation and reparation.

development and construction while putting an end to
all forms of destruction and ruin.

We must reveal the fate of all missing persons and
return refugees and displaced people to their homes.
We must reject violence and hate speech. We must work
together, hand in hand, to create safety and security
for all and move from conflict and chaos to peace
and stability. The time has come to launch a stage of

The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.

Despite all those challenges and others, I stress
before the Council that the Libyan nation has not been
broken and shall, with the will of its people, recover
and return stronger than before, God willing.

I now invite Council members to informal
cosultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.50 a.m.

22-2370821/21
