UNITED NA TIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIFTH

YEAR

2189’”

MEETING:

7 JANUARY

1980

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
. . . . . . . . . . . . .. ., . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , .

1

. . . . . . . . . . . . ., . . . , . . . , . . . ., . . . . . . . . . . , , . . . . , . . . .

1

Letter dated 3 January 1980 addressed to the President of the Security Council
by the representatives of Australia, the Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belgium, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Denmark, the
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Fiji, Germany, Federal
Republic of, Greece, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, Indonesia, Italy, Japan,
Liberia, Luxembourg, Malaysia, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines, Portugal,
Saint Lucia, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore, Somalia, Spain,
Suriname, Sweden, Thailand, Turkey, Uganda, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of America, Uruguay
and Venezuela (S/13724 and Add. 1 and 2) . . +. +, , . . . . . . . a. . . . . . , . . . . ‘. . . .

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2189)
Adoption of the agenda

SlPV.2189

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements
of the Official Records of the SecurifJt Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
cm/
Decisions
of the Secur’ify Council.
The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2189th MEETING
Held in New York on Monday,
President:

Mr. Jacques LEPRETTE

7 January

(France).

1980, at 10.30 a.m.

I. The PRESIDENT
(i/zterp,-etation fron7
French):
In accordance with decisions taken at the 2185th to
2188th meetings,
I invite the representatives
of
Afghanistan, Australia, Bulgaria, Canada, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Kampuchea,
Egypt, the Federal Republic of Germany, Hungary,
Italy, Japan, Liberia, Malaysia, MongoIia, the Netherlands, New Zbaland, Pakistan, Poland, Saudi Arabia,
Singapore, Somalia, Spain, Turkey, Venezuela and
Viet Nam to take the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council chamber.
.’
,’ At the invit&ion
of the President MI*. Sal7ak
(Afghanistan), Mr. Af7dersoi7 (Australia), Mr. Yrrnkov
(Bulgada), Mr. Bar?on (Canada), MI+. LiE’vano (Colomhiq), Mr. Pizcr Es&ante
(Costa Rica), Mr. Hlllinsk$
(Czechoslqvakia):
‘Mr. Thiomn Prasith (Demmatic
Kat,njmchea), Mr. Ahdel Meguid (Egypt), Baron w7
Wechmw (GeGmny, Federal Republic of), MI+. Hollai
(Hungary), Mr. La Rocca (Italy), MI+. Nisibori(Japan),
Ml.. T~~rbmarz (LiberG),
MJ.. Zaiton
(Malaysia),
Mr. Dashtseren (Mongolia),
Mr. Botlp’ens-Hosang
(Nethedands), Mr. Fmncis (New Zealand), Mr. Naik
(Pakistan),
MI-. Jwoszek (Poland),
Mr. Allagcl~zy
(Saudi Atwhia), Mr. Koh (Singnpore),
Mr. Shcrrif
(Somalia), Mr. de PiniPs (Spnin), Mr. EtaIp (Turkey),
MI+. Nnva Cadlo (Venezuela) crnd Mr. Ha Van Lau
(Viet Nm7) took the pluces resemeci fos then7 at the
side of tke Coui7cil chumher.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh,
China, France, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Ur.ion of Soviet Socialist
Republics, Unite’d: Kingdom
of Great -Britain and
Northern 1reland;Ulii~ed
States of America, Zambia.
Provisional ‘,,agenda (S/Agenda/2189)
1. Adoption of the agenda
,. ,I% ‘,
..
2. Letter dated 3 January 1980 addressed to the President of the Security Council by the representatives of Australia,
the Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belgium,
Canada, Chile, China,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Denmark,, the Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Fiji,
Germany, Federal Republic of, Greece, Haiti,
Honduras,
Iceland,
Indonesia,
Italy,
Japan,
Liberia, Luxembourg, Malaysia, the Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, the Philippines,
Portugal,
Saint Lucia, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Singapore, Somalia, Spain, Suriname, Sweden,
Thailand, Turkey, Uganda, the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United
States of America,
Uruguay and Venezuela
(S/13724 and Add.1 and 2)
. _. .~
The meetillg was called to odes at II.55 a.117.

2. The PRESIDENT
(inteppr4etcrtion florn French):
I wish to inform the members of the Council that
I. have received letters from the representatives of
Chile, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Panama
and Yugoslavia in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion. In accordance with the
usual practice, .I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate
in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
conformity with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

Adoption of the agenda

Letter dated 3 January 1980 addressed to the President of the Security Council by the representatives
of Australia, the Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belgium, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Denmark, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Fiji, Germany, Federal Republic of, Greece, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, Indonesia,
Italy, Japan, Liberia, Luxembourg,
Malaysia, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines,
Portugal, Saint Lucia, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Singapore, Somalia, Spain, Suriname,
Sweden,
Thailand, Turkey, Uganda, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States
of America, Uruguay and Venezuela (S/13724 and
Add.1 and 2)

At tize invitrrtion of the President,
Mr. Curznles
(Chile), Mr. Southichtlk
(Ltro People’s Detnoc~atic
Republic), Mr. Illuew (Pa~zam~) aj7d MI.. Kotnatina
(Yugoslavia) took the plcrces resewed for then7 at the
side of the Council chan7her.
3. The PRESIDENT
(interpletatio/7
from
French):
The members of the Council have before them document S/13729, containing the text of a draft resolution
sponsored by Bangladesh, Jamaica, the Niger, the
1

.-

Philippines
that Tunisia
resolution.

and Zambia. I have just been informed
wishes to become a sponsor of that draft

4. Mr. MuTuKWA
(Zambia): Mr, President, at the
outset I wish to extend to you my delegation’s warmest
congratulations
on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security
Council for the month of January.
With your experience as a seasoned diplomat, the
Council will no doubt be able to discharge its responsibilities successfully. I wish also to congratulate your
predecessor, the representative of China, who presided
very diligently
over the business of the Councilfor the
month of December 1979.

10. The presence of foreign forces of intervention
on the territory of any independent sovereign State
is totally inadmissible.
As always, therefore, Zambia
does not hesitate to call strongly for the total and
unconditional
withdrawal
of such foreign forces.
Zambia takes strong exception to all cases of external
meddling and interference by major Powers in the
internal affairs of other States, on any pretext.
11. The independence and non-aligned status of any
country, including Afghanistan, must be fully respected
by all, including the super-Powers, which are privileged
to serve as permanent members of the Security
Council.
12. It is also evident that there are conflicting
reasons for which different countries have an interest
in this matter. For our part, Zambia’s concern is with
the destiny of Afghanistan as well as with the fate
of small countries in this world of Powers. We cannot
ever remain silent when a State’s independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity are at stake.

5. The Zambian
delegation warmly welcomes the
German Democratic
Republic, the Niger, the Philippines and Tunisia, which have joined as new members of the Security Council. We wish the new members success during their term of office. The Zambian
delegation will work in close co-operation with them.
We wish to record our appreciation also to those
delegations
that completed their term on the Council
at the end of last month.

13. It would be tragic if the view that small countries are only pawns in the game of the great Powers
were to be perpetuated as we enter the new decade of
the 1980s. We reject this notion of dominance in any
form. The primary interests of an independent State
are, in our view, best articulated by its nationals.
It is in this framework that we approach the issue
before the Council.

6. International
relations are at a crossroad. We are
in transition
from the age of dominance and dependence to the new age of equality and respect for each
other’s independence.
Nations of the third world which
have elected to be non-aligned have to be taken for
what they are and not for what the dominant Powers
want them to be.

14. As a Member of the United Nations and the nonaligned movement,
my country views the current
deteriorating situation in South-West Asia with great
concern. We urge all Member States strictly to uphold
the principles of the Charter. Among those principles
is the need for all Member States to settle their international disputes by peaceful means in such a manner
that international
peace and security are not jeopardized. Member States are also required to refrain in
their international
relations from the threat to use
force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State or in any other manner inconsistent with the principles of the Charter.

7. Zambia
does not wish to see the day when the
security of small States will be perpetually in peril.
That would be unhealthy for our world. Worse still,
a state of anarchy could only hurt the contemporary
international
order of peace and security. Peace and
freedom are to us in Zambia commodities which must
be cherished and guarded jealously. As the custodian
of international
peace and security, the Security
Council has a vital role in ensuring that all States, big
and small, respect each other’s territorial integrity and
independence.
8. It is with deep apprehension that we learn of
situations in which the powerful seek to impose their
will on the weak. In the process, they trample on all
the tenets
of acceptable conduct in international
relations.

15. As a member of the non-aligned third world,
Zambia strongly feels that world peace can be realized
only through strict adherence to the above-stated principles. All necessary measures should therefore be
taken to prevent an escalation of tension in the region
of South-West Asia that could threaten international
peace and security.

9. I must admit that the issue before the Council is
multifaceted.
There are developments which must be
subjected
to scrutiny. Some of the rationalizations
we have heard are puzzling, to say the least, It is
unclear to us who was responsible for sending an
invitation
to foreign forces to move into Afghanistan.
It was unfortunate
that the late President Amin of
Afghanistan,
who, we assume, should have known
something
about that invitation, was himself killed
in the course of events.

16. It is in the light of the foregoing that my delegation makes specific appeals to all those concerned in
the conflict to exercise maximum restraint in their
dealings with each other. The Government in Afghanistan should by all means be allowed to find a political
solution to its internal problems. That goal could in
my delegation’s view be achieved if all foreign forces
withdrew from Afghanistan.
2

:

Mongolian People’s Revolutionary Party and Chairman
of the Presidium of the Great People’s Khural of the
Mongolian People’s Republic, comrade Y. Tsedenbal,
said on 30 December 1979:

17. To reiterate: the steps just proposed would in our
view be conducive to the peaceful settlement of the
dispute in Afghanistan. The people of the region
should be allowed to determine their destiny without
any interference or intervention
from any external
Powers in that volatile region.

“, . . The Mongolian people express their solidarity
with the struggle of the friendly Afghan people for
the defence and consolidation of the gains of the
April revolution against the encroachments of both
the internal and the external reaction. The Mongolian People’s Revolutionary Party and the Government of the Mongolian People’s Republic fully
support and highly appreciate the international aid
being rendered by the Soviet Union to the Afghan
people at their request.”

18. As a member of the Security Council, Zambia
will join in all constructive and meaningful efforts to
have the issue resolved amicably.
19. The PRESIDENT
(intevpretcrtiun
jhn
Ftw~h):
The next speaker is the representative of Mongolia.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
20. Mr. DASHTSEREN
(Mongolia): Mr. President,
allow me to congratulate you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of January and, through you, to express to the other
members of the Council our gratitude for my being
allowed to participate in the debate on the item of
which the Council is now seized.

25. The Mongolian people, who have in the past
experienced the oppression of feudal lords and the
intrigues of external forces, are well aware of the
present situation in Afghanistan, of the achievements
of the people of Afghanistan and of the difficulties
facing them.
26. After the victory of the popular revolution in
1921, the then backward and medieval Mongolia
embarked upon the road of social progress. The
Mongolian revolution had two phases: revolutionarydemocratic and socialist. It was during the first phase
of the revolution that the Mongolian people encountered enormous difficulties, especially in the form of
plots by the deposed feudal lords, as well as interference by foreign reactionary forces in the internal
affairs of Mongolia.

21. First of all, I should like to join the previous
speakers who have strongly opposed consideration by
the Security Council of the internal situation in
Afghanistan,
notwithstanding
the objection of the
legitimate Government of that country, as constituting
a flagrant violation of Article 2, paragraph 7, of the
Charter of the United Nations and the fundamental
principles of contemporary
international
law, the
principles of the sovereign equality of States and noninterference in internal affairs.

27. It was in those circumstances that Mongolia
concluded a treaty of friendship with Soviet Russia.
The extensive Soviet assistance, including military
aid, provided at the request of our Government has
long served as the basis for safeguarding and consolidating the revolutionary gains and State sovereignty
of the Mongolian People’s Republic. In 1925, when the
direct threat of intervention was over, the Soviet
military contingents were withdrawn. In the same
manner, in the 1930s the Soviet Union came to help
us in repulsing the armed aggression from the east.

22. Furthermore,
the situation in Afghanistan and
the presence of a limited number of contingents of
Soviet troops which are now being stationed in
Afghanistan at the request of the Government of that
country, do not pose any threat to peace and security,
as the initiators of this agenda item have tried to
suggest in presenting the case. On the contrary, the
strengthening of the position of the revolutionary
Government of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan will lead to the stabilization of the situation in
the country and in the region and will thus remove the
possible danger to international peace and security.

28. Today our friendship with the Soviet Union is a
decisive factor in the defence of our country from the
encroachments
of our southern neighbour, whose
ambitions and claims as a great Power are well known.

23. In this context, my delegation cannot but ask
those who today describe the Soviet emergency aid to
the Afghan people as an invasion and hypocritically
pretend to defend the principle of non-interference
in
internal affairs, where they were when last year a great
Power, a permanent member of the Security Council,
in gross violation of the basic principles of contemporary international law and the Charter, committed
a naked act of aggression against a sovereign, independent and non-aligned
country,
the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam, in order to teach a “bloody
lesson”?
‘i

29. The events that have taken place during the last
two years since the April revolution in Afghanistan,
in many respects resemble those of the first, antiimperialist and democratic stage of our revolution.
The profound political, social, economic and cultural
transformations
that are taking place in Afghanistan
are not in line with the interests of the deposed feudal
lords nor to the liking of the forces which are interested
in preserving the old feudal regime and in turning the
country into a springboard against the Soviet Union,
Iran and other countries of the region.

24. With regard to the events in Afghanistan, the
First Secretary of the Central Committee
of the

3
j&

35. Some speakers are trying to connect the Soviet
aid and assistance to the Afghan people with the
internal developments and changes in the leadership
of Afghanistan. The truth is that the’removal of Amin,
who had overthrown and killed the country’s legitimate
President, Noor Mohammad Tarakj, imprisoned and
massacred thousands of people and- set up a rbgime of
tyranny and despotism, was the v,e.rdict of the people
and of the revolution. It was a logical move to save
the gains of the April revolution. The new leadership
has come out with a constructive programme to defend
those gains, to eradicate the consequences of the
crimes of Amin and his clique and to build a new,
prosperous and independent Afghanistan. Thus one
of the first acts of the new Gqyernment
was the
proclamation
of a general amnesty for all political
p,risoners, irrespective
of their class affiliation,
religion, language, clan, nationaii’ti or ideology.

30. Since, t,he>victory of the April revolution of 1978,
&he forces ofthe internal counter-revolution
and foreign
reactionary forces, aware of the fact that every success
of the Afghan people in their democratic revolution
would lessen their own chances of regaining their lost
position,
have intensified their subversive actions,
including
armed incursions from a neighbouring
country. As was pointed out by Mr. Shah Mohammad
Dost, Foreign Minister of the Democratic Republic of
Afghanistan
[2185th meeting], for a long period of
time, imperialism,
colonialism and reaction staged and
continually
stepped up armed provocations against
the sovereign
Democratic Republic .of Afghanistan,
thus jeopardizing
its territorial.integrity,
freedom and
independence,
Even according to Western journalists
who recently visited Pakistan, the .Western States and
China are financing rebels that.are entrenched in the
territory of Pakistan and are. supplying them with
weapons with a ,view to overthrowing the legitimate
Government
of the Afghan people.
_,
.i
31. In the aforementioned
circumstances,
in the
course of 1978 and 1979, the, Afghan Government
has turned more than once to.the Soviet Union with
a request for support, specifically with requests for
military aid in order to defend the revolutionary gains
of its people and to repel armed incursions and
provocations
from the outside. ‘.

36. In conclusiqn, I should like to extend to Mr. Shah
Mohammad Dost, the Foreign &l$ster of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan, mydelegation’s
wholehearted welcotie to the United Nilions and, through
him, to express to the people Of’Afghanistan and its
Government,
headed by Babrak ,Karmal,
the full
solidarity and support of the pedple and Government
of Mongolia.
37. We are confident that the ‘Afghan people and
the Revolutionary
Council will be able to defend the
gains of the April revolution and achieve the noble
aims of building a new and prosperous society in their
country.

32. At the end of 1979, when interference from
outside and terror unleashed by the usurper Amin
within the country posed a real threat to the very
existence of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan,
the Afghan
Government
once again requested the
Soviet Union
to render assistance in defending the
revolutionary
gains and the sovereignty, independence and national dignity of Afghanistan.

38. Mr. KAISER (Bangladesh): Mr. President, may
I warmly congratulate you on the assumption of the
presidency of this Council for this month. We are
particularly happy to see you iri the Chair, not only
because you represent a country with which Bangladesh has the most cordial and close relations, but
also because of your personal attributes of objectivity,
diplomatic
skill, knowledge and wisdom. In these
critical days those qualities will be put to a severe test.
We are confident that they will serve to guide the
work of the Council to a successful conclusion.

33. The request for aid and assistance was based on
article 4 of tGe Treaty of Friendship, Good Neighbourliness and Co-operation between the .Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics
and the Democratic Republic of
Afghanistan
of 1978.’ In making its request, the
Afghan Government
was acting in strict conformity
with, Article
51 of the Charter of the United Nations,
in the exercise of its legitimate right of self-defence.
Therefore
the Soviet Union’s material, moral and
military assistance is not only legitimate, but is also
fully in keeping with the aspirations and interests of
the Afghan people.

39. I also take this opportunity
to reiterate our
gratitude and warm regards to your predecessor,
Mr. Chen Chu, for the excellent and efficient way that
he conducted our business during the difficult month
of December.

34. It is no secret that the noisy campaign around
the events in Afghanistan and the anti-Soviet propaganda are intended to divert the attention of the
world’s public from -the aggressive designs of the
imperialist
forces, especially those of the United
States,, which are trying to use the prevailing situation as a pretext for interference in the internal
affairs of Afghanistan, for increasing their military
presence in. that region and for creating an interventionist
rapid deployment force in that and other
parts of the world.

40. Our congratulations
are extended to the new
members of the Council which have joined us this year,
the representatives of the German Democratic Republic, the Niger, the Philippines and Tunisia. The constraints of pressing events and time preclude my
extending to them the warm words of welcome that
I feel like expressing and that they deserve. I assure
them, however, of the fullest co-operation
of my
delegation and myself. We look forward to working in
close contact with them.
4

48. I have briefly outlined the principles of this
world body, principles which in the case of Afghanistan
stand contravened and I have suggested the course
of action which the Council should pursue. The events
in that country and their immediate and long-term
effects on contemporary international relations must
give us pause to ponder deeply the future of our world
institutions. At stake is the fabric of the international
community,
world peace and law that we have so
painstakingly built.

41. I have listened with great respect and attention
to the participants in this debate. A very large number of those speakers have expressed their views
eloquently, pointing out the grave threat to peace that
the situation in Afghanistan poses to the world. An
overwhelming majority of them provided information
pertinent to the issue and have also pointed out the
serious breaches and contraventions of the provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations and of the
numerous decisions and other formal expressions of
the principles adopted by the Organization.

49. The draft resolution [S/1.3729], which Bangladesh
sponsored along with Jamaica, the Niger, the Philippines, Tunisia and Zambia, reaffirms the sacrosanct
principles of the Charter and other relevant decisions
of the Organization and of the non-aligned movement,
which are so highly relevant to the situation in
Afghanistan. The operative paragraphs of the draft
resolution lay down the course of action to be followed.
This is the minimum that can be done for the time
being in order to seek a solution to this grave problem.
Bangladesh strongly supports and commends the draft
resolution to the Council for its full support in order
to bring peace to Afghanistan.

42. My delegation fully shares the views expressed
by a large majority of the speakers participating
in
the debate, particularly most of those who are members of the non-aligned movement and of the Organization of the Islamic Conference. Hence I shall not
take more of the Council’s time and shall be brief.
43. My Government
has strongly expressed our
deepest concern over developments in Afghanistan, a
fellow non-aligned and southern Asian neighbour,
with which we not only have the closest fraternal
relations but with which we are bound by long-standing
historical, cultural, i-eligious and geographical ties.

JO. Mr. OUMAROU
(Niger) (interpretntion
J~UWI
French): Mr. President, as this is the first time that
I have spoken in the Council, I wish to congratulate
you on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this particularly difficult month
of January which nevertheless brings high hopes for
the new year and the new decade. There can be no
doubt that, thanks to your personal qualities which
bear the imprint of the abiding values of France, a
country of proven humanistic and diplomatic traditions, you will discharge your task with the necessary
tact and skill. I should like to take this opportunity
to say how much my country welcomes the many
and long-standing ties that bind our two countries in
mutual esteem and regard and regularly find concrete
expression in many forms of co-operation. Your warm
words of welcome to us as we join the Council, as
well as those of the other members of the Council
allow us to hope for fruitful co-operation for an
enlightened contribution to peace. You may all rest
assured that the Niger will do its utmost to encourage
such an atmosphere.

44. The Soviet Union has openly admitted that it
has introduced Soviet military forces into Afghanistan.
It is our firm belief that the presence of those Soviet
troops in Afghanistan and their direct involvement in
the country’s internal affairs pose a serious threat to
peace and stability in the region and to world peace.
45. Consistent with our firm commitment
to the
Charter of the United Nations and to the principles
of non-alignment, which particularly enjoin upon all
States respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity
and political independence of all States, the non-use or
threat of use of force and non-interference
in the
internal affairs of other countries, Bangladesh has
always resolutely opposed all forms of external interference in the affairs of any country.
46. Consequently, we believe that the presence of
Soviet troops in Afghanistan is a serious violation
of those fundamental principles and is inconsistent
with the aims and purposes of the Charter. Bangladesh
upholds the sovereign and inalienable right of the
freedom-loving people of Afghanistan to determine
freely their form of Government and to pursue their
own economic, political and social system, as well as
to preserve the non-aligned status of Afghanistan.

51. Our gratitude goes also to the entire international
community and to its representatives for the confidence
that they placed in us thereby bringing us to this seat
on the Security Council.
52. I should also like to extend our sincerest compliments to the representative of China, Mr. Chen Chu,
for the talent and skill with which he conducted the
proceedings of the Security Council during the particularly difficult month of December 1979.

47. Bangladesh therefore calls for the immediate and
unconditional withdrawal of all Soviet forces from
Afghanistan, so that the people of Afghanistan may be
allowed to determine their own destiny, free from outside interference, intervention, coercion or constraint
of any kind whatsoever, especially that involving the
use of force in any form, as a result of any plea or
on any pretext whatsoever.

53. The situation that has concerned us for the past
few days is particularly serious and disturbing. Most
of the speakers preceding me have stressed the un5

usually disturbing causes of the situation and have
issued injunctions
and pleas for a return to order on
the basis of the Charter of the United Nations and of
the wisdom of nations. That situation reveals a flouting
of established international
principles that increases
not only tension but also the threat of confrontation
in our world, which is already in a state of chronic
anxiety and apprehension.

for the realization
yearn.

of the well-being

for which they

58. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
fi.o/?z ~J’cM’h):
The next speaker is the representative of the Federal
Republic of Germany. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his stzitement.
59. Baron von WECHMAR
(Federal Republic of
Germany):
Mr. President,
it gives me particular
pleasure to see you, the representative of a close
partner and ally, in the Chair of the Security Council.
I should like to congratulate you on the assumption
of your high duties. My Government is confident that
this body will once again greatly profit from YOUI
personal skills and long-standing, diplomatic
experience.

54. Peaceful coexistenceamong
States is, indeed, one
of the rules on which world peace is based and without
which neither friendships nor agreements are conceivable in international
relations. How can there be
agreement and understanding
when there is an everpresent desire to dominate others, to impose on
others convictions
that they do not hold or cannot
assimilate? How can there be agreement when people
are continually challenging the right of others to exist
or the simple right to conduct their own affairs in a
manner that suits their sense of what is fitting and
proper?

60. I should also like to pay a tribute to the representative of China, who most ably and efficiently
guided the Council through the particularly busy and
rough month of December, thus giving another example
of the customary wisdom of Chinese diplomacy.

55. My country, which is economically emerging and
militarily
without ambitions,
is firmly devoted to
peace. Our international
policy is to use ways and
means to bring about concord and understanding
among peoples. That is why we are particularly concerned whenever relations among States are disrupted
simply because of the intolerance of some or a lack
of restraint and a desire for hegemony on the part of
others. Our President, Colonel Seyni Kountch6, has
often stated that the peace and tranquillity that the
Niger desires for itself it wants also for others because,
as he adds, in view of the alliances that are now
inevitable, peace in the world must be comprehensive
or it will not exist at all.

61. Addressing all members of the Security Council
through you, Mr. President, I should like to express
our gratitude for my country’s being granted the
opportunity to speak in this crucial debate.
62. I should also like to congratulate those countries
that have just joined the Council as new members and
to wish them success in the exercise of their important
responsibilities.
63. The Federal Republic of Germany, taken aback
by the Soviet intervention
in Afghanistan, welcomes
the fact that the situation created by that action has
been brought before the Security Council. We share
the view that has been repeatedly expressed here, that
the intervention
of the Soviet Union in Afghanistan
constitutes a threat to the stability of the entire region
and violates the fundamental
principles
of selfdetermination,
peaceful international relations and the
indivisibility
of ditente.
This violation
is an
extremely grave matter which requires a reaction from
the international
community.

56. For all these reasons, in our consultations the
Niger was not at all opposed to the present meetings
of the Council on the situation in Afghanistan. We
take this opportunity solemnly to repeat our opposition
to any policy aimed at calling in question internationally recognized borders; to any policy of interference in the internal affairs of States and to any
policy of military interference whose purpose, avowed
or concealed, is to deprive a people of its identity.
We express our total disapproval of and concern at the
armed invasion of which Afghanistan, a country so
close to ours in its threefold character of a third world
country, Islamic country and State Member of the
United Nations and member of the non-aligned movement, is at present the stage. To say the least, we
regard this development
as a regrettable violation of
the Charter of the United Nations.

64. Only a few months ago, the Soviet Foreign
Minister stated: “The Afghans alone are entitled to
settle their internal affairs. Only they will settle them,
the same as the people of any other sovereign State”.
65. The Soviet Union must face the question of how
it reconciles this unquestionably
correct statement
with its present action. After all, the political and
military resistance of the Afghan people to the Soviet
troops and the rkgime installed by them clearly shows
what the Afghans themselves think about the assistance they are allegedly receiving and whom they see
as a threat to their freedom and their right to selfdetermination.
The people of Afghanistan are showing
that they w’tint to live in accordance with their tradi-

57. Finally, the Niger will support any resolution
of the Council highlighting
its strong disapproval of
this violation in all its manifestations and calling on
the Soviet forces immediately to leave Afghan territory,
in order to allow the people of that country to exercise
their sovereign will in overcoming their present difficulties and to work in an atmosphere of tranquillity
6

.

__ _

_

.

tions and their own religion,
system of their own choice.

_.._

and under a political

present case, a call for the withdrawal of all foreign
troops from Afghanistan.

66. The military intervention
of the Soviet Union
cannot be justified. There can be no question of any
country other than the Soviet Union having interfered in the internal affairs of Afghanistan. The Soviet
Union’s invocation of Article 51 of the Charter and
article 4 of the 1978 Treaty’ is not supported by facts.

73. It is alarming that the behaviour of a permanent
member of the Security Council, which bears a special
responsibility
for the maintenance of world peace,
should give cause for this development. On the one
hand, this behaviour inevitably casts doubt on the
credibility
of what the Soviet Union has stated
time and again, particularly in the United Nations. On
the other, it raises the question of whether the United
Nations itself can credibly uphold its principles in the
face of such action. It is faced here with a serious
situation.

67. The Federal Republic of Germany shares the
deep concern felt by the countries in that region about
the- Soviet--intervention.
Our concern stems from- a
twofold conviction: world peace depends largely on
political, social and military stability in the third world;
furthermore,
the political
systems and regional
relationships
in the third world can only become and
remain stable if they are consonant with the wishes,
sentiments and traditions of its peoples. Nobody but
they themselves are authorized to define their interests.

74. The Federal Republic of Germany deeply regrets
this recent development.
My country has been
endeavouring to improve its relations with the Soviet
Union. There has been evident progress-for
the
benefit of both sides and the situation in Europe as
a whole. We view that progress, and the results it has
achieved so far, as an important contribution to the
safeguarding of world peace. The Federal Republic of
Germany has, however, like other countries, always
expressed the conviction that detente should prove
itself world-wide-that
is, also in the relations of
East and of West with the nations of the third world.

68. Naturally,
countries not belonging to the third
world can and must assist the peoples of those regions.
That would be in our own interest if we want to
establish a greater measure of world-wide stability,
reduce the risk of crises and give wider scope for
peace.

75. The Foreign Minister of the Federal Republic of
Germany strongly emphasized this point in his recent
speech before the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth
sessionI Statements by the Soviet Union and its allies
have borne out the impression that they identify
themselves with these principles. The joint GermanSoviet Declaration of 6 May 1978, which was signed by
Chancellor Schmidt-and President Brezhnev, explicitly
speaks of respect for the indivisibility
of peace and
security in all parts of the world.

69. But such assistance must not take the form of
manipulation,
pressure and intervention.
These are
methods used to impose alien concepts on otherpeoples-measures
to make them mere pawns in
foreign power designs and draw them into spheres of
influence. Genuine assistance consists, rather-and
with pride of place-in
respect for the independenceof the nations of the third world, for their right to
determine their future and their political systems
themselves and for their own decision to remain
non-aligned. The Federal Republic of Germany has
always stressed this point, just as it has underlined the
constructive role of the non-aligned movement.

76. The present situation created by the Soviet Union
has deeply clouded our hopes that this principle would
acquire practical meaning.

Genuine help also consists in support for those
countries in their attempts to safeguard the economic
basis of their existence, Tractors, machinery and
technology are what those developing countries need,
not tanks-least
of all if they are manned by foreign
troops under foreign command.

70.

77. The PRESIDENT
(inferprefrrticm
jbom Frrnch):
The next speaker is the representative of Yugoslavia,
whom I invite to take a.place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
78. Mr:XOMAT-INA
(Yugoslavia) (iuferpreration
fion~ Ftvnck): I should like to thank the Security
Council for giving me this opportunity to set forth the
views of my delegation on the acute and urgent
problem before the Council which affects international relations as a whole.

71. These have been the guiding principles of the
Federal Republic of Germany in its relations with
Afghanistan, with whose people it has traditional and
deeply rooted bonds of friendship. They are our guide
in relations with every nation of the third world. These
are principles we should like to see generally recognized and practised.

79. To you, personally, Mr. President, I should like
to express the congratulations
of my delegation on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Councils for January, in the conviction that your
political experience, as well as your personal devotion
and commitment,
will contribute to the success of the
work of this important organ of the United Nations. .‘-

‘72. We will, therefore, support any decision by the
Security Council which gives effect to principles of
national
sovereignty,,
territorial
integrity,
noninterference and non-intervention
and the renunciation
of force-a decision which has to include, in the
7

I should also like t0 congratulate the delegations of the
German Democratic
Republic, Mexico, the Niger, the
Philippines
and Tunisia upon their election to the
Security Council,

taken as a pretext for “influencing”
such countries :
and peoples and for imposing various forms of
dependence as well as for shifting the lines of spheres
of interest. It is the inalienable right of every country
and people freely to choose the’ways and forms of its
socio-political
development.

80. We support the decision of the Security Council
“to consider
the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications
for international peace and security”,
proceeding from the irreplaceable role of the United
Nations for the maintenance of peace and security in
the world.

84. There is no reason whatsoever that would justify
intervention by anyone and no reason to jeopardize
the independence of any people or its sovereign right
to decide its own destiny.
85. It is our firm conviction that this must be the
paramount law of international
relations and that it
must be respected without any exception. This must
be the obligation of all the members of the international community and, I would specially emphasize,
the particular duty of the permanent members of the
Security Council, because their privileges under the
Charter must be interpreted
exclusively as giving
them greater responsibility
and tibligation for maintaining-and
not jeopardizing-peace,
security and
stability in the world.

81. We are seriously concerned at the constant
deterioration
of international
relations. Particularly
disquieting
is the stagnation in the process of dbtente
in the world and the ever more frequent use of force,
in contradiction
of the Charter of the United Nations,
the principles
of non-alignment
and the generally
accepted norms of international law. Such practices,
which are being resorted to ever more frequently,
lead to flagrant violations of the territorial integrity,
sovereignty
and independence of countries and are
conducive to anarchy and lawlessness, posing a serious
threat to peace in the world, to security, progress and
the peaceful development of mankind.

86. A selective application and arbitrary interpretation of these basic principles, as well as the use of
the Charter and other multilateral
or bilateral instruments to justify intervention
and interference in the
internal affairs of other States, are not acceptable.
There can be ,no good or bad, justified or unjustified,
foreign intervention,
in the same way as there is no
good or justified aggression pr occupation. Consequently, we do not approve of preventive wars or
military interventions for so-called reasons of security
or any other motives. We have always maintained
that strict observance of these principles is the primary
obligation of all the members of the international community and, as I said earlier, particularly of the great
Powers, which bear special responsibility
for the
maintenance of peace and security.

X2. In connection
with the military action of the
Soviet Union in Afghanistan, the Federal Secretariat
for Foreign Affairs of Yugoslavia issued the following
statement on 30 December 1979:
“Yugoslavia
expresses its deep concern at the
serious consequences that such a development can
have not only by causing greater instability in that
region but also by affecting international relations
as a whole.
“As is known, Yugoslavia has always resolutely
advocated
strict respect for the Charter of the
United Nations
in relations among States. At the
same time, guided by the principles and objectives
of the policy of non-alignment, Yugoslavia considers
that the realization
of the sovereign rights of States
to independence,
territorial integrity and their own
way of life must be the only recognized practice in
international
relations.

87. The non-aligned movement bases its action on the
maintenance of peace through the universal application
of the principles of active and peaceful coexistence,
inseparable components of which are strict respect for
national independence, sovereignty and equality, free
national and social development, and opposition to and
condemnation
of all forms of interference, intervention, bloc rivalries, power politics, spheres of interest,
imperialism,
colonialism and hegemony.

“That
includes
the inadmissibility
of foreign
intervention
or of the imposition of alien will upon
sovereign States. It is the latter’s inalienable right
to solve their own problems and to choose their
own socio-political
system without interference
from outside.”

88. The sixth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned
Countries, held at Havana
from 3 to 9 September 1979, devoted the greatest
attention to these questions, raising them to the level
of fundamental principles and objectives of the policy
of non-alignment and emphasizing that their violation
is “totally
unacceptable,
unjustifiable
under any
circumstances and incompatible
with the obligations
assumed by the United Nations Members under the
Charter of the United Nations”.”

83. In this, as well as in all similar situations, we
are guided by the principle of the inadmissibility
of
foreign intervention
by armed force or in any other
way, as well as the unacceptability of any form of
imposition
of alien will upon sovereign countries and
peoples. Indispensable
social changes are frequently

8’

i
’
i
;
1
:
:
!

89. At the thirty-fourth session of the General Assembly, the non-aligned countries provided the initiative for the adoption of a declaration on noninterference and ‘n-on-intervention
and elaborated a
corresponding draft text in that regard [General Asse&iy resolution 34/f0Z]. The contents of the resolution on hegemonism [resolution 34/103] also point to
the same problems, 8I

interests of Peace in the region and in the world at
large.
94. It is therefore all the more important that the
voice of non-alignment,
as an independent and nonbloc factor in international
relations, should make
itself heard even more strongly today, Otherwise, the
Policy and Practice of “might makes right” could
impose itself as the law governing international
relations, a development which would threaten the
non-aligned countries the most, and, consequently,
the Policy of non-alignment as a whole, The present
critical phase of international relations should not be
allowed to become a permanent state of affairs.

90, The international community should not reconcile
itself to the practice of the imposition of alien solutions upon sovereign States by means of military
intervention as reflected, in particular, in the crises in
the Middle East, in southern Africa and, more recently,
in South-East and ‘South-West Asia as well.
:I
91. The international community
should resolutely
bar the way to ‘interventionism,
which represents
the most acute threat to the security and independence
of States. Precisely: for that reason, the Heads of
State or Governmdnt of Non-Aligned Countries at their
sixth Conference st’rrkssed that they viewed “with
concern the fact’ ‘that interference in the internal
affairs of States is becoming one of the chief forms of
aggression against the non-aligned countries”.4

95. Yugoslavia has always consistently adhered to
the principles of the Charter and non-alignment, and it
has been actively striving for their implementation.
Those principles have an irreplaceable and universal
Significance for relations among all countries, regardless of their size, level of development or social
system. They constitute a progressive heritage of the
struggle against all forms of domination and the only
basis for the safeguarding of world peace, the settlement of international problems and disputes and the
development of international co-operation founded on
equal rights.

92. The newly created situation shows that it is
incumbent upon th’e United Nations ‘and the international community as,a whole to intensify its efforts
to eradicate all the sources of the use of force and of
interference in internal affairs and to strive to transform
ddtente into a universal process encompassing all the
regions of the world and to ensure’ the participation
of all countries in the solution of outstanding international problems. We ‘must prevent the imposition of
the alternative of a return to the cold war and an
exacerbation of bloc confrontations leading the world
to the brink of war. On the contrary, we must opt
energetically for such dbtente, as it will be a component
of the process of the establishment
of an international order in which there will be no place for
intervention, pressure or the use of force.

96. The people of Afghanistan, like all other peoples,
has the inalienable right to decide on its way of life
and its destiny without interference from outside and
without the presence of foreign troops on its soil.
97. In line with our action in all similar situations,
we support and join in the request made by the nonaligned countries which are members of the Security
Council in their draft resolution [S/13729], calling for
the immediate and unconditional
withdrawal of all
foreign troops from Afghanistan. All States should
refrain from interfering in the internal affairs of that
non-aligned country, Yugoslavia supports this request
in the profound conviction that if the Soviet troops
are withdrawn and if other States refrain from any
form of interference and pressure against Afghanistan,
that would contribute towards overcoming this dangerous crisis and would promote peace and stability
in the region and beyond.

93. These imperatives
affirm once again the
irreplaceable role of the policy of non-alignment,
which has grown into a broad international movement
precisely in the struggle for a new system of international relations founded on the defence of the sovereign
rights of peoples to peace, independence, territorial
integrity and free development, without any form of
overt or covert use of force. This has found particular
expression in the assertion and affirmation of the
policy of non-alignment in South-West Asia, where,
the pact of the Central Treaty Organization has disintegrated and Iran and Pakistan have joined the
movement of non-aligned countries. Those changes
were directed against bloc rivalries and the creation
of spheres of influence and in favour of the stabilization
of relations and co-operation among the States of the
region. The failure to recognize and respect this
Positive process and the disruption of the process
through unilateral actions are detrimental
to the

98. The PRESIDENT
(interprettrtion
fiotn French):
The next speaker is the representative of the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic. I invite him to take a
place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
99.

Mr. SOUTHICHAK

(Lao People’s Democratic
French): Mr. President,
the delegation of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic wishes first of all to extend to you its congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for January and to express to YOU and to all
the other members of the Security Council Our thanks
for having enabled my delegation to set forth its
views on the item now before the Council.

Republic)

9

(it~tevp~eta~ionf~ot~

100. We should like also to convey our sincere congratulations to the new non-permanent members of the
Council, the German Democratic Republic, the Niger,
the Philippines and Tunisia, and also to pay a tribute
to the outgoing non-permanent
members for their
effective contribution
to the cause of international
peace and security.

eliminate the last remaining vestiges of the old regime
and has made a brilliant start on the establishment
and consolidation of a democratic system throughout
the country.
105. However, everyone knows that since that time
the enemies of the Afghan people-worried
by its
revolutionary victory, which in their view constitutes
a serious obstacle to their policy of expansion, domination and military adventurism-have
concentrated
their efforts on sowing trouble and confusion, in an
attempt to undermine the democratic system of the
country with the ultimate goal .of undermining
the
Afghan revolution. To that end, they have constantly
been taking stands hostile to the Afghan people and
its revolution, expressing their positions by acts of
interference in the internal affairs of Afghanistan.

101. Recently the world’s leading imperialist Power
has done its utmost to orchestrate slanderous propaganda against a country that has helped another
country to preserve its independence, its sovereignty
and its territorial integrity, which were threatened by
acts of aggression directed from outside the country.
It has now brought its noisy campaign of slander and
calumny before the United Nations, not so that we may
“unite our strength to maintain international peace
and security”,
as is advocated by the Charter, but
rather to poison even further a situation of crisis and
tension that now confronts the international
community.

106. As Mr, Babrak Karma1 has pointed out, the
Afghan people, which cherishes peace and liberty
in an independent and sovereign Afghanistan, cannot
agree that “the party and the State have embarked
upon a perilous course of blindness, error and fluctuation, which is what reaction and imperialism would
have liked”.

102. In proposing the urgent convening of the Council to consider the so-called situation in Afghanistan,
in spite of the clear opposition of the Government of
the Democratic
Republic of Afghanistan, the imperialists are trying to involve the most important body
of the Organization
in sterile debate, which will serve
only to harm the prestige of the United Nations and
will benefit only the cause of imperialist expansion
and domination,
which is condemned in all international forums by the non-aligned countries and countries throughout the world that love peace and justice.
By their manoeuvres they are once again demonstrating
their shameless interference in the internal affairs of
Afghanistan in flagrant contradiction of the provisions
of Article 2, paragraph 7, of the Charter, which
provides that:

107. But the fact remains that those forces have
never abandoned their dark designs of expansion and
domination.
The political and military support they
have given to internal reaction and the subversive and
aggressive activities directed against Afghanistan from
outside constitute a gross infringement
of its independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity, and, as
was stressed by Mr. Karmal, “if the truly revolutionary
and patriotic forces had not taken the revolutionary
initiative,
Afghanistan’s
independence
would have
been imperilled”.
108. It was in the face of precisely such a danger
that the Government of the Democratic Republic of
Afghanistan appealed for urgent assistance from the
Soviet Union, which responded positively to this
particular appeal. The request for military assistance
made by Afghanistan is entirely in keeping with the
provisions of Article 51 of the Charter of the United
Nations, which has confirmed the natural right of
legitimate self-defence, individual
or collective, if a
State Member of the United Nations becomes the
target of armed aggression. It is also in keeping with
the Declaration on Principles
of International
Law
concerning
Friendly
Relations
and Co-operation
among States in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations [Getzetd Assetnbly resolution 2625
(XXV)], which authorizes peoples to seek or receive
support in keeping with the purposes and principles
of the Charter in the exercise of their right to selfdetermination.

“Nothing
contained in the present Charter shall
authorize the United Nations to intervene in matters
which are essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of any State or shall require the Members to
submit such matters to settlement under the present
Charter.”
103. In Afghanistan, the victory of the revolution of
liberation of April 1978 was an historic victory for the
Afghan people and progressive and peace-loving
peoples throughout
the world. In this connection,
Mr. Shah Mohammad
Dost, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Democratic
Republic of Afghanistan
[2185/h lneeting],
has lucidly and clearly presented to
the Councii the fruitful results of the revolution for the
Afghan people and for international peace and security.
104. Indeed, the victory of the April revolution
further liberated the Afghan people from the yoke of
tyranny and exploitation
imposed by a feudal-type
rCgime behind which were hidden imperialism
and
international
reaction. Continuing the work of revolution, the Afghan people has successfully striven to

109. In embarking upon this noisy campaign of
slander against the Soviet Union concerning the SOcalled situation in Afghanistan,
imperialism
and
international reaction are only attempting to conceal
10

their subversive and provocative manoeuvres which
are at present becoming more and more open against
sovereign and ifidependent Afghanistan. That campaign is also aimed at camouflaging their dark designs
of expansion
and domination,
which have been
reflected in certain actions which presented a real
danger to international
peace and security. For
example, the American plan aimed at the deployment
of medium-range
missiles in Western Europe, the
strengthening of bases and military potential in Asia,
the Middle
East,. Africa and Latin America, the
creation of a rapid,deployment
force and the threat of
teaching a lesson to independent and sovereign States,
and so on.
110. In so far as concerns the dispatch of a limited
Soviet military contingent to Afghanistan at the request
of the Government
of the Democratic Republic of
Afghanistan, pursuant to the Treaty of Friendship,
Good Neighbourliness
and Co-operation of 5 December 1978,’ the Soviet Union has declared to the world
that that limited military contingent will be withdrawn
after the reasons for the Afghan request have been
eliminated. The temporary presence of that contingent
constitutes neither a danger nor any threat to international peace and security because the offer of Soviet
military assistance is limited in time and space and is
intended solely to fulfil obligations flowing from the
Treaty between these two countries, a Treaty which
Mr. Karma1 has described as being, by its very nature,
a document guaranteeing lasting peace and security in
the region.
111. In the course of the consideration of the item
now before the Council, certain delegations have put
forward demands which are entirely out of keeping
with the provisions of the Charter. We hope, however,
that the Council will live up to its responsibilities and
refrain from dealing with, still less taking a decision
on,
a question which falls within the exclusive competence of a Member State of the Organization.
In
its primary mission of maintaining international peace

and security, it must see to it that the circles of
imperialism
and international
reaction do not take
advantage of the ‘complicated situation in Asia and
in the various parts of the world to strengthen their
military potential and to pursue a policy of expansion
and hegemony which is the true cause of a threat to
international peace and security.
112. The Government of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic has followed closely the events which
have occurred and continue to occur in Afghanistan.
After authentically revolutionary Afghan forces took
charge of the destiny of the country, a message was
sent to Mr. Babrak Karmal, which reads as follows:
“In spite of a still difficult situation created by
imperialism and its lackeys, we are convinced that,
thanks to the People’s Democratic Party of Afghanistan with yourself at its head and the historic
victories it has won, the heroic people of Afghanistan with the support and assistance of the Soviet
Union, the socialist countries and countries of the
world that love peace will win new, major victories
in defeating the subversive manceuvres of the
imperialists and their lackeys and in safeguarding
the gains of the revolution and building a nation
which has taken the course of socialism, thus contributing to the consolidation of peace and security
in that region.”

NOTES
’ To be printed
No. 17976.
2 See

in

“United

Qfficiol Records

Session, Hewry
Meetings,
.i A/34/542,
annex, para.
4 Ibid.,
para. 249.

qf the

Nations,

Trm~y

Cenertrl

Assert~h/.~,

1 I th meeting.
245.

SP~~PS”,

under

Thirty-forrrth

HOW

TO OBTAIN

m7TED

NATIONS

I’UBLICAIIONS

United
Nations
publications
may be obtnined
throughout
the world. Consult
your hookstoro
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

from bookstores
and distributom
or write to; United
Nations,
Sales

DES NATIONS

UNlES

Les publicntions
des Nations Units
want en vente dnns les librairies
et lea agences
$positiri,res‘dq
mondo enticr. Informex~vous
nupr&s de -votre libraire ou adreasex-vous
B : Nations Unies. Section dcs ventes, New York ou GcnBve.
XAX

SIOJIY’IHTl6

H~DANRJI

OITAlIli

3AJIlIJI

Ofi-I>E~HHEHIIbIX

HAUlfR

&L(RHHR
OpraHHJauHU
OCkbenHHeHHblx
Hau81d MOJ!WO XynHTb
II KHwtmbIX
Mar&3max
w are%rcrsax
a0 acex parfoHar
ultpn. Hnaonnre
cnpaaw
06 wnafmffx
8
aawew xiui3HxoM
Ma%3Htie
ww mfuwre
no anpccy:
Opraw3aqHa
Odaenwrewrbrx
KaqtiR. Ce~qrr~ no nponawa HsnawR,
Hbm-FiopX
)i:rm Wewzea.
COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

Las publicaciones
de laa Naciones
Unidas estin
buidorss
en todas partea de1 mundo.
Consulte
Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations, New York

00300

NACIONES

UNIDAS

en venta en lib&as
y c-s
distria su librero o dirijase
a: Naciones

. _..,_...

( ,_-
