76

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

Administrator of the United Nations Development
Programme and the executive heads of the agencies
and programmes members of the Inter-Agency Consultative Board are taking steps, in a spirit of partnership, to strengthen their mutual co-ordination, both
between headquarters and in recipient countries, with
a view to improving tbe integration of technical assistance in line witb the above-mentioned consensus;
2. Requests all organizations of the United Nations system to pursue actively their consultations in
order to develop the measures required to strengtben
their co-operation and to ensure, tbrougb an efficient
United N ations development field network, an integrated and interdisciplinary approacb to operational
activities, and looks forward to the report of the Governing Council of the United Nations Development
Programme, to be submitted througb tbe Economic and
Social Council, on the steps takcn and results achieved;
3. Invites all countries to help promote a properly
co-ordinated approach to operational activities and to
assist in the achievement of the dynamic growtb of
the activities of the United Nations Development Programme for 1977-1981 based on the need for an
equitable sbaring of the total effort required witb regard
to the level, timeliness and usability of voluntary contributions to the Programme.
106th plenary meeting
2 I December 1976
31/172.

Assistance to the drought-stricken areas
of Ethiopia

The General Assembly,
Noting with deep concern the recent failure of rain
during critica! stages of tbe cropping season in parts
of Ethiopia,
Mindful of tbe demands made on the resources of
the Government of Ethiopia,
Noting with appreciation the assistance given to
Ethiopia by Member States and intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations,
Recognizing the relief and rehabilitation efforts made
by the Government of Ethiopia,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1986 (LX) of 6 May 1976, by wbich the Council
requested the Administrator of the United N ations Development Programme to intensify the response to the
needs for recovery, rehabilitation and development of
the drougbt-stricken areas,
Further recalling its resolution 3441 (XXX) of 9
December 1975, in wbich it urged the United Nations
and the specialized agencies to continue to implement
vigorously the provisions of Economic and Social Council resolutions 1833 (LVI) of 8 May 1974, 1876
(LVII) of 16 July 1974 and 1971 (LIX) of 30
July 1975,
l. Urges the United Nations Disaster Relief Coordinator, the Administrator of tbe United Nations
Development Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund and the other United Nations organizations
and specialized agencies to continue and intensify their
assistance to Ethiopia in its relicf and rebabilitation
efforts in their respective areas of competence and to
implement promptly tbc relevant provisions of Gen-

eral Assembly resolutions 3202 (S-VI) of 1 May 1974
and 3441 (XXX) of 9 December 1975, and Economic
and Social Council resolutions 1833 (LVI), 1876
(LVII), 1971 (LIX) and 1986 (LX);
2. Appeals to all Member States and voluntary
agencies and intergovernmental organizations to continue and increase their assistance to Etbiopia;
3. Invites the Secretary-General, the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator and the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme
to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-second
scssion and to the Economic and Social Council at
its sixty-second session on the implementation of paragraphs 1 and 2 above and of other relevant resolutions
of the Assembly and tbe Council.
106th plenary meeting
21 December 1976
31 /173.

Office of the United 1"ations Disaster
Relief Co-ordinator

The General Assembly,
Recalling resolutions 28 l 6 (XXVI) of 14 Decembcr 1971, establishing the Office of the United Nations
Disaster Relief Co-ordinator, 3243 (XXIX) of 29
November 1974 on the strengthening of that Office,
3440 (XXX) of 9 December 1975, which provides,
ínter alía, for measures to be taken in support of the
activities of the Office, and 3532 (XXX) of 17 Deccmber 1975 on the financing of emergency relief assistance and technical co-operation activities of the
Office,
Recalling section II, paragraph 14, of its resolution
3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 2016 (LXI) of 3 August 1976, in which the
Council recommended that the General Assembly at
its thirty-first session should consider the most appropriate means for the financing, after 31 December 1977,
of the Office of the United Nations Disaster Relief Coordinator,
Aware that it would be desirable, for planning purposes, for the General Assembly to give guidance to
thc Secretary-Gcneral on tbe modalities for the future
financing of the activities of tbe Office of the United
Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator,
l. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of
the Secretary-General on the activities of the Office
of the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator 92
and of the further information given by the Coordinator in bis statement to the Second Committee
on 19November 1976;93
2. Commends the United Nations Disaster Relief
Co-ordinator and bis staff for the progress made in
strcngtbening the capacity of bis Office with a view to
providing an efficient world-wide service of mobilizing
and co-ordinating disaster rclief, including in particular
thc collection and dissemination of information on
disaster asscssment, priority nceds and donar assistance;
3. Recognizes that there will be a need for the
maintenance of the activities of the core programme
02 A/3 l /88 and Add.1

and 2.
Records of tlze General Assembly, Tlzirty-first
Snsion. Second Committee, 47th meeting, paras. 1-16.
!l:i Ofjicial

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

of the Office of the United Nations Disaster Relief Coordinator, as specified in the statement made to the
Second Committee by the Co-ordinator on 24 November 1976;94
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-second session, through
the Economic and Social Council, his proposals for a
continued sound financia! basis for the core programme,
which should include proposals for the transfer, over a
period of time, of appropriate costs from voluntary
funding to the United Nations regular budget;
5. A/so requests tl¡e Secretary-General, in formulating his draft programme budget for the biennium 1978-1979, to include provision for the financing
from the regular budget of a substantial portion of
those core programme administrative activities currently
financed from the trust fund established in pursuance
of General Assembly resolution 3243 (XXIX), as
an initial step in the process of ensuring a sound financia! basis for the Officc of the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator and to enable the Assembly
to reach a final decision on this mattcr on the basis of
the fullest possible information;
6. Decides to maintain for a further two-year
period from 1 January 1978 the trust fund established
pursuant to its resolution 3243 (XXIX), modified
under resolutions 3440 (XXX) and 3532 (XXX),
in order to ensure that the financia! resources available
to the Office of the United Nations Disaster Relief Coordinator remain adequate to meet the tasks entrusted
to that Office;
7. Further requests the Secretary-General, in preparing his budgetary proposals referred to in paragraph 5 above, to take full account of the possibility
of field co-ordination being undertaken, where appropriate, by the resident representatives of the United
Nations Development Programme with due consideration being given to the views expressed by the Government of the disaster-stricken country;
8. Appeals to all Governments to make contributions to the trust fund for a further two-year period;
9. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
undertake in 1978 the review of alternative sources of
funding for the technical co-operation activities of the
Office of the United Nations Disaster Relief Coordinator provided for in General Assembly resolution 3532 (XXX);
10. Invites the Secretary-General to submit a report
on possible sources of financing for such activities to
assist the Economic and Social Council in this review;
l l. Decides to examine further the question of
future financia! arrangements for the Office of the
United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator at its
thirty-second session with a vicw to rcaching definitive
conclusions at that time.
106th plenary meeting
21 December 1976
31/174.

Ways and means of accelerating the
transfer of real resources to developing
countries on a predictahle, assured and
continuous hasis

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2626 (XXV) of 24 October 1970 containing the International Development
04See A/C.2/31/15.

77

Strategy for the Second United Nations Development
Decade, 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of 1 May
1974 containing the Declaration and the Programme
of Action on the Establishment of a New International
Economic Order and 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December
1974 containing the Charter of Economic Rights and
Duties of States,
Reca/ling further its resolution 3362 (S-VII) of 16
September 1975 on development and international economic co-operation, in which it, inter alia, called for
an increased, predictable, continuous and increasingly
assured flow of concessional financia! resources for development on more favourable terms and conditions,
Disturbed by the stagnating flows of official development assistance, which during the Second United
Nations Development Decade has remained well below
the target stipulated in the International Development
Stratcgy,
Recognizing that increased volume, predictability and
continuity of such flows are necessary to enhance socioeconomic progress and promote more systematic and
effective development planning and implementation in
developing countries,
Noting with concern that the need for long-term
sustained development assistance has become more
urgent in the light of increasing economic difficulties
which have hampered the continuity of the economic
growth and long-term development plans of many developing countries,
Recalling a/so its resolution 3489 (XXX) of 12
December 1975, in which it requested the SecretaryGeneral to submit a study on ways and meaos of accelerating the transfer of real resources to developing
countries on a predictable, assured and continuous
hasis,
l. Takes note of the report submitted by the Secretary-General95 in response to General Assembly resolution 3489 (XXX);
2. Reiterates its appeal to developed countries
which have not yet done so to meet the target of O. 7
per cent of the gross national product for official development assistance set out in the International Developmcnt Strategy for the Second United Nations
Development Decade;
3. Urges developed countries to accelerate the
transfer of real resources to developing countries on a
predictable, continuous and increasingly assured basis
and, towards that end, to consider seriously the various
suggestions proposed in the report of the SecretaryGeneral, including wider implementation of the current
practices of sorne developed countries, particularly:
(a)
The pledging of development assistance on a
rnultiyear basis, in order to provide developing countries with more reliable projections of aid on a longerterm hasis to facilitate their development planning;
( b) The appropriation of developrnent assistance
in such a manner as to prevent the erosion in the real
value of aid in terms of the national currency of the
individual donor country;

(e) The endowment of development assistance with
non-lapsing authority to ensure that budgetary allocations unexpended at the end of the fiscal year for
which they are appropriated are carried forward;
n.-, A/31/186 and Corr.l.
