United Nations

A/RES/56/232

General Assembly

Distr.: General
26 February 2002

Fifty-sixth session
Agenda item 118

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/56/582)]

56/232. Use of mercenaries as a means of violating human rights
and impeding the exercise of the right of peoples to
self-determination
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 55/86 of 4 December 2000, and taking note of
Commission on Human Rights resolution 2001/3 of 6 April 2001, 1
Recalling also all of its relevant resolutions, in which, inter alia, it condemned
any State that permitted or tolerated the recruitment, financing, training, assembly,
transit and use of mercenaries with the objective of overthrowing the Governments
of States Members of the United Nations, especially those of developing countries,
or of fighting against national liberation movements, and recalling further the
relevant resolutions and international instruments adopted by the Security Council,
the Economic and Social Council and the Organization of African Unity, inter alia,
the Convention of the Organization of African Unity on the Elimination of
Mercenarism in Africa,
Reaffirming the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations concerning the strict observance of the principles of sovereign equality,
political independence, the territorial integrity of States, the self-determination of
peoples, the non-use of force or of the threat of use of force in international
relations and non-interference in affairs within the domestic jurisdiction of States,
Reaffirming also that, by virtue of the principle of self-determination, all
peoples have the right freely to determine their political status and to pursue their
economic, social and cultural development, and that every State has the duty to
respect this right in accordance with the provisions of the Charter,
Reaffirming further the Declaration on Principles of International Law
concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations, 2

_______________
1
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2001, Supplement No. 3 (E/2001/23), chap. II,
sect. A.
2
Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.

01 49579

A/RES/56/232

Alarmed and concerned at the danger that the activities of mercenaries
constitute to peace and security in developing countries, in particular in Africa and
in small States,
Deeply concerned at the loss of life, the substantial damage to property and the
negative effects on the policy and economies of affected countries resulting from
criminal mercenary activities,
Convinced that, notwithstanding the way in which they are used or the form
they take to acquire some semblance of legitimacy, mercenaries or mercenaryrelated activities are a threat to peace, security and the self-determination of peoples
and an obstacle to the enjoyment of human rights by peoples,
1.
Welcomes the report of the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on
Human Rights on the use of mercenaries as a means of violating human rights and
impeding the exercise of the right of peoples to self-determination; 3
2.
Reaffirms that the use of mercenaries and their recruitment, financing and
training are causes for grave concern to all States and violate the purposes and
principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations;
3.
Recognizes that armed conflict, terrorism, arms trafficking and covert
operations by third Powers, inter alia, encourage the demand for mercenaries on the
global market;
4.
Urges all States to take the necessary steps and to exercise the utmost
vigilance against the menace posed by the activities of mercenaries and to take
legislative measures to ensure that their territories and other territories under their
control, as well as their nationals, are not used for the recruitment, assembly,
financing, training and transit of mercenaries for the planning of activities designed
to impede the right of peoples to self-determination, to destabilize or overthrow the
Government of any State or to dismember or impair, totally or in part, the territorial
integrity or political unity of sovereign and independent States conducting
themselves in compliance with the right of peoples to self-determination;
5.
Welcomes the recent entry into force of the International Convention
against the Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training of Mercenaries, 4 and calls
upon all States that have not yet done so to consider taking the necessary action to
sign or ratify it, as a matter of priority;
6.
Welcomes also the cooperation extended by those countries that have
received visits from the Special Rapporteur;
7.
Welcomes further the adoption by some States of national legislation that
restricts the recruitment, assembly, financing, training and transit of mercenaries;
8.
Calls upon States to investigate the possibility of mercenary involvement
whenever and wherever criminal acts of a terrorist nature occur and to bring to trial
those found responsible or to consider their extradition, if so requested, in
accordance with domestic law and applicable bilateral or international treaties;
9.
Welcomes the convening by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights of a meeting of experts on the question of
traditional and new forms of mercenary activities as a means of violating human
_______________
3
4

2

See A/56/224.
Resolution 44/34, annex.

A/RES/56/232

rights and impeding the exercise of the right of peoples to self-determination, and
takes note of its report, 5 as a valuable contribution to the process of formulating a
clearer legal definition of mercenaries that would make more efficient the
prevention and punishment of mercenary activities;
10. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to
convene, before the fifty-ninth session of the Commission on Human Rights, a
second meeting of experts, pursuant to General Assembly resolution 54/151 of
17 December 1999, to continue studying and updating the international legislation
and to make recommendations for a clearer legal definition of mercenaries that
would make more efficient the prevention and punishment of mercenary activities;
11. Requests the Special Rapporteur to propose a clearer definition of
mercenaries, including clear nationality criteria, based on his findings, the proposals
of States and the outcomes of the meetings of experts, and to make suggestions on
the procedure to be followed for international adoption of a new definition;
12. Requests the Office of the High Commissioner, as a matter of priority, to
publicize the adverse effects of the activities of mercenaries on the right of peoples
to self-determination and, when requested and where necessary, to render advisory
services to States that are affected by the activities of mercenaries;
13. Requests the Special Rapporteur to continue taking into account in the
discharge of his mandate the fact that mercenary activities continue to occur in
many parts of the world and are taking on new forms, manifestations and
modalities;
14. Urges all States to cooperate fully with the Special Rapporteur in the
fulfilment of his mandate;
15. Requests the Secretary-General and the High Commissioner to provide
the Special Rapporteur with all the necessary assistance and support for the
fulfilment of his mandate, both professional and financial, including through the
promotion of cooperation between the Special Rapporteur and other components of
the United Nations system that deal with countering mercenary-related activities;
16. Requests the Special Rapporteur to consult States and intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations in the implementation of the present resolution
and to report, with specific recommendations, to the General Assembly at its fiftyseventh session his findings on the use of mercenaries to undermine the right of
peoples to self-determination;
17. Decides to consider at its fifty-seventh session the question of the use of
mercenaries as a means of violating human rights and impeding the exercise of the
right of peoples to self-determination under the item entitled “Right of peoples to
self-determination”.
92nd plenary meeting
24 December 2001

_______________
5

E/CN.4/2001/18, annex.

3
