Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(a) The right, without discrimination on grounds
of marital status or any other grounds, to receive
vocational training, to work, to free choice of profession and employment, and to professional and vocational advancement ;
( b) The right to equal remuneration with men and
to equality of treatment in respect of work of equal
value;
(c) The right to leave with pay, retirement privileges and provision for security in respect of unemployment, sickness, old age or other incapacity to work ;
( d) The right to receive family allowances on equal
terms with men.
2. In order to prevent discrimination against women
on account of marriag~ or maternity and to ensure their
effective right to work, measures shall be taken to
prevent their dismissal in the event of marriage or
maternity and to provide paid maternity leave, with the
guarantee of returning to former employment, and to
provide the necessary social services, including childcare facilities.
3. Measures taken to protect women in certain types
of work, for reasons inherent in their physical nature,
shall not be regarded as discriminatory.
Article 11
1. The principle of equality of rights of men and
women demands implementation in all States in accordance with the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights.
2. Governments, non-governmental organizations
and individuals are urged, therefore, to do all in their
power to promote the implementation of the principles
contained in this Declaration.
1597th plenary meeting,
7 November 1967.

2293 (XXII). World social situation
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1916 (XVIII) of 5 December 1963, 2035 (XX) of 7 December 1965 and 2215
(XXI) of 19 December 1966,
Emphasizing the responsibilities assumed by Member
States under the Charter ,of the United Nations for
international co-operation in the solution of international social and economic problems,
Noting with deep concern that, despite the adoption
of its resolutions 1522 (XV) of 15 December 1960 and
1711 (XVI) of 19 December 1961 and despite efforts
in many countries of the world, the social situation
remains unsatisfactory owing to factors which include
inadequate contribution, which up to now remain
below the recommended target,
Noting also the need for continuing improyement
in the co-ordination of technical assistance in the social
field and the importance of concentrating such assistance
systematically on the priority needs of the developing
countries through a fully co-ordinated programme of
assistance to each country,
Convinced that the implementation of the main
objectives and principles of the social programme of
the United Nations set forth in Economic and Social
Council resolution 1139 (XLI) of 29 July 1966, on

17

the basis of clearly defined concepts of social development, is of the utmost importance to the solution of
the basic social problems,
Recognizing the interdependence of the economic
and social aspects of development and the fact that,
while national efforts are ·being intensified, a significant
expansion of international assistance for development
is required for the improvement of the world social
situation,
Welcoming Economic and Social Council resolution
1227 (XLII) of 6 June 1967, which invited the Commission for Social Development to make recommendations on ways of strengthening the operational
programmes of the United Nations system in the social
field, in order to enable these programmes to play their
full role in promoting social development in the immediate years ahead and during the forthcoming decade,
Convinced also that the consideration every three
years of the reports on the world social situation
reflecting the over-all social situation and trends in
different regions of the world and in countries with
differing economic and social systems, as well as the
elaboration of the declaration on social development
as decided by General Assembly resolution 2215
(XXI), will substantially influence the comprehensive
approach to the problems of social development and
facilitate the continuing process of improvement of the
United Nations programmes in the social field,
1. Calls upon the Economic and Social Council,
the Commission for Social Development and the
Secretary-General to continue the implementation of
Economic and Social Council resolution 1139 (XLI),
taking into account the urgency of determining clearly
the concepts and targets of social development and
also the necessity for the concentration of efforts on
priorities and on the use of the most effective methods
contained in that resolution ;
2. Calls upon the Economic and Social Council to
request the Committee for Development Planning to
take fully into account the role of social development
in accelerating the attainment of the goals of development of nations, particularly in the context of the
preparations for the decade following the current United
Nations Development Decade;
3. Appeals to all Member States, and in particular
the economically advanced States, to respond to the
Secretary-General's appeal for a significant expanc;ion
of international assistance for development, which will
contribute to the improvement of the world social sihtation, in order to maximize the success of the decade
following the current United Nations Development
Decade;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to exert all
appropriate efforts in order that the needs of developing
countries for United Nations assistance in social development, as reflected in requests by Governments, are
met as effectively as possible;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit his
next report on the world social situation to the General
Assembly at its twenty-third session, together with a
separate report consisting of conclusions and suggestions directed towards the realization of substantial
progress in the implementation of the prov.rammes in
the social field, taking into account the comments of
the Commission for Social Development and the Economic and Social Council thereon;
6. Notes with appreciation the progress achieved
hy the Commission for Social Development in the

38

General Assembly-Twenty-second Senion

preparation of the draft declaration on social development and invites the Economic and Social Council
and the Commission for Social Development to continue to give high priority to this task ;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
the Commission for Social Development the summary
records of the discussions held during the current
session of the General Assembly on the item entitled
"World social situation", together with the statements,
in extenso, of the Director of the Social Development
Division, so that they can be taken into consideration
particularly in connexion with the preparation of the
draft declaration on social development;
B. Decides to accord high priority at its twenty-third
session to the item on the world social situation.
1625th pleno;ry meeting,
11 December .1967.

2294 (XXII). Continuation of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees,1
Recalling its resolution 1783 (XVII) of 7 December
1962, in which it decided to review, not later than at
its twenty-second session, the arrangements for the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees with a view to determining whether the Office
should be continued beyond 31 December 1968,
Concerned at the ever-increasing number of refugees,
particularly in Africa,
Recognizing the continuing need for international
action on behalf of refugees,
Considering the valuable work which has been performed by the Office of the High Commissioner in
providing international protection for refugees and in
promoting permanent solutions for their problems, with
the joint participation of Governments, international
organizations and voluntary agencies,
Commending the High Commissioner for the efforts
he has made in finding satisfactory solutions of problems affecting groups of refugees who are his concern,
Taking note of the recommendation of the Economic
and Social Council in its resolution, 1253 (XLIII) of
1 August 1967 to the effect that the High Commissioner
be invited to attend the meetings of the Inter-Agency
Consultative Board of the United Nations Development
Programme,
N otin_q further the recommendation of the Executive
Committee of the High Commissioner's Programme
inviting the High Commissioner to participate in the
inter-agency activities and in the concerted efforts made
by the United Nations organs to attain the goals of the
United Nations Development Decade,
Expressing its concern at the difficulties with which
the High Commissioner is faced in financing his programme of assistance,
I. Decides to continue the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees for a further
period of five years from 1 January 1969;
1 Official Records of the Genrral Assembly. Twenty-second
Session, SupPlement No.11 (A/6711) and Suprlcnunt No. ILi
(A/6711/ Add.1/Revl ).

2. Requests the High Commissioner to pursue his
activities of protection and assistance and to continue
to make every possible effort to facilitate the repatriation, local integration or resettlement on a voluntary
basis of the refugees who are his concern, bearing in
mind the ever-increasing number of refugees in Africa;
3. Invites the High Commissioner to continue to
report to and be guided by the Executive Committee
of the High Commissioner's Programme with regard
to refugee situations, in accordance with the Committee's terms of reference ;
4. Decides that the High Commissioner be invited
to attend the meetings of the Inter-Agency Consultative
Board of the United Nations Development Programme
and to participate in the preparatory work of the second
United Nations development decade;
5. Urges States Members of the United Nations and
members of the specialized agencies to lend their
support to the humanitarian task of the Office of the
High Commissioner and to consider increasing their
annual voluntary contributions to the High Commissioner's Programme;
6. Further invites those Member States which have
not yet done so to accede to the 1951 Convention
relating to the Status of Refugees 2 and to the 1967
Protocol to the Convention ;8
7. Further requests the Economic and Social Council
to consider as soon as possible the advisability of enlarging the membership of the Executive Committee
of the High Commissioner's Programme, in order to
give at least one additional African country the possibi 1ity of participating in the work of the Committee;
8. Decides to review, not later than at its twentyseventh session, the arrangements for the Office of the
High Commissioner with a view to determining whether
the Office should be continued beyond 31 December
1973.
.
1625th plenary meeting,
11 December 1967.

2295 (XXII). Elimination of all forms of religious
intolerance
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1781 (XVII) of 7 December 1962 and 2020 (XX) of 1 November 1965,
Bearing in mind the decisions of the Third Committee
(a) Not to mention any specific examples of religious
intolerance in the draft International Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and of
Discrimination based on Religion or Belief,4
( b) To amend the title, the preamble and article I
of the draft Convention proposed by the Commission on
Human Rights, 6
Having been unable to complete the consideration of
the draft Convention owing to its heavy agenda and the
lack of time,
Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189 (1954), No. 2545.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Twmty/irst Session. Supplement No. 11A (A/6311/Rev.l/ Add.1), part
one, para. 2.
4 lbid., Twenty-second Session, Annexes, agenda item 54,
document A/6934, para. 21.
6 l/Jid., paras. 26, 72 and 90.
2 United

3 See
