UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1999/26
24 August 1999
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 4036th meeting of the Security Council, held on 24 August 1999 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Angola", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council expresses its deep concern at the deteriorating
political, military and humanitarian situation in Angola, at the suffering
of the people and at the dramatic increase in the number of internally
displaced persons, which has now reached well over two million people, not
including the unknown number of internally displaced persons in areas which
are currently inaccessible to humanitarian agencies.
"The Security Council reiterates that the primary cause of the current
crisis in Angola is the failure by the leadership of the União Nacional
para a Independência Total de Angola (UNITA) to comply with its obligations
under the Lusaka Protocol, and again demands that UNITA comply immediately
and without conditions with its obligations to demilitarize and permit the
extension of state administration to areas under its control. It reaffirms
its belief that lasting peace and national reconciliation can only be
achieved through political dialogue.
"The Security Council expresses its concern at the critical condition
of the internally displaced persons who suffer from lack of food,
medicines, shelter, arable land and other necessities. The Council further
expresses its grave concern at the number of malnourished children and at
the outbreak of diseases such as polio and meningitis due to the lack of
access to clean water and hygiene. In this regard the Council commends the
excellent work by the Government of Angola and the United Nations system in
their efforts towards the eradication of diseases in Angola. The Council
also expresses its concern at the plight of those vulnerable groups, such
as children, women, the elderly and the handicapped, who are particularly
at risk and in need of special assistance.
"The Security Council expresses its concern that the continuing
conflict in Angola has increased the cost of humanitarian assistance. It
notes the insufficient level of contributions to the 1999 United Nations

99-24442 (E)

240899

/...

S/PRST/1999/26
English
Page 2

Consolidated Inter-Agency Appeal for Angola and reiterates its appeal to
the donor community to contribute generously, financially and in kind, to
the humanitarian appeal to enable the agencies to address effectively the
plight of the internally displaced persons. The Council welcomes the
announcement by the Government of Angola of an Emergency Plan for
Humanitarian Assistance.
"The Security Council also expresses its concern that the continuing
conflict and lack of access jeopardize the ability of the agencies to
continue to deliver assistance to those in need. The Council urges the
Government of Angola and particularly UNITA to provide access to all
internally displaced persons in Angola, and to facilitate the mechanisms
necessary for the delivery of humanitarian assistance to all populations in
need throughout the country. The Council urges both parties, particularly
UNITA, to guarantee the safety and security and freedom of movement of
humanitarian personnel, including United Nations and associated personnel,
providing assistance to internally displaced persons. The Council strongly
urges respect for the principle of neutrality and impartiality in the
delivery of assistance. The Council commends the determination and courage
of those working to relieve human suffering in Angola, including the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the World Food Programme and
the United Nations Children’s Fund and other agencies.
"The Security Council urges both parties to ensure full respect for
human rights and international humanitarian law. In this connection, the
Council urges UNITA to cease committing atrocities, including killing
civilians and attacking humanitarian aid workers, and demands the release
of all foreign citizens, including the Russian aircrews, held by UNITA. It
expresses its concern at reports of re-mining activities as well as the
laying of mines in new areas in the country.
"The Security Council will remain actively seized of the matter."

-----
