A /69/PV.68

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-ninth session

68th plenary meeting

Wednesday, 10 December 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kutesa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Uganda)

In the absence of the President, Ms. Rambally
(Saint Lucia), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 112 (continued)
Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and
other elections
(a) Election of twenty members of the Committee
for Programme and Coordination
Note by the Secretary-General (A/69/291/Add.1)
The Acting President: The General Assembly will
now resume its consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda
item 112 for the election of three members of the
Committee for Programme and Coordination. Pursuant
to General Assembly decision 42/450 of 17 December
1987 and upon the nomination by the Economic and
Social Council, the Assembly elects the members of the
Committee for Programme and Coordination.
Members will recall that at its 32nd plenary
meeting, held on 29 October, the General Assembly
elected 13 members to the Committee for a three-year
term of office beginning 1 January 2015. Members will
also recall that the Economic and Social Council, by
its decision 2014/201 A of 23 April 2014, postponed
the nomination of three members from Asia-Pacific
States and four members from Western European and
other States for election by the General Assembly for a
three-year term beginning 1 January 2015.

In this connection, the Assembly has before it a
note by the Secretary-General, contained in document
A/69/291/Add.1. As indicated in that document, by its
decision 2014/201 B of 17 November 2014, the Economic
and Social Council nominated Pakistan, Saudi Arabia
and the United States of America for election by the
General Assembly for a three-year term beginning
1 January 2015 and expiring on 31 December 2017.
In accordance with rule 92 of the rules of procedure,
all elections should be held by secret ballot, and there
shall be no nominations. However, I should like to
recall paragraph 16 of General Assembly decision
34/401, whereby the practice of dispensing with the
secret ballot for elections to subsidiary organs when
the number of candidates corresponds to the number
of seats to be filled should become standard unless
a delegation specifically requests a vote on a given
election. In the absence of such a request, may I take
it that the General Assembly decides to proceed to the
elections on the basis of dispensing with a secret ballot?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The number of States
nominated from among the Asia-Pacific States and the
Western European and other States is lower than the
number of seats to be filled in each of those groups. May
I therefore take it that the General Assembly wishes to
declare Pakistan, Saudi Arabia and the United States
of America elected as members of the Committee
for Programme and Coordination for a three-year
term beginning on 1 January 2015 and expiring on
31 December 2017?

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

14-68431 (E)

*1468431*

A/69/PV.68

It was so decided.
The Acting President: Members are reminded that
the Economic and Social Council decided to further
postpone the nomination of three members from
Western European and other States for election by the
General Assembly, two members for terms beginning
on the date of election and expiring on 31 December
2014 and one member for a term beginning on the dates
of election and expiring on 31 December 2015, and also
decided to postpone the nomination for one member
from Asia-Pacific States and three members from the
Western European and other States for a three-year
term, beginning on 1 January 2015 and expiring on
31 December 2017.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 112.
Agenda item 123 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(c) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(k) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Economic Cooperation Organization
(v) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Preparatory Commission for the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
Organization
Draft resolutions (A/69/L.31, A/69/L.11/Rev.1
and A/69/L.15)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the Assembly held its debate on agenda item 123 and
its sub-items (a) to (y) at its 48th plenary meeting, on
11 November.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Myanmar to introduce draft resolution A/69/L.31.
Mr. Kyaw Tin (Myanmar): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the States members of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), namely, Brunei
Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Malaysia, the Philippines,
Singapore, Thailand, Viet Nam and my own country,
Myanmar, to introduce the draft resolution contained
in document A/69/L.31, entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations”, under agenda item 123 (c). The draft
2/16

10/12/2014

resolution is sponsored by a total of nearly 80 United
Nations Member States, including 10 members of
ASEAN and a large number of United Nations Member
States from Asia-Pacific, Africa, Latin America, the
Caribbean and Europe.
The Association of Southeast Asian Nations,
which was established in 1967, has become a dynamic
and outward-looking regional organization. We will
realize the establishment of an ASEAN community
by the end of next year. ASEAN has a long history
of forging friendly ties with other countries, as well
as regional and international organizations. ASEAN
was founded on the same principles as those guiding
the United Nations. That is clearly reflected in the
ASEAN Charter, which includes as one of its principles
a specific provision to uphold the Charter of the United
Nations and international law.
ASEAN believes that the United Nations and
regional organizations have unique and complementary
capacities and great potential to help their respective
members address global issues of common interest and
strive for peace, security and sustainable development
at the regional and global levels. Both ASEAN and
the United Nations have a long history of engagement
based on the common desire to promote cooperation
on the political, security, economic and socioeconomic
pillars.
Over the past decades, ASEAN has further
broadened not only its cooperation with the United
Nations, but also its interactions with States Members
of the United Nations and many other regional and
international organizations to strengthen mutually
beneficial cooperation. ASEAN established a dialogue
on partner relations with the United Nations in 2006.
A Memorandum of Understanding on ASEAN-United
Nations cooperation was signed in New York on
27 September 2007 in order to forge the partnership
between the two organizations.
Following the adoption of the Joint Declaration
on Comprehensive Partnership between ASEAN and
the United Nations in 2011, relations between the two
organizations have progressed significantly, with new
achievements in all key areas of cooperation. That has
strengthened the ASEAN-United Nations partnership’s
fulfillment of common goals, while contributing to
ASEAN community-building efforts. We are happy
to note that the frequent convening of ASEAN-United
Nations summits, regular ASEAN-United Nations
ministerial meetings and secretariat-to-secretariat
14-68431

10/12/2014

dialogue have further advanced ASEAN-United Nations
interactions and cooperation. ASEAN also welcomes
the recent United Nations decision appointing a United
Nations liaison officer in Jakarta to strengthen joint
activities and implement the ASEAN-United Nations
Comprehensive Partnership.
At the sixth ASEAN-United Nations Summit,
concluded in Nay Pyi Taw, Myanmar, on 12 November
under Myanmar’s chairmanship, the leaders of
ASEAN and the Secretary-General expressed their
commitment to further deepening and broadening
cooperation between the two organizations and
welcomed the adoption of the ASEAN-United Nations
work plan for 2015. The work plan sets out priority
areas for the implementation of the Joint Declaration
on Comprehensive Partnership between the two
organizations. The work plan is of critical importance in
the context of ASEAN community-building in 2015, the
Association’s deliberation on the ASEAN community’s
post-2015 vision, and the global discussion on the post2015 development agenda.
The resolution entitled “Cooperation between the
United Nations and the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations” was first introduced by ASEAN at the General
Assembly in 2002 (resolution 57/35). The resolution
welcomed cooperation between the two organizations
and encouraged them to increase contacts and further
identify areas of cooperation, as appropriate. Since
then, ASEAN has submitted the draft text to the
General Assembly biennially, with the broad support
of States Members of the United Nations, to underscore
and strengthen cooperation between ASEAN and the
United Nations.
The draft resolution introduced today is based on
resolution 67/110, of 17 December 2012, with updates
reflecting some of the important developments that
have taken place in ASEAN and in ASEAN-United
Nations cooperation over the past two years. The draft
resolution once again welcomes the progress made in
the ongoing cooperation activities between the two
organizations and encourages the United Nations to
work with ASEAN to further intensify the level and
framework for their cooperation.
In conclusion, I wish to take this opportunity
to express, on behalf of the 10 member States of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations, our sincere
thanks to all of the sponsors of the draft resolution and
to all Member States for their continued support for the
draft text, which has enjoyed wide sponsorship and has

A/69/PV.68

been adopted by consensus in the General Assembly
since 2002. In view of that, I would like to request all
Member States to lend their continued support to this
year’s draft resolution by adopting it by consensus, as
in the previous years.
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran to
introduce draft resolution A/69/L.11/Rev. 1.
Mr. Mokhtari (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
am grateful for the opportunity to introduce draft
resolution A/69/L.11/Rev.1, entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Economic
Cooperation Organization”, on behalf of the members
of that organization.
As the current Chair of the Council of Ministers
of the Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO), the
Islamic Republic of Iran had the honour to facilitate
the consultations on the draft text of this biannual
resolution. The main draft was based on resolution
67/14, of the same title, as amended and approved by
the Council of Permanent Representatives of ECO on
27 August and later adopted at its ministerial meeting
here in New York on the sidelines of the general debate
of the General Assembly in September. Since then, the
draft text, under sub-item (k) of agenda item 123, has
been through the Assembly’s consultation process in
November, facilitated by my delegation.
The text of the draft acknowledges developments
since the original resolution’s adoption, including in
ECO’s relations with the United Nations. Additionally, in
the context of implementing international development
goals, including the Millennium Development Goals,
it invites the United Nations development system and
other international economic and financial institutions
to consider supporting ECO in its capacity-building for
following up and implementing various development
goals and priorities.
On behalf of the ECO countries, I would like to
take this opportunity to thank all the representatives
who participated so actively and constructively in the
consultations for the flexibility they showed throughout
the process, without which no agreement would have
been possible. We are also grateful to those delegations
that showed understanding in agreeing to the terms of
the draft resolution.
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider A/69/L.31, A/69/L.11/Rev.1 and A/69/L.15.

14-684313/16

A/69/PV.68

Draft resolution A/69/L.31 is entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, the
following delegations have also become sponsors of
A/69/L.31: Afghanistan, Argentina, Austria, Brazil,
Chile, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark,
Djibouti, Hungary, Iceland, India, the Islamic Republic
of Iran, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
the Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway,
Pakistan, Peru, Portugal, the Solomon Islands,
Sweden, Tonga, Turkey and the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/69/L.31?
Draft resolution A/69/L.31 was adopted (resolution
69/110).
The Acting President: Draft resolution A/69/L.11/
Rev.1 is entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Economic Cooperation Organization”.
May I take it that the General Assembly decides to
adopt draft resolution A/69/L.11/Rev.1?
Draft resolution A/69/L.11/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 69/111).
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/69/L.15, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization”.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution and in addition to those delegations listed
in the draft document, the following countries
have become sponsors of A/69/L.15: Afghanistan,
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Argentina, Australia,
Austria, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina

4/16

10/12/2014

Faso, Cambodia, Canada, Chile, Colombia, the Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech
Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Estonia, Finland, France,
the Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Hungary, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lesotho, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, the Netherlands, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway,
Peru, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of
Korea, the Republic of Moldova, Romania, the Russian
Federation, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Seychelles,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
Turkey, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, the United States of America and
Uruguay.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/69/L.15?
Draft resolution A/69/L.15 was adopted (resolution
69/112).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of position on the resolutions
just adopted, I would like to remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Soteriou (Cyprus): Concerning resolution
69/111, “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Economic Cooperation Organization”, which has
just been adopted, my delegation wishes to state for the
record that Cyprus dissociates itself from the consensus
on that resolution for the following reasons.
In paragraph 2, the resolution takes note of the Baku
Declaration, issued at the twelfth summit meeting of the
Heads of State and Government of States members of
the Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO), held on
16 October 2012 in Azerbaijan. The Baku Declaration
endorses the report of the Council of Ministers at its
twentieth meeting and instructs the Secretary General
of ECO to ensure its full implementation.
We are informed that the report recommends that
a so-called Turkish Cypriot State be given the status of
observer in the Economic Cooperation Organization. In
effect, therefore, the Baku Declaration is calling on the
Secretary General of that organization to act against
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions on
Cyprus.
In that context, I would particularly like to recall
Security Council resolutions 541 (1983) and 550

14-68431

10/12/2014

(1984), which state that the declaration of a purported
secession of part of the Republic of Cyprus is legally
invalid and call for its withdrawal. In those resolutions,
the Security Council condemned all such secessionist
acts and called on all States to respect the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of the Republic
of Cyprus and not to recognize any Cypriot State other
than the Republic of Cyprus. It also called on all States
not to facilitate or in any way assist the secessionist
entity. I would also like to recall the General Assembly’s
resolutions on Cyprus, specifically resolutions 3212
(XXIX). of 1974, and 37/253, of 1983, also calling on
all States to respect the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus.
My delegation reiterates those calls of the main
bodies of the United Nations on all member States of
the Economic Cooperation Organization. We strongly
urge them and the Secretary General of ECO not to
act against United Nations resolutions by according
observer status to an illegal secessionist entity. We
sincerely hope that ECO and its member States will
re-evaluate their position on the issue and, in view
of their aspirations to cooperation with the United
Nations, act in compliance with its Charter.
Further to our stated position of principle, which
is based on decisions of the United Nations Security
Council and General Assembly, we also wish to call
on the facilitator of the resolution and some of the
sponsors of its text to demonstrate more flexibility and
transparency in future discussions on the substance of
the text, something that unfortunately was not the case
during this year’s consultations.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-items c, k and v of agenda item
123?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The Acting President: The Assembly now has
before it a report of the Fifth Committee on sub-item (b)
of agenda item 113, entitled “Appointment of members
of the Committee on Contributions” (A/69/565/Add.1).
In order for the Assembly to consider that report, it will
be necessary to reopen consideration of sub-item (b) of
agenda item 113.

A/69/PV.68

May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to reopen consideration of sub-item (b)
of agenda item 113 and proceed immediately to its
consideration?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 113 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(b) Appointment of members of the Committee on
Contributions
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/69/565/Add.1)
The Acting President: In paragraph 3 of its report,
the Fifth Committee recommends that the General
Assembly appoint Mr. Toshiro Ozawa of Japan as a
member of the Committee on Contributions for a term
of office beginning on 21 December 2014 and ending
on 31 December 2015.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to appoint Mr. Toshiro Ozawa as a member of the
Committee on Contributions for a term of office
beginning on 21 December 2014 and ending on
31 December 2015?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 113.
Agenda item 140
United Nations pension system
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/69/637)
The Acting President: If there is no proposal under
rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it that the
General Assembly decides not to discuss the report of
the Fifth Committee that is before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Statements will therefore
be limited to explanations of vote. The positions of
delegations regarding the recommendation of the Fifth
Committee have been made clear in the Committee and
are reflected in the relevant official records.
May I remind members that under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that

14-684315/16

A/69/PV.68

“When the same draft resolution is considered
in a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its
vote only once, that is, either in the Committee or
in plenary meeting, unless that delegation’s vote
in plenary meeting is different from its vote in the
Committee”.
May I further remind delegations that, also in
accordance with General Assembly decision 34/401,
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendation contained in the report of the Fifth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same
manner as was done in the Fifth Committee.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 7 of its report. The Fifth Committee adopted
the draft resolution, entitled “United Nations pension
system”, without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
69/113).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
140.
Agenda item 113 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(i) Appointment of the judges of the United Nations
Appeals Tribunal
Memorandum by the Secretary-General
(A/69/555)
Report of the Internal Justice Council (A/69/373)
Note by the President of the General Assembly
(A/69/373/Add.1)
The Acting President: As indicated in document
A/69/555, the General Assembly is required, during the
sixty-ninth session, to appoint a judge to the United
Nations Appeals Tribunal to serve the remainder of the
seven-year term, which commenced on 1 July 2012, of
Judge Jean Courtial, who has resigned his position as a

6/16

10/12/2014

judge of the Appeals Tribunal, effective 31 December
2013.
As also indicated in paragraph 16 of document
A/69/555, in accordance with article 3, paragraph 2 of
the statute of the Appeals Tribunal,
“The judges shall be appointed by the General
Assembly on the recommendation of the Internal
Justice Council in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 62/228. No two judges shall be
of the same nationality. Due regard shall be given
to geographical distribution and gender balance.”
The names and curricula vitae of the candidates
recommended for appointment to the Appeals Tribunal
are contained in document A/69/373. Information on
the withdrawal of one of the candidates, namely Judge
Manuel Mazuelos Fernandez-Figueroa, of Spain, is
contained in document A/69/373/Add.1.
Article 3, paragraph 3 of the statute of the Appeals
Tribunal requires that in order to be eligible for
appointment, a person shall be of high moral character
and possess at least 15 years of judicial experience in
the field of administrative law or the equivalent within
one or more national jurisdictions.
In document A/69/555, it is proposed that the
General Assembly proceed to appoint a judge of the
Appeals Tribunal by way of an election, bearing in
mind paragraph 58 of resolution 63/253, in which the
Assembly invited
“Member States, when electing judges to the United
Nations Dispute Tribunal and the United Nations
Appeals Tribunal, to take due consideration of
geographical distribution and gender balance”.
If there is no objection, may I take it that the
General Assembly agrees to the proposal?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The candidate who obtains
the largest number of votes and a majority of the votes
of those present and voting shall be considered elected
and thereby appointed by the General Assembly to the
Appeals Tribunal.
Also, balloting shall continue, in accordance
with the rules of procedure of the Assembly, until
one candidate has obtained, in one or more ballots, a
majority of votes of the members present and voting.

14-68431

10/12/2014

May I take it that the General Assembly agrees to
those procedures?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The General Assembly will
now proceed to the election of a judge of the United
Nations Appeals Tribunal. Only those candidates
whose names appear on the ballot papers are eligible
for election. Representatives are requested to indicate
the candidate for whom they wish to vote by placing a
cross to the left of the candidate’s name on the ballot
paper. Each representative may vote for not more than
one candidate for appointment to the Tribunal.
The election will be held in accordance with the
relevant rules of procedure of the General Assembly.
Therefore, in accordance with rule 92 of the rules of
procedure, the election shall be held by secret ballot
and there shall be no nominations.
Before we begin the voting process, I should like to
remind members that, pursuant to rule 88 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, no representative
shall interrupt the voting except on a point of order
on the actual conduct of the voting. In addition, ballot
papers will be given only to the delegate seated directly
behind the country’s nameplate.
We shall now begin the voting process. Members
are requested to remain seated until all ballots have
been collected.
Ballot papers will now be distributed. I request
representatives to indicate the candidate for whom
they wish to vote by placing a cross to the left of the
candidate’s name on the ballot paper. I would also like
to remind delegates that they may vote for not more than
one candidate for appointment to the Appeals Tribunal.
A ballot will be declared invalid if more than one name
is marked for appointment to the Tribunal.
At the invitation of the President, Ms. Anjum
(Bangladesh), Ms. Johnson (Jamaica), Ms. Verøyvik
(Norway), Mrs. Rolón Candia (Paraguay),
Mrs. Oanţă (Romania) and Mr. Silwamba (Zambia)
acted as tellers.
A vote was taken by secret ballot.
The meeting was suspended at 11.05 a.m. and
resumed at 11.35 p.m.
The Acting President: The result of the voting is
as follows:

A/69/PV.68

Number of ballot papers:
165
Number of invalid ballots:
0
Number of valid ballots:
165
Abstentions:
9
Number of members voting
156
Required majority:
79
Number of votes obtained:
Ms. Deborah Thomas-Felix (Trinidad and
Tobago):
103
Ms. Sabine Knierim (Germany):
53
Having obtained the required majority and the
largest number of votes, Ms. Deborah ThomasFelix (Trinidad and Tobago) was elected a judge of
the United Nations Appeals Tribunal for a term of
office beginning on 10 December 2014 and ending
on 30 June 2019.
The Acting President: I take this opportunity
to extend to Ms. Deborah Thomas-Felix the
congratulations of the Assembly on her election and to
thank the tellers for their efforts.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of sub-item (i) of agenda item 113.
I should like to inform members that the
consideration of the reports of the Sixth Committee
will begin promptly at noon. I will therefore suspend
this meeting until noon, at which time we will begin
our consideration of the reports of the Sixth Committee.
The meeting was suspended at 11.35 p.m. and
resumed at noon.
Reports of the Sixth Committee
The Acting President: The General Assembly
will now consider the reports of the Sixth Committee
on agenda items 75 to 85, 107, 118, 133 and 168 to
172. I request the Rapporteur of the Sixth Committee,
Mr. Salvatore Zappalá of Italy, to introduce the reports
of the Committee in one intervention.
Mr. Zappalá (Italy), Rapporteur of the Sixth
Committee: I have the honour to introduce the reports
of the Sixth Committee on its work during the sixtyninth session of the General Assembly.
The Assembly allocated to the Committee 18
substantive and 3 procedural agenda items. Except for the
item relating to the election of officers, all those agenda
items fall under three of the headings corresponding to
the priorities of the Organization, namely, “Promotion

14-684317/16

A/69/PV.68

of justice and international law”, “Drug control, crime
prevention and combating international terrorism in
all its forms and manifestations” and “Organizational,
administrative and other matters”. I will introduce the
reports of the Sixth Committee on the various items in
the order in which they fall under those three headings.
I begin with the first heading, “Promotion of
justice and international law”, under which the Sixth
Committee considered 11 agenda items and adopted 13
draft resolutions.
The Sixth Committee considered agenda item 75,
entitled “Criminal accountability of United Nations
officials and experts on mission”. The report on this
agenda item is contained in document A/69/495, and
the draft resolution recommended to the Assembly for
adoption is reproduced in paragraph 7 thereof. The
draft resolution affirms the various measures adopted
in previous resolutions aimed at ensuring the criminal
accountability of United Nations officials and experts
on mission and reiterates its decision to form a working
group of the Sixth Committee during its seventieth
session.
The report on agenda item 76, entitled “Report
of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law on the work of its forty-seventh session”, is
contained in document A/69/496. The Sixth Committee
recommended two draft resolutions for adoption by the
General Assembly, which are reproduced in the report.
Under the terms of the first draft resolution, the
Assembly would, inter alia, note with appreciation
that the secretariat of the Commission has taken steps
to establish and operate the repository of published
information under the Rules on Transparency in Treatybased Investor-State Arbitration as a pilot project, and
request the Secretary-General to keep the Assembly
informed of developments regarding the funding and
budgetary situation of the repository. It would further
take note with interest of the decisions taken by the
Commission with regard to its future work and the
progress made by the Commission in its work in several
areas.
Under the terms of the second draft resolution,
the Assembly would adopt the United Nations
Convention on Transparency in Treaty-based InvestorState Arbitration, the text of which is annexed to the
draft resolution. The Assembly would also authorize
a ceremony for the opening for signature of the
Convention, to be held in Port Louis on 17 March 2015.

8/16

10/12/2014

The report on agenda item 77, entitled “United
Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching,
Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of
International Law”, is found in document A/69/497, and
the draft resolution recommended to the Assembly for
adoption is reproduced in paragraph 7 thereof. Under
the terms of the draft resolution, the Assembly would
reaffirm that the Programme constitutes a core activity
of the United Nations and recognize the Programme’s
important contribution to the furtherance of the United
Nations rule-of-law programmes and activities. The
Assembly would, inter alia, note with serious concern
that the provisions of paragraphs 7 of resolutions 66/97,
67/91 and 68/110 have not been implemented and would
therefore decide to revisit the matter of funding for
the Programme under the programme budget for the
biennium 2014-2015, in particular the United Nations
Regional Courses in International Law and the United
Nations Audiovisual Library of International Law for
the year 2015. It would request the Secretary-General
to include additional resources under the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2016-2017 for the
organization of the United Nations Regional Courses
in International Law for Africa, for the Asia-Pacific
region and for Latin America and the Caribbean each
year, and for the continuation and further development
of the Audiovisual Library. It would also request the
Secretary-General to include in the regular budget, for
consideration by the Assembly, the necessary funding
for the Hamilton Shirley Amerasinghe Memorial
Fellowship on the Law of the Sea, with effect from the
biennium 2016-2017, should voluntary contributions
be insufficient for granting at least one fellowship per
year.
The report on agenda item 78, entitled “Report of
the International Law Commission on the work of its
sixty-sixth session”, is contained in document A/69/498,
and the two draft resolutions recommended to the
Assembly for adoption are reproduced in paragraph 10
of the report.
Under draft resolution I, the Assembly would,
among other things, express its appreciation to the
Commission for the work accomplished at its sixtysixth session and recommend that it continue its work
on the topics in its current programme. Furthermore,
the Assembly would decide that the next session of
the Commission would be held at the United Nations
Office at Geneva from 4 May to 5 June and from 6 July
to 7 August 2015.

14-68431

10/12/2014

Under the terms of draft resolution II, the Assembly
would, inter alia, welcome the conclusion of the work
of the Commission on the expulsion of aliens and its
adoption of the draft articles and a detailed commentary
on the subject, take note of the recommendation of the
Commission contained in paragraph 42 of its report
on the work of its sixty-sixth session, and decide that
the consideration of that recommendation would be
continued at the seventy-second session of the General
Assembly.
The report on agenda item 79, entitled “Status of
the Protocols Additional to the Geneva Conventions of
1949 and relating to the protection of victims of armed
conflicts”, is contained in document A/69/499, and
the draft resolution recommended to the Assembly for
adoption is reproduced in paragraph 8 thereof. Under the
terms of the draft resolution, the Assembly would, inter
alia, affirm the necessity of making the implementation
of international humanitarian law more effective and
support its further strengthening and development.
The report on agenda item 80, entitled “Consideration
of effective measures to enhance the protection, security
and safety of diplomatic and consular missions and
representatives”, is contained in document A/69/500,
and the draft resolution recommended to the Assembly
for adoption is reproduced in paragraph 8 of the report.
Under the terms of the draft resolution, the Assembly
would, among other things, strongly condemn acts
of violence against diplomatic and consular missions
and representatives, as well as against missions and
representatives to international intergovernmental
organizations and officials of such organizations,
and urge States to ensure, in conformity with their
international obligations, the protection, security and
safety of the missions, representatives and officials
mentioned above.
The report on agenda item 81, entitled “Report of
the Special Committee on the Charter of the United
Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the
Organization”, is contained in document A/69/501.
The draft resolution recommended to the Assembly for
adoption is contained in paragraph 9 thereof. Under
the terms of the draft resolution, the Assembly would,
inter alia, request the Special Committee to continue its
consideration of all proposals being considered under
the various clusters of the issues on its programme,
as well as invite the Special Committee to consider
the question of an appropriate commemoration of the

A/69/PV.68

seventieth anniversary of the Charter of the United
Nations.
The report on agenda item 82, entitled “The rule
of law at the national and international levels”, is
contained in document A/69/502. Under the terms of
the draft resolution, which is contained in paragraph
7 of the report, the Assembly would, inter alia, invite
Member States to focus their comments at the Sixth
Committee debates during its seventieth session on the
sub-topic “The role of multilateral treaty processes in
promoting and advancing the rule of law”.
The report on agenda item 83, entitled “The
scope and application of the principle of universal
jurisdiction”, is contained in document A/69/503.
Under the draft resolution recommended for adoption,
which is reproduced in paragraph 9 of the report, the
Assembly would decide that the Sixth Committee shall
continue its consideration of the matter next year,
including in the context of a working group of the
Committee, which would further undertake a thorough
discussion of the item.
The relevant report on agenda item 84, entitled
“Effects of armed conflicts on treaties”, is contained
in document A/69/504, and the draft resolution
recommended to the Assembly for adoption is
reproduced in paragraph 6 thereof. Under the terms of
the draft resolution, the Assembly would request the
Secretary-General to invite Governments to submit
written comments on any future action regarding the
articles on the effects of armed conflicts on treaties,
adopted by the International Law Commission in 2011.
The Assembly would also decide to include the item
in the provisional agenda of its seventy-second session
with a view to examining, inter alia, the question of the
form that might be given to the articles.
The last report on this cluster relates to agenda
item 85, entitled “Responsibility of international
organizations”. It is contained in document A/69/505,
and the draft resolution recommended to the Assembly
for adoption is reproduced in paragraph 6 of the report.
Under the terms of the draft resolution, the Assembly
would request the Secretary-General to prepare an
initial compilation of decisions of international courts,
tribunals and other bodies referring to the articles
on the responsibility of international organizations,
adopted by the International Law Commission in
2011, and to invite Governments and international
organizations to submit information on their practice in

14-684319/16

A/69/PV.68

that regard, as well as written comments on any future
action regarding the articles. The Assembly would also
request the Secretary-General to submit such material
well in advance of its seventy-second session, in
2017, and would also decide to include the item in the
provisional agenda of its seventy-second session with a
view to examining, among other things, the question of
the form that might be given to the articles.
I shall now turn to the second heading, “Drug
control, crime prevention and combating international
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations”, under
which the Sixth Committee considered agenda item
107, entitled “Measures to eliminate international
terrorism”.
The relevant report on this single item is contained
in document A/69/506, and the draft resolution
recommended to the Assembly for adoption is
reproduced in paragraph 9 thereof. By its terms, it is
envisaged that a working group would be established
at the seventieth session with a view to finalizing the
process on the draft comprehensive convention on
international terrorism as well as discussions on the
item included in its agenda by resolution 54/110, while
encouraging all Member States to redouble their efforts
during the intersessional period towards resolving any
outstanding issues.
Under the third and final heading, “Organizational,
administrative and other matters”, the Sixth Committee
considered six substantive and two procedural items.
Agenda item 144, entitled “Administration of
justice at the United Nations”, was allocated to the
Fifth and Sixth Committees. The views of the Sixth
Committee on this item were transmitted to the Fifth
Committee through a letter from the President of the
General Assembly dated 29 October 2014, which is
annexed to document A/C.5/69/10.
The report on agenda item 168, entitled “Report of
the Committee on Relations with the Host Country”, is
contained in document A/69/510, and the draft resolution
recommended to the Assembly for adoption appears in
paragraph 8 of the report and, inter alia, requests the
Committee to continue its work in conformity with
resolution 2819 (XXVI).
Furthermore, the Sixth Committee considered four
requests for observer status in the General Assembly. It
recommended that the Assembly grant observer status
to the Developing Eight Countries Organization for
Economic Cooperation, under agenda item 171, and to
10/16

10/12/2014

the Pacific Community, under agenda item 172. The
Committee recommended that the Assembly defer
taking a decision on the request for observer status in
the General Assembly for the Cooperation Council of
Turkic-speaking States, under agenda item 169, to the
seventieth session of the Assembly.
The coordinating delegation for agenda item 170,
entitled “Observer status for the International Chamber
of Commerce in the General Assembly”, decided not to
pursue the request for observer status in the Assembly
for the International Chamber of Commerce at the
current session, while reserving the right to present it at
a future session. The Sixth Committee thus concluded
its consideration of this item without taking action.
The reports concerning those requests are found in
documents A/69/513, A/69/514, A/69/511 and A/69/512,
respectively. The relevant draft resolutions and draft
decisions are reproduced in paragraph 7 of documents
A/69/513 and A/69/514 and in paragraph 8 of document
A/69/511.
Concerning two procedural items, namely, agenda
item 118, entitled “Revitalization of the work of the
General Assembly”, and agenda item 133, entitled
“Programme planning”, the report under agenda item
118, which contains the provisional programme of work
of the Sixth Committee at the seventieth session, is
contained in document A/69/507. The draft decision by
which the Assembly would take note of the provisional
programme of work is reproduced in paragraph 7 of
the report. The report on agenda item 133 is contained
in document A/69/508, and no further action by the
Assembly is recommended.
The Committee adopted without a vote the draft
resolutions and the draft decisions relating to the
agenda items under all three headings, and it is my
hope that the General Assembly will be in a position to
do the same.
Finally, I wish to inform the Assembly that there is
no report in respect of agenda item 5, entitled “Election
of the officers of the Main Committees”. Consistent
with previous practice, the election of the officers of
the Sixth Committee for the seventieth session will be
taken up at a later stage in the course of the current
session.
This concludes my introduction of the reports of
the Sixth Committee. Let me take this opportunity
to express my gratitude to the Chairman of the Sixth
Committee, Ambassador Manongi of the United
14-68431

10/12/2014

Republic of Tanzania, for his dedicated work and for
the commendable leadership that he provided to the
Committee, as well as the other members of the Bureau,
Ms. Fernanda Millicay of Argentina, Mr. Mirza Pašić
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Mr. Hossein Gharibi
of the Islamic Republic of Iran, for their cooperation. I
also wish to thank all the representatives and colleagues
for their valuable contributions to the success of this
session. Finally, I would like to express my gratitude
and appreciation to the secretariat of the Sixth
Committee and the Codification Division of the Office
of Legal Affairs for their efficient and valuable support
and for the competent and professional advice provided
throughout the session.
The Acting President: If there is no proposal under
rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it that the
General Assembly decides not to discuss the reports
of the Sixth Committee that are before the Assembly
today.
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Statements will therefore
be limited to explanations of vote. The positions of
delegations regarding the recommendations of the Sixth
Committee have been made clear in the Committee and
are reflected in the relevant official records.
May I remind members that, under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that:
“When the same draft resolution is considered
in a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its
vote only once, that is, either in the Committee or
in plenary meeting, unless that delegation’s vote
in plenary meeting is different from its vote in the
Committee”.
May I also remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Sixth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives
that we are going to proceed to take decisions in the
same manner as was done in the Committee, unless the
secretariat is notified otherwise in advance. I therefore
hope that we may proceed to adopt without a vote those
recommendations that were adopted without a vote in
the Committee.

A/69/PV.68

Members are reminded that additional sponsors
are no longer accepted now that draft resolutions and
decisions have been adopted by the Committee. Any
clarification about sponsorship should be addressed to
the Secretary of the Committee.
Agenda item 75
Criminal accountability of United Nations officials
and experts on mission
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/69/495)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee
in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
69/114).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 75?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 76
Report of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law on the work of its fortyseventh session
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/69/496)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it two draft resolutions recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 9 of its report. We will now
take a decision on draft resolutions I and II.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Report of the United
Nations Commission on International Trade Law
on the work of its forty-seventh session”. The Sixth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 69/115).
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is
entitled “United Nations Convention on Transparency
in Treaty-based Investor-State Arbitration”. The Sixth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?

14-6843111/16

A/69/PV.68

Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 69/116).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 76?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 77
United Nations Programme of Assistance in
the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider
Appreciation of International Law
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/69/497)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee
in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
69/117).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 77?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 78
Report of the International Law Commission on
the work of its sixty-sixth session
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/69/498)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it two draft resolutions recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 10 of its report. We will now
take a decision on draft resolutions I and II.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled “Report
of the International Law Commission on the work of its
sixty-sixth session”. The Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 69/118).
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Expulsion of aliens”. The Sixth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?

10/12/2014

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 78?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 79
Status of the Protocols Additional to the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and relating to the protection
of victims of armed conflicts
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/69/499)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee
in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
69/120).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 79?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 80
Consideration of effective measures to enhance the
protection, security and safety of diplomatic and
consular missions and representatives
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/69/500)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee
in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
69/121).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 80?
It was so decided.

Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 69/119).

12/16

14-68431

10/12/2014

Agenda item 81
Report of the Special Committee on the Charter of
the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the
Role of the Organization
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/69/501)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee
in paragraph 9 of its report. We will now take action on
the draft resolution. The Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
69/122).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 81?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 82
The rule of law at the national and international
levels
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/69/502)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee
in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
69/123).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 82?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 83
The scope and application of the principle of
universal jurisdiction
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/69/503)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee
in paragraph 9 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Committee adopted it

A/69/PV.68

without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
69/124).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 83?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 84
Effects of armed conflicts on treaties
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/69/504)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
69/125).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 84?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 85
Responsibility of international organizations
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/69/505)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
69/126).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 85?
It was so decided.

14-6843113/16

A/69/PV.68

Agenda item 107
Measures to eliminate international terrorism
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/69/506)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee
in paragraph 9 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
69/127).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 107?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 168
Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host
Country
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/69/510)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee
in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
69/128).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 168?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 169
Observer status for the Cooperation Council of
Turkic-speaking States in the General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/69/511)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft decision recommended by the Sixth Committee
in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now take action on
the draft decision. The Committee adopted it without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?

14/16

10/12/2014

The draft decision was adopted (decision 69/527).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 169?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 170
Observer status for the International Chamber of
Commerce in the General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/69/512)
The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly wishes to take note of the report of
the Sixth Committee?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 170?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 171
Observer status for the Developing Eight Countries
Organization for Economic Cooperation in the
General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/69/513)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee
in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
69/129).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of Pakistan, who wishes to speak
in explanation of postion on the draft resolution just
adopted.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank the
General Assembly for giving observer status to the
Developing Eight Countries Organization for Economic
Cooperation (D-8) in the General Assembly. We are
grateful to all members of the General Assembly for
unanimously adopting this resolution (resolution
69/129).

14-68431

10/12/2014

The D-8 Organization has been promoting
development cooperation among its member States —
Bangladesh, Egypt, Indonesia, Iran, Malaysia, Nigeria,
Pakistan and Turkey — since 1997. The objectives of
the D-8 Organization are the promotion of member
States’ role in the global economy, the creation of
new opportunities in their trade relations and the
improvement of standards of living in the member
States. The D-8 objectives are synergistic with the
objectives of the United Nations. We would therefore
work in synchronization with the United Nations.
The observer status of the D-8 will help it in
furthering its objectives and developing synergies with
the United Nations socioeconomic and sustainable
development objectives. Its links with the United Nations
will yield mutual benefits for the two organizations.
In the current session, we would particularly like to
focus on the development of the post-2015 development
agenda. We look forward to working with all States
Members of the United Nations.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 171?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 172
Observer status for the Pacific Community in the
General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/69/514)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee
in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
69/130).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of Fiji, who wishes to speak in
explanation of postion on the resolution just adopted.
Mr. Thomson (Fiji): I do not wish to disrupt the
admirable flow of your adoptions, Madam President,
but I would just quickly take the floor to explain our
position.
We are taking this brief opportunity to thank all
Member States for their support in the adoption of

A/69/PV.68

resolution 69/130. I would like to also acknowledge the
collaborative efforts of the wise experts of the Sixth
Committee in their deliberations on the resolution.
The adoption of this resolution today is a step in
the right direction for the sustainable development in
the Pacific region, particularly for the Pacific small
island developing States, as it will help synchronize
our development programmes with those of the United
Nations agencies and programmes. This resolution was
initially submitted by Fiji in support of the decision
taken by the eighth ministerial conference of the Pacific
Community, of which Fiji is the current Chair.
The Pacific Community is one of the most
important development organizations in our region,
as evidenced by the assistance the organization
provides to its membership in the implementation and
monitoring of development activities in our region. The
Pacific Community currently provides assistance to its
membership in such critical areas as energy, transport,
public health, agricultural development, disaster
reduction, human development, development statistics
and oceans and fisheries.
This resolution is especially important in the
context of finalizing and implementing the post-2015
development agenda. We welcome the granting of
observer status to the Pacific Community, coming as
it does at this very important juncture, as we jointly
design the post-2015 development agenda.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 172?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 118 (continued)
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/69/507)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft decision recommended by the Sixth Committee
in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now take action on
the draft decision, entitled “Provisional programme of
work of the Sixth Committee for the seventieth session
of the General Assembly”. The Sixth Committee
adopted the draft decision without a vote. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 69/529).

14-6843115/16

A/69/PV.68

The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 118.
Agenda item 133 (continued)
Programme planning
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/69/508)
The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly wishes to take note of the report of
the Sixth Committee?
It was so decided.

10/12/2014

The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
133.
On behalf of the General Assembly, I would like to
thank His Excellency Mr. Tuvako Nathaniel Manongi
of the United Republic of Tanzania, Chair of the Sixth
Committee, the members of the Bureau, the Secretary
of the Committee and representatives for a job well
done.
The General Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of all the reports of the Sixth Committee
before it.
The meeting rose at 12.50 p.m.

16/16

14-68431
