UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
PROVISIONAL
S/PV.3281
22 September 1993
ENGLISH

PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE THREE THOUSAND
TWO HUNDRED AND EIGHTY-FIRST MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York,
on Wednesday, 22 September 1993, at 4.45 p.m.

President:

(Venezuela)

Brazil
Cape Verde
China
Djibouti
France
Hungary
Japan
Morocco
New Zealand
Pakistan
Russian Federation
Spain
United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland
United States of America

Mr. de ARAUJO CASTRO
Mr. JESUS
Mr. LI Zhaoxing
Mr. OLHAYE
Mr. MERIMEE
Mr. ERDÖS
Mr. HATANO
Mr. SNOUSSI
Mr. McKINNON
Mr. MARKER
Mr. VORONTSOV
Mr. PEDAUYE

Members:

Mr. Taylhardat

Sir David HANNAY
Mr. HICKS

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and
interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be
printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be
sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one
week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Office of Conference
Services, room DC2-794, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of
the record.

93-86587 (E)

S/PV.3281
2-5

The meeting was called to order at 4.50 p.m.
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
The agenda was adopted.
THE SITUATION IN LIBERIA
REPORT OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL ON LIBERIA (S/26422 and Add.1)
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):

I should like to inform

the Council that I have received a letter from the representative of Liberia in
which he requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council’s agenda.

In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with

the consent of the Council, to invite that representative to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions
of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Bull (Liberia) took a place at the
Council table.

S/PV.3281
6

The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):

The Security Council

will now begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the report of the Secretary-General
on Liberia, documents S/26422 and S/26422/Add.1.
Members of the Council also have before them document S/26477, which
contains the text of a draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council’s
prior consultations.
I should like to draw attention to the following revisions to be made to
the draft resolution contained in document S/26477 in its provisional form.

In

the last preambular paragraph and in operative paragraph 10, the word "general"
should be replaced by "legislative"; and in operative paragraph 8, the words "in
conjunction" should be replaced by "concomitantly".
The first speaker is the representative of Liberia, on whom I now call.
Mr. BULL (Liberia):

The delegation of Liberia warmly congratulates

you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for this month and
on the effective manner in which you are carrying out your duties.

I should

like also to express my delegation’s appreciation to
Ambassador Madeleine Albright of the United States of America for her leadership
and her skilful guidance of the work of the Security Council during the month of
August.
My delegation welcomes and deeply appreciates the Secretary-General’s
comprehensive report (S/26422 and Add.1) of 9 September 1993 on the situation in
Liberia, which was submitted pursuant to paragraph 3 of resolution 856 (1993) on
the proposed establishment of a United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia
(UNOMIL).

The Secretary-General’s report manifests his continuing commitment to

the pacific settlement of the Liberian conflict, and also reflects his desire to
implement the principles enunciated in his report "An Agenda for Peace".
Since the signing of the Cotonou Agreement on 25 July 1993 by the parties
to the Liberian conflict there have been no significant violations of the terms
of that Agreement.

Most of the political components of the Agreement, including

the selection of a five-member transitional Council of State, have been
implemented, and Liberians are optimistic that peace is finally at hand.

S/PV.3281
7
(Mr. Bull, Liberia)
However, the relative absence of conflict in the country must not be mistaken
for irreversibility of the peace process.
Liberia is still unsettled.

On the contrary, the situation in

The crucial military components of the Cotonou

Agreement, dealing with the encampment, disarmament and demobilization of
combatants, have yet to be implemented.
As long as the combatants remain armed, the situation in the country will
continue to be unpredictable.

That is why my delegation welcomes the Secretary-

General’s proposal that the disarmament process be undertaken as soon as
possible.

This would allow the installation of the transitional Government,

which according to the Cotonou Agreement is to be seated concomitantly with the
commencement of the disarmament process.

The deployment of some members of the

advance team of UNOMIL pursuant to resolution 856 (1993) has served as an
important confidence-building measure.

It is therefore most important that the

remaining members of UNOMIL be deployed as soon as possible.
The disarmament of the combatants will be greatly enhanced by the
deployment of additional troops to augment the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) Military Observer Group (ECOMOG).

As noted in the

Secretary-General’s report, the funding for additional troops will depend,
inter alia, on voluntary contributions to the Trust Fund by Member States.

My

delegation would like to echo the request already made by the Secretary-General
for Member States to make generous contributions to the Trust Fund.

Indeed,

such contributions will prove indispensable if the repatriation, the
rehabilitation, the demobilization and the electoral process are to be
implemented within the time-frame set for the holding of legislative and
presidential elections, by March 1994.
The people of Liberia have undergone more than three and a half years of
civil strife.

Through the efforts of the Economic Community of West African

States, and with the support of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and the
United Nations, Liberians are now engaged in a process which will lead to
national reconciliation and reconstruction and the establishment of a duly
elected Government in the country.
The report of the Secretary-General outlines the support which is required
from the international community:

contributions to the Trust Fund and the

S/PV.3281
8-10
(Mr. Bull, Liberia)
continued provision of humanitarian assistance, which will complement the
determined efforts of the Liberian people to achieve a peaceful resolution of
the Liberian conflict.
While we acknowledge that peaceful change in Liberia will ultimately depend
on the Liberians themselves, my delegation appeals to the members of the
Security Council and the international community to provide the required
assistance and support that are so vital if a peaceful resolution of the
conflict is to be fully achieved.
In that connection, I should like to seize this opportunity to register my
Government’s appreciation to those countries which have already responded to the
Secretary-General’s appeal.

My delegation wholeheartedly endorses the

Secretary-General’s report and the draft resolution now before the Council.

By

adopting that draft resolution, the Council will be acting in accordance with
its mandate under Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter.

Additionally, by

endorsing the draft resolution the Council will be taking a bold step in
undertaking peace-keeping, peacemaking and peace-monitoring in concert with the
subregional organization that initiated the process.
By exerting its best efforts to ensure that UNOMIL is successful, the
Council could provide a model for future cooperation between the United Nations
and other subregional organizations.

S/PV.3281
11

The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):

I thank the

representative of Liberia for his kind words addressed to me.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to proceed to the vote on
the draft resolution before it, as orally revised in its provisional form.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall take it that that is the case.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
Before putting the draft resolution to the vote, I shall call on those
members of the Council who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. OLHAYE (Djibouti):

My delegation would again like to express its

appreciation to the Secretary-General for his timely and informative report on
the situation in Liberia.
The planning mission dispatched last month to gather information prior to
the proposed establishment of the United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia
(UNOMIL) would seem to have accomplished its mission.

On the basis of the

results of this initial visit, sufficient data is available to form a basis for
the structure of UNOMIL.
This mission establishes an important precedent for the United Nations,
that of a peacemaking mission set up after one is already in place through
another organization.

Consequently, the issues of coordination, command and

responsibilities are significant and will require careful monitoring and
assessment.

The supportive but independent role of the United Nations needs to

be safeguarded, particularly where hostilities may resume and peacemaking action
is required against one of the parties.

We must also be assured that proper

measures are in place to protect United Nations personnel and permit them to
exercise unimpeded their functions.
It would seem that the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS),
which has done a splendid job to date to resolve this crisis, is resolute in its
desire to resolve this conflict and establish a representative elected
Government.

The deployment of UNOMIL therefore seems to be crucial to the whole

process proceeding in high gear.

For this reason we applaud the speed with

which the mission has been organized and will be put in place.

This will,

hopefully, demonstrate to the Liberians our commitment to the peace process and
to a return to normalcy.

We shall then be in a position to encourage the new

S/PV.3281
12
(Mr. Olhaye, Djibouti)
five-member Council of State to take the steps necessary to complete the
disarmament and demobilization process and to organize the important elections
commission.
While we focus on the political settlement, we are pleased to note that the
plight of Liberia’s many refugees and displaced persons is not being overlooked;
nor is the need for humanitarian assistance.

Attending to these matters will

gain a good deal of immediate support from the general populace and ease the
transition to the new phase of life in Liberia.

The ordinary Liberian has

suffered unduly in this conflict and requires our utmost attention.
Deployment of UNOMIL is a key factor in the fair distribution of
humanitarian aid.

We support the steps the Secretary-General has undertaken to

establish a trust fund to cover a range of vital processes and activities and
his call for contributions from Member States is consistent with the timetables
set to accomplish various tasks.
The United Nations is much wiser now and is aware of the steps which need
to be taken to forge the road to peace and settlement.

Difficulties and

uncertainties are always present, but the United Nations appears to have
assessed the Liberian situation with some care, and the chances of resolution,
based upon the actions of combatants to date in Liberia and Cotonou, seem quite
encouraging.
My delegation therefore supports the draft resolution before us
establishing UNOMIL for a period of seven months under the direction of the
Secretary-General, through his Special Representative.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):

I shall now put to the

vote the draft resolution contained in document S/26477, as orally revised in
its provisional form.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:

Brazil, Cape Verde, China, Djibouti, France, Hungary, Japan,
Morocco, New Zealand, Pakistan, Russian Federation, Spain,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Venezuela

S/PV.3281
13

The PRESIDENT:

There were 15 votes in favour.

The draft resolution,

as orally revised in its provisional form, has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 866 (1993).
I shall now call on those members of the Council who wish to make
statements following the voting.
Mr. HICKS (United States of America):

As the Council is aware, the

United States has a long historical link with Liberia and has watched
developments there closely.

We are therefore pleased to be a part of the

international community’s actions in support of the Agreement reached between
the parties at Cotonou to lay their arms aside and move together towards a
peaceful resolution of the tragic conflict there that has heaped such suffering
upon their nation in recent years.
The resolution just adopted by the Security Council should help to create
the climate necessary for successfully building up the trust so vital to
successful implementation of the Peace Agreement.
The role of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) will be pivotal.

We trust that adequate and

appropriate coordination between all levels of command of ECOMOG and the United
Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL) will enable both groups to operate
in the complementary manner foreseen by the Council and the parties to the
Agreement.

The precedent set here of side-by-side operations by the United

Nations and a regional group may have reverberations in other conflict areas
which could perhaps be tackled in a similar manner if the world sees it work
well in Liberia.
Let me take this opportunity to reassure the brave troop-contributing
nations that are willing to help Liberia out of its crisis that the United
States Government is prepared to assist them in their efforts.
Finally, I should like to stress the importance of moving quickly to
commence the process of encampment and demobilization, which will enable the
Council of State to begin its work.

S/PV.3281
14-15

Mr. MERIMEE (France) (interpretation from French):

It was with great

satisfaction that my delegation voted in favour of this resolution.

It attests

to the resolve of the international community to implement a peace agreement in
a strife-torn nation and creates a United Nations force that is called upon,
pursuant to Chapter VIII of the Charter, to work in close cooperation with the
regional organization.
This is one of the first instances of a joint peace-keeping operation and
could serve as a precedent if it succeeds.

Accordingly, we shall be

particularly attentive to the way it unfolds.

The United Nations Observer

Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL) will play fully its role of monitoring and verifying
the implementation of the Cotonou Agreement, while the primary responsibility
for actually implementing the provisions of the Agreement will fall to the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group (ECOMOG).
We expect African countries, and members of the Organization of African
Unity in particular, to contribute as quickly as possible to the strengthening
of ECOMOG.

France also calls on the Liberian parties to honour their

commitments in good faith, to set aside violence once and for all and, in a
genuine spirit of national reconciliation, to prepare themselves for the
elections in February and March 1994 that will put this country on the road to
peace, stability and democracy.
In order to achieve this objective, France calls on the parties to begin
without delay the process of cantonment, disarmament and demobilization.

I

should like to reiterate the great importance we attach to the provision of aid
to civilian populations in need, and I call on all those involved to facilitate
the delivery of such aid.
Finally, I express the hope that the implementation of a peace-keeping
operation in Rwanda will receive the same degree of attention from the Council.

S/PV.3281
16

Sir David HANNAY (United Kingdom):

The resolution which we have just

adopted is a further important step towards implementing the terms of the
Agreement reached at the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
Summit in Cotonou on 25 July for which both ECOWAS and the United Nations and
its Special Representative, whose work we commend, have worked so hard.
The creation of the United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL)
under this resolution brings closer the prospect of lasting peace in Liberia and
of ending a conflict which has had an appalling cost.

Some 150,000 people have

lost their lives, hundreds of thousands have been displaced, and the conflict
has had a much wider destabilizing effect on the countries of the subregion as a
whole, and particularly on Sierra Leone.

In this respect, we very much welcome

the decision in the resolution that UNOMIL should have a monitoring function on
Liberia’s borders with its neighbours, and in particular with Sierra Leone.
UNOMIL will be the first example of a United Nations peace-keeping mission
undertaken in cooperation with a mission already established by a regional
organization.

This is testimony to the very effective, imaginative and welcome

collaboration that is already under way between the United Nations and ECOWAS.
UNOMIL will work alongside the ECOWAS Military Observer Group (ECOMOG)
peace-keeping force.

Their roles will be separate but complementary.

Close

coordination and the fullest cooperation between the two bodies will be vital to
the success of the enterprise.

We therefore welcome the fact that the

resolution spells out in some detail how the mandate of UNOMIL will fit with
that of ECOMOG.

The intention of the Secretary-General to conclude with ECOWAS

a formal agreement defining the respective roles and responsibilities of the two
is very necessary.

We hope it will be concluded as soon as possible and that

this will precede the early deployment of the Observer Mission.
In the view of my Government, it is crucial to the effective functioning of
UNOMIL and to the safety of its personnel that the cooperation to which the
parties to the Cotonou Agreement committed themselves be continued.
cease-fire must continue to be adhered to strictly.

The present

It is impossible to stress

too much the need for all the parties to the conflict to take this opportunity
for peace.

So many have been lost in the past.

The resolution also welcomes the establishment by the Secretary-General of
a Trust Fund to assist the task of reinforcing ECOMOG as well as to meet other

S/PV.3281
17
(Sir David Hannay,
United Kingdom)
important objectives.

We urge Member States to look positively at the case for

supporting a Trust Fund.

For our part we are considering how best we might help

the cause of peace in Liberia, and in the meantime we will continue to provide
humanitarian relief to those suffering.

We have committed £8.5 million since

1990.
Finally, the resolution rightly urges that the timetable set out in the
Cotonou Agreement, which would point to elections in 1994, should not be allowed
to slip.

Of course, one must not underestimate the problems of sticking to that

timetable, but if all show flexibility, cooperation and good will it can be
achieved, and the sooner those elections take place in free and fair conditions
the sooner the people of Liberia can begin a new life, and a new life in peace.
Mr. HATANO (Japan):

My delegation notes with satisfaction that since

the Peace Agreement was signed in Cotonou progress has been made towards the
restoration of peace in Liberia.

The Council of State representing all three

Liberian parties has been formed and a United Nations advance team has been
deployed.

Now the time is ripe to establish a new peace operation, the United

Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL) to facilitate the implementation of
the Peace Agreement.
UNOMIL is unique in the sense that it will be the first mission undertaken
by the United Nations in cooperation with a peace-keeping force already set up
by a regional organization, the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS).

It will be extremely important to ensure close coordination

between UNOMIL and the ECOWAS Military Observer Group (ECOMOG) and clearly to
define the roles and responsibilities of each body in the implementation of the
Peace Agreement.
Japan notes that under the Peace Agreement ECOMOG bears the primary
responsibility for ensuring the implementation of the provisions of the
Agreement, while it is up to UNOMIL to monitor the procedures in order to verify
their impartial application.
I concur with the Secretary-General’s view that the successful
implementation of the Peace Agreement will be in jeopardy if the additional
troops are not deployed or if some of the ECOMOG troops are to be withdrawn

S/PV.3281
18
(Mr. Hatano, Japan)
prematurely.

Thus we welcome ECOMOG’s plan to expand its forces by 4,000 and

encourage African States to provide additional troops.
I stress that the peace process must be advanced in accordance with the
timetable laid out in the Peace Agreement - that is, elections must be held in
February or March 1994.

Since the process is already behind schedule, we urge

all parties in Liberia to demonstrate their strong political will to implement
the Agreement without delay.

It is important that ECOMOG move quickly to begin

the disarmament process even before the expanded ECOMOG and UNOMIL forces are
fully deployed.
Finally, I believe it should be reiterated that the sustainability of
UNOMIL, and in fact of all future peace-keeping operations, depends on the
safety of United Nations personnel involved.

Japan welcomes ECOMOG’s commitment

to ensure the safety of UNOMIL observers, and urges all parties to take every
necessary measure to enhance the security and safety of UNOMIL personnel and
those involved in humanitarian activities.
Mr. de ARAUJO CASTRO (Brazil):
Council has just adopted.

It is an important resolution that the

The Cotonou Peace Agreement, signed in July by the

Liberian parties, brought new and well-founded hopes for a peaceful settlement
of the crisis in Liberia, a crisis which has taken a very heavy toll and brought
great suffering to the people of that African country of the South Atlantic
region.
There is an opportunity for peace in Liberia, and it must not be lost.
With the decisions taken today by the Security Council in adopting
resolution 866 (1993) the United Nations is showing that it is fully aware of
the need to ensure the successful outcome of that process and is prepared to add
its own important contribution to the efforts already being made by the African
countries that are neighbours of Liberia.
We support the recommendations made by the Secretary-General for the
establishment of the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL), as set out in
resolution 866 (1993).

S/PV.3281
19-20
(Mr. de Araujo Castro, Brazil)
By assisting in the monitoring of compliance with the Cotonou Agreement,
UNOMIL will constitute a decisive complement to the activities to be carried out
by the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) Military Observer
Group (ECOMOG).

The distinct mandates of the two operations are clearly

designed to promote the same goal:

the restoration of peace, security and

stability in Liberia.
This is a case in which new modalities are being designed for close
cooperation in the field between the United Nations and the regional
organization.

We are convinced that such cooperation, with clearly defined

roles for each organization, each in accordance with its own rules and
procedures, is a very encouraging development.
The significance of the tasks entrusted to UNOMIL stands out quite clearly.
The monitoring of the cease-fire and other aspects of the Peace Agreement,
particularly the arms embargo and the assembly, disarmament and demobilization
of troops, as well as the observation of the election process, and other
activities, will no doubt constitute an invaluable contribution to the efforts
of the Liberian people to achieve national reconciliation and to establish a new
basis on which to restart their national development.
Brazil attaches great importance to respect for the norms of international
humanitarian law.

We were appalled by the reports of serious violations of

those norms in the conflict in Liberia, and we understand that respect for
humanitarian imperatives will be a cornerstone of the peace process.

That must

of necessity include - and we wish to emphasize this point - strict respect for
the safety of all United Nations personnel and relief workers in Liberia.

q

S/PV.3281
21
(Mr. de Araujo Castro, Brazil)
I wish to express our recognition of, and support for, the work carried out

by the Secretary-General and his Special Representative for Liberia,
Mr. Trevor Gordon-Somers.

Their efforts, together with the close monitoring of

the situation by the Security Council, will continue to play a crucial role in
ensuring success in the peace process, with a view to the holding of democratic
elections in March 1994.

It is our hope that these elections will open the way

for a new era of peace and development for the Liberian people.
Mr. LI Zhaoxing (China) (interpretation from Chinese):

The Peace

Agreement signed at Cotonou has brought new hope of ending the civil war and
restoring peace and security in Liberia as well as the subregion of West Africa.
This is the result of concerted efforts by the various Liberian parties, the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the Organization of African
Unity (OAU) and the United Nations.

For this, we wish to express our welcome

and appreciation.
We are pleased to note that the various Liberian parties have started to
implement the Peace Agreement signed at Cotonou; that the Liberian National
Transitional Government and the Joint Cease-fire Monitoring Committee, composed
of representatives of the three Liberian parties, the ECOWAS Military Observer
Group (ECOMOG) and the United Nations, have both been established; and that some
members of the advance team of United Nations military observers to Liberia have
arrived in Monrovia.

This undoubtedly will advance the peace process in

Liberia.
We hope that the conflicting parties in Liberia will fully cooperate with
ECOWAS, adopt practical and effective measures and earnestly implement the Peace
Agreement and the relevant Security Council resolutions so as to contribute to
an early realization of national reconciliation and national peace.

Therefore,

the Chinese delegation supports the recommendations of the Secretary-General for
the deployment of the United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL) and
voted in favour of the resolution that has just been adopted.

S/PV.3281
22

Mr. McKINNON (New Zealand):

This resolution sets an important

precedent for United Nations cooperation with regional organizations.

We pay

tribute to the work of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
and to the Organization of African Unity (OAU).

The regional countries have

played an important and responsible role in the peace process.

We look forward

to the participation of other African States, in partnership with the United
Nations and with ECOWAS, in bringing a lasting peace to Liberia.
New Zealand is very pleased that the resolution spells out clearly and
precisely the role the United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL) is to
perform.

In particular, my delegation welcomes the fact that the mandate and

the command and control issues are clearly set out.
My delegation is also very pleased that the issue of safety of United
Nations personnel features prominently in the resolution.
We warmly welcome the decision by the Liberian parties to establish an
interim government.

We urge the establishment as soon as possible of mechanisms

to enable political reconciliation and the conduct of early elections.
We emphasize the importance of the provisions in the Cotonou Agreement
relating to disarmament and demobilization.

Recent history in other places has

shown us the disastrous consequences that can follow if disarmament and
demobilization obligations are not carried out.

The Security Council will be

following this aspect with close attention.
We are also very conscious of the burdens that the war in Liberia has
created for Liberia’s neighbours.

We are pleased that the resolution takes

account of this aspect.
Finally, my delegation warmly welcomes the resumed delivery of humanitarian
assistance to all parts of the country.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):

There are no further

speakers on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.25 p.m.
