S/2010/25

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
14 January 2010
Original: English

Letter dated 14 January 2010 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the attached letter of 9 January 2010 addressed to
me by the Permanent Representative of Nepal to the United Nations, Gyan Chandra
Acharya, in which he requested, on behalf of his Government, the extension of the
current mandate of the United Nations Mission in Nepal from 23 January until
15 May 2010.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

10-21006 (E) 140110

*1021006*

S/2010/25

Annex
Letter dated 9 January 2010 from the Permanent Representative
of Nepal to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
Upon instruction from my Government, I have the honour to request an
extension of the duration of the current mandate and the continuation of the related
work of the United Nations Mission in Nepal (UNMIN) until 15 May 2010. The
Government of Nepal has decided to seek the renewal of the mandate in view of the
current transitional situation of the country and in recognition of an important role
played by UNMIN in providing support and facilitation within its mandate to
Nepal’s nationally driven peace process since its establishment under Security
Council resolution 1740 (2007) and subsequent renewals.
Looking at the successive developments in the country since November 2006,
we have reason to be optimistic about the overall direction of the peace process in
Nepal. Despite best efforts, occasional delays and roadblocks are inevitable in the
transitional process from conflict to a post-conflict situation. However, the
Government and the major political parties of Nepal remain fully committed to
taking the peace process to a positive and speedy conclusion.
The committees of the Constituent Assembly have made substantive
deliberations on various complex but important issues and many of them have
submitted their inputs to the relevant bodies of the Constituent Assembly. The
Government and major political parties are committed to completing the drafting of
the new Constitution and its promulgation by May 2010.
In the meantime, the release of the disqualified children in the cantonments
has already begun and we expect to complete the process by next month. Similarly,
the Special Committee and the Technical Committee are intensifying their works
related to the integration and rehabilitation of combatants of the Unified Communist
Party of Nepal (Maoist) currently living in the cantonments. We expect the work of
the Special Committee to be completed before the promulgation of the new
Constitution.
In view of the developments outlined above, the Government of Nepal
requests a shorter time frame of extension of UNMIN, until 15 May 2010.
(Signed) Gyan Chandra Acharya
Ambassador
Permanent Representative

2

10-21006
