S/PV.6983

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

6983rd meeting

Thursday, 20 June 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Sir Mark Lyall Grant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Oyarzábal
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Sharifov
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Araud
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Bouchaara
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Kim Sook
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Manzi
Mr. Menan
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2013/350)

13-36881 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1336881*

S/PV.6983

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security (S/2013/350)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Afghanistan, Canada, Germany,
India, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Spain and Turkey to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Ján Kubiš, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan,
to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Ioannis Vrailas,
Deputy Head of the Delegation of the European Union
to the United Nations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2013/350, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security.
I now give the floor to Mr. Kubiš.
Mr. Kubiš: We are meeting amid intense focus
on ensuring that Afghanistan’s three complex and
intertwined transition processes — political, security
and economic — are on track. Those efforts are due to
culminate in 2014, but the fundamentals are to be put
in place this year.
The very core of transition is the strengthening
of Afghan national ownership and leadership. The
onus for driving progress is thus on the Government
of Afghanistan and the country’s leading political
forces. There is, however, a clear need for sustained
and predictable international support, through 2014
and beyond, in ways that reinforce Afghanistan’s
leadership.

2

As announced this week, Afghan security forces
have entered the last phase in assuming the lead
responsibility for security throughout the country.
Anti-Government elements are, however, seeking
to counter this by targeting security personnel and
terrorizing civilians. They aim to shake the population’s
confidence in the Government and its armed forces.
We are seeing increasingly brutal, complex assaults
on high-profile targets, high in civilian casualties but
low on reaching military objectives, but nevertheless
garnering media attention. Targeted killings of
those deemed supportive of the Government include
civil servants and judicial workers, in violation of
international law and the norms of war. In population
centres, attacks in public spaces demonstrate a complete
disregard for civilian lives.
Afghan security forces fight bravely and bear the
brunt of losses, showing increased courage, confidence
and competence in countering the intentions of the
anti-Government forces. At the same time, the Afghan
forces, notably the National Army, urgently require
critical enablers such as air capacity to ensure their
effectiveness and sustainability. The international
community must assist them.
A smooth and legitimate transfer of power is
widely acknowledged as the most critical part of the
transition, underpinning all other efforts. President
Karzai continues to reiterate his commitment to
standing aside, in accordance with the Constitution.
Planning and positioning ahead of the polls, scheduled
for 5 April 2014, dominates the political landscape.
Although I see progress in many technical areas, I
am concerned by the continued delays in the passage of
the two major pieces of electoral legislation. For orderly
and timely preparations for the polls, promulgation is
necessary before the summer recess of the National
Assembly. That will require compromise and goodwill
on all sides, notably the proactive engagement of the
Government. The continuous lack of progress in this
critical area has already raised questions in some
minds about intentions to hold elections in a timely and
acceptable manner.
An increased focus on a broad national accord with
regard to electoral platforms and possible presidential
candidates is legitimate and even advisable. However,
that must not be at the expense of electoral preparations,
and it cannot and should not be a substitute for credible
elections. There is no alternative to inclusive and

13-36881

S/PV.6983

transparent elections as a means of delivering a political
transition with the necessary degree of legitimacy and
acceptability. The elections are central to international
and domestic legitimacy and sustained extraordinary
support on the part of the international community for
the new Government.
Peace is the Afghan people’s greatest desire.
Political efforts centred on establishing a Taliban office
in Doha for the purpose of talks between the Afghan
High Peace Council and authorized representatives of
the Taliban to promote peace and reconciliation led
to contradictory developments and announcements
this week. We hope that the current controversies and
legitimate concerns related to the Taliban office in
Doha will soon be resolved, thus opening the way for
direct peace and reconciliation discussions between the
High Peace Council and the Taliban. We also hope that
this will be accompanied by a reduction of violence and
of civilian casualties.
The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan stands ready to support all peace and
reconciliation efforts, based on and in full conformity
with its mandate. Among other things, it stands ready
to facilitate an inter-Afghan track-two dialogue as
well as to engage with the Taliban on issues related
to the promotion of human rights, the application
of humanitarian law and the reduction of civilian
casualties.
The promotion of peace and reconciliation
requires an enabling regional environment. Recent
developments between Afghanistan and Pakistan, as
noted in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2013/350),
are of concern. Such tensions are unfortunate and
dangerous, especially at this stage of Afghanistan’s
development. They bring in additional elements of risk
to an already complex and complicated political and
security situation in Afghanistan and in the region. It
is for the two countries to address those concerns and
problems and their underlying reasons, to build trust
and to refrain from any steps that could contribute to an
escalation of tensions and inflamed public sentiments.
The two neighbouring countries share common
concerns and interests in fighting terrorism. They can
succeed or fail together.
I am encouraged by the positive exchanges following
the recent Pakistani elections between President Karzai
and Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif, as well as by the
resumption of high-level military contacts between the

two countries, with the participation of the International
Security Assistance Force.
A major conference in Kabul next month will
assess the progress made on the mutual commitments to
Government reform and international civilian assistance
made one year ago in Tokyo. Frank discussions between
the Government of Afghanistan and its international
partners must result in a reinvigorated agenda for
action in the coming year. Among the hard deliverables
are not only issues of economic development and good
governance, but also, at this juncture of the transition,
issues related to elections and human rights. They
address fundamental building blocks of the Afghan
State.
This week’s appointment of new human rights
commissioners to the Afghan Independent Human
Rights Commission raised concerns at whether the
appointment process complied with international
principles and standards and met Afghan legal
requirements of transparency, broad consultations
and selection of independent, qualified individuals.
These concerns are currently under review by the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights in
Geneva and will be further reviewed by the respective
international accreditation body for such national
human rights institutions. In the meantime, the work of
the Commission will be under increased scrutiny.
The implementation of the Law on the Elimination
of Violence Against Women, and protecting and
promoting the rights of Afghan women and girls and the
gains they have made over the past decade, are another
central obligation. Women’s equal and meaningful
participation in economic, political and public life is
constitutionally guaranteed in Afghanistan and globally
recognized as central to improving social development,
including the health and well-being of children, who
represent the future of any nation. Key international
donors are clear that any erosion of such commitments,
including of the Law on the Elimination of Violence
Against Women and its implementation, would have
a direct negative impact on future international
assistance.
Afghanistan’s already acutely low humanitarian
indicators are put further at risk by shrinking
humanitarian space. But humanitarian response alone
will not suffice, and greater attention and priority
must be afforded to durable solutions and Government
capacity. This includes a greater development focus

13-368813

S/PV.6983

on disaster management systems, internally displaced
persons and refugees, their strictly voluntary return
and sustainable livelihoods, and sustaining access to
and the quality of the health system.
This is a critical juncture. The trajectory is
irreversible, but the Afghan authorities, the Afghan
people and international partners need to work
together in ensuring that it is sustainable. There are
results to report, but setbacks appear and are and
will be inevitable. The need is for predictability and
confidence. Determined internal and external efforts
are required to prove that the worse-case scenarios are
wrong. This is challenging but possible.
The President: I thank Mr. Kubiš for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Afghanistan.
Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): Let me begin by first
congratulating you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of June. I thank you
for holding today’s debate on Afghanistan. I welcome
the presence of my good friend, Special Representative
Kubiš, among us here today. We thank him for his
comprehensive briefing and steadfast support for
Afghanistan.
Afghanistan is at a critical juncture. As foreign
forces prepare to withdraw next year, Afghan national
forces are assuming full responsibility for the security
and defence of their country. Two days ago in Kabul,
a milestone was reached — the official launch of the
fifth and final stage of the security transition. This is
a remarkable achievement and a source of pride for
the Afghan people. Our security forces are handling
complex security situations with increased confidence
and fortitude. We stand ready to consolidate our gains,
stand on our feet, defend ourselves and secure lasting
peace.
The transition in its entirety aims to bring enduring
peace and stability to Afghanistan. To ensure the
security and defence of our country, it is essential to
bring all Afghans together through a national dialogue
and in a spirit of national unity to achieve a political
solution that is embraced by all. In recent months,
Afghanistan has been extensively involved with various
stakeholders, the United States of America in particular,
in starting direct negotiations with the Taliban as part
of the peace process. In that regard, an agreement was
reached with the United States on the opening of a

4

Taliban office in Doha, Qatar, under assurances that
peace talks would be conducted in accordance with the
following concrete set of principles.
The sole purpose of the office would be to serve
as a venue for direct negotiations between the Taliban
and the High Peace Council. The office would not serve
as an official representation of the Taliban in the form
of a Government, embassy, emirate or sovereign entity.
The office would not engage in or support any activity
related to terrorism and acts of violence, inconsistent
with international law, and consistent with the
provisions of resolutions 1988 (2011) and 2082 (2012).
Yet just two days ago, on 18 June, in a rather
theatrical sequence of events, the Taliban office was
inaugurated in a manner that contradicted the very
principles to which I just referred. Furthermore, the
public statement by the Taliban representatives in Doha
not only lacked any clear commitment to peace talks
with the Afghan High Peace Council —the sole body
mandated to conduct peace talks — but made explicit
reference to the continuation of violence. Again, that
goes against the very spirit of peace.
Given the concerns that have arisen, emanating
from the obvious contradictions pertaining to our peace
process, the Government of Afghanistan decided,
first, that the High Peace Council would not engage
in peace talks under the circumstances in which the
Taliban office was opened; and secondly, to suspend
negotiations on the bilateral security agreement with
the United States. Afghanistan naturally expects its
international partners to stand against any threat to the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the country. In fact, all of Afghanistan’s partnership
agreements are made in light of Afghanistan’s national
interests and aimed at promoting the country’s peace,
security and stability.
While Afghanistan is committed to a peace process
and reconciliation that ensures a permanent end to the
conflict, pursuing a process that will undermine the
hard won gains of the past 12 years — our Constitution,
the rights of all citizens, particularly women, and our
democratic order — will by no means be acceptable
to the Afghan people. Afghanistan does not recognize
such a thing as the Emirate of the Taliban. The raising
of the Taliban flag on Tuesday in Doha was just a
reminder of a dark and bloody past from which our
country still struggles to emerge. The Islamic Republic
of Afghanistan is the sole sovereign and legitimate

13-36881

S/PV.6983

authority chosen by the Afghan people and recognized
and supported by the international community.
Further, Afghanistan’s ownership of the peace
and reconciliation process is indispensible, and will
not be compromised. Any successful outcome to the
reconciliation process requires preserving the Afghanled and Afghan-managed character of the negotiations.
This is an issue that has been recognized and endorsed
both in Afghanistan and by the international community
as a whole, including the Security Council.
I take this opportunity to wish to also make
clear to the international community, all Member
States and international and regional organizations
that the Taliban office was established for one clear
objective — peace talks that strictly observe agreed
principles, as mentioned. Any other activity or function
undertaken by or with the Taliban office outside the
Afghan-led peace talks purposes is unacceptable.
The continuing campaign of fear and terror, violence
and brutality endangers the prospects of the peace
process. There has been an escalation in acts of violence
in recent weeks, affecting all citizens — men, women
and children — as well as international personnel.
We condemn all heinous acts of terror, including the
recent attacks on the International Organization for
Migration, the International Committee of the Red
Cross, Kabul airport and the Supreme Court. Children
are increasingly bearing the brunt of the conflict. Last
month in Kandahar, terrorists beheaded two children
as they were scavenging for food to take home to their
families next to a local police checkpoint. Days earlier,
in Paktika province, children died in a suicide bombing
near their school.
We also note with regret the continued civilian
casualties caused by counter-terrorism operations. The
loss of one innocent life is one too many. We condemn
all incidents of civilian casualties and call for their
immediate end.
Despite all the challenges we face, Afghanistan
is confidently advancing forward towards another
milestone, namely, next year’s presidential and provincial
council elections. President Karzai has embarked
upon a broad consultative process with the relevant
stakeholders, including civil society and political
parties, with the clear aim of having the polling take
place in a spirit of national unity and with consensus on
core electoral issues. Afghans see successful elections
as a new and important benchmark for progress that

will allow the country to embrace the needs of the post2014 transformation decade. Preparations for the polls
are well under way, with voter registration and security
preparations having already started. The electoral law
and draft Independent Election Commission law were
adopted by the lower house of Parliament and are now
under consideration by the upper house. We welcome
the readiness of the United Nations and other partners
to support Afghan-led elections. We are confident that
the elections will unify Afghans around a common
objective.
Afghanistan has always seen regional cooperation
as an important pillar of stability and prosperity in our
part of the world. A new regional order is emerging,
increasing the prospects for a more peaceful and stable
region. The Istanbul Process has become a catalyst for
results-oriented cooperation in our wider region. We
are encouraged by the strong commitment shown by
all regional and international partners for that historic
initiative. That was further exemplified by the third
ministerial meeting of the Heart of Asia countries, held
in Almaty in April. We also thank the Government of
China for its generosity in hosting the next ministerial
meeting of the Process next year.
Afghanistan is committed to expanding relations
with all of our neighbors. We applaud our brothers
and sisters in the Islamic Republic of Pakistan and the
Islamic Republic of Iran for their recent successful
elections.
The Government of Afghanistan looks forward to
working with the new Government and leadership of
Pakistan, and hopes that Pakistan will sincerely support
peace and stability in our country. Afghanistan desires
friendly relations with Pakistan that are characterized
by mutual respect and observance of each other’s
national sovereignty. That is crucial to stability in
Afghanistan and to prosperity and cooperation in the
region.
Without any doubt, terrorism constitutes to pose a
serious threat to the peace and stability of Afghanistan
and the region. The people of Afghanistan are still the
main victims of a heinous and continuous terrorist
campaign. The fact remains that, so long as terrorist
sanctuaries continue to exist on Pakistan’s soil and some
elements continue to use terrorism as an instrument of
foreign policy, peace will prevail neither in Afghanistan
nor in the region. We also are very concerned about
ongoing border shelling, which constitutes a serious

13-368815

S/PV.6983

threat to Afghan sovereignty and the prospect of
friendly relations between our two countries. We should
not forget that, as two brotherly countries, Afghanistan
and Pakistan have a shared stake in a successful fight
against terrorism and in the prospects for peace and
stability in Afghanistan and our region.
We in Afghanistan know that long-term peace
and prosperity is interlinked with development, good
governance and human rights. The Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework forms the basis for a
revitalized partnership between Afghanistan and
our international partners while addressing those
key issues. Aid coherence, in partnership with the
international community, is critical to our sustainable
development. The mutual commitments made in Tokyo
will be solidified during the transformation decade. In
that regard, we look forward to the meeting of senior
officials to be held in Kabul on 3 July.
By the same token, the empowerment
of women as proactive members of Afghan
society — as parliamentarians, peacebuilders and
Government officials — and as the most vibrant
members of civil society is among our proudest
achievements. While obstacles remain to fully realize
that goal, we are working to protect and promote the
human rights of all Afghans, and those of women in
particular. Afghanistan condemns in the strongest
terms all incidents of violence against women. The
fight against impunity is central to our human rights
efforts, as evidenced by the prosecution of an increasing
number of perpetrators in various parts of the country.
This moment marks an important chapter in
Afghanistan’s history. The security transition and the
upcoming elections will mark major achievements for
the future of our country. Those achievements will be
the result of the diligent efforts that we have made over
the past 12 years. We have come this far together on a
joint journey founded on a shared commitment to the
betterment of our country, for the benefit of current
and future generations. Our mission is unfinished, but
well on its way. Afghanistan has come a long way to
even consider falling short of fulfilling the goals we set
out in 2001. We have been, and we remain, steadfastly
committed to building a peaceful, stable, prosperous
and democratic Afghanistan.
The President: I shall now give the floor to the
members of the Security Council.

6

Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ján Kubiš
for his briefing and for his ongoing dedication and
leadership of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA). We also acknowledge the
presence of Mr. Zahir Tanin, Permanent Representative
of Afghanistan, and we thank him for the very important
role he plays in New York.
This is clearly a decisive time in Afghanistan’s
transition. Significant progress has been made in
security in the past few months. President Karzai’s
announcement, on 18 June, on milestone 2013 and the
fifth and final tranche of transition will see the Afghan
National Security Forces (ANSF) take national lead
responsibility for security across the country and mark
a turning point in the modern history of Afghanistan.
Their capability has improved significantly, as
demonstrated by their swift response to recent attacks
in Kabul. In Uruzgan province, where Australia has
focused its efforts, the ANSF is already in the lead and
will assume full responsibility for security by the end
of the year. The international community has signalled
its strong commitment to the Afghan National Security
Forces, which will be important for consolidating
security gains. Finalizing ANSF sustainment
mechanisms will be essential.
Economic and political transition will also be
critical. International support will help to reinforce
Afghan sovereignty.
A credible presidential election in 2014 will be
indispensible to political transition. Afghanistan must
take steps to intensify its preparations, in particular
passing an improved electoral law by the upper
house of Parliament. Resolving the impasse over the
Independent Election Commission’s structure law so
that a new chairperson can be appointed is vital. It is
axiomatic that the presidential elections be Afghanled and run, but we also urge the Afghan Government
to utilize international support, including that of the
United Nations. The Enhancing Legal and Electoral
Capacity for Tomorrow II project of the United Nations
Development Programme provides valuable technical
support, which is important for maximizing voter
participation and strengthening anti-fraud measures.
UNAMA also has an important role to play in supporting
Afghan institutions to prepare for the elections.
We urge the full implementation of the law on
the elimination of violence against women, which

13-36881

S/PV.6983

is a bellwether commitment under the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework. Advancing opportunities
for women and girls in Afghanistan is a must and will
be a decisive measure of the country’s success.
The scale of international donor pledges at the
2012 Tokyo Conferences illustrates the international
community’s commitment to helping Afghanistan to
achieve a secure, stable and prosperous future. But the
international community’s ability to sustain support
for Afghanistan depends upon the Afghan Government
delivering on its commitments under the Framework.
Only the Afghan Government itself can implement
the reforms that will deliver good governance and
ensure growth and stability. Concrete progress on
anti-corruption efforts, human rights and economic
reform is vital if the legitimate expectations of ordinary
Afghans and of the broader international community are
to be met. The forthcoming meeting in Kabul of a team
of senior officials will be an important opportunity to
review progress and address the shortfalls.
As the Secretary-General noted in his report
(S/2013/350) and as Mr. Kubiš has outlined, Afghanistan
continues to face significant humanitarian challenges.
The increase in civilian casualties, attributed to
anti-Government elements, is obviously of grave
concern. We must all condemn, in the strongest possible
terms, the recent attacks that have targeted civilians,
including humanitarian workers, the Afghan judiciary
and the offices of the International Organization for
Migration.
The situation of children in particular is of greatest
concern. The indiscriminate use by insurgents of
suicide bombers and improvised explosive devices
is deplorable. All parties must respect international
humanitarian law, and the Taliban must do so. The
issue of counter-narcotic efforts is a critical challenge.
It is a matter of concern that the Secretary-General has
reported a probable increase in poppy cultivation for a
third consecutive year.
Australia has been a long-term supporter of an
Afghan-led process of reconciliation and encourages the
commencement of such a dialogue. We recognize that
that will not be an easy or straightforward process and
that there is no guarantee of success. But work towards
peace and reconciliation must continue. We support
efforts to build the conditions for reconciliation and,
as Chair of the Security Council Committee esbalished
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), we will work to

ensure that the Taliban sanctions regime supports an
Afghan-led process. It is essential that momentum is
sustained to build the foundations for an Afghan-owned
peace and reconciliation process taht leads to a durable
political settlement. It is also important that we provide
effective support for the role of the United Nations and
United Nations-affiliated agencies in Afghanistan as
transition moves forward and beyond 2014. We must
get the UNAMA future mandate right, and ongoing
adequate funding will be required.
In conclusion, as Ambassador Tanin has just
said, Afghanistan’s mission is unfinished but is well
on its way. The United Nations and the international
community remain committed to working to help
Afghanistan complete that journey and consolidate its
long-term security and stability well beyond 2014.
Mr. Kim Sook (Republic of Korea): I thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, Mr. Jan Kubiš, for his comprehensive
briefing. I also welcome Ambassador Tanin’s
contribution to today’s debate.
We welcome the recent development in the security
transition. The announcement by Afghan President
Karzai this week to launch the fifth and final phase of
the security transition is a significant milestone in the
history of Afghanistan. The Afghan National Security
Forces will now take full responsibility for leading and
conducting all operations throughout the country. As
the transition moves forward, continued international
support will be all the more vital to ensure that the
transition is irreversible and sustainable. However,
an increase of 25 per cent in civilian casualties
during the reporting period shows that grave security
challenges remain. We are deeply concerned about the
targeted killings of civilians, including international
humanitarian workers.
Moreover, the recent terrorist attacks by the Taliban
against judiciary institutions, including the Supreme
Court in Kabul, are worrisome. They constitute a direct
challenge to the establishment of the rule of law. The
perpetrators must be brought to justice. All parties
must take every feasible steps to ensure the protection
of civilians and comply with their obligations under
international law. Increased efforts to train the
Afghan National Security Forces and provide it with
all the necessary support will remain crucial tasks to
effectively protect civilians and ensure accountability.

13-368817

S/PV.6983

My delegation recognizes that the transition is
not only a security process but also requires the full
assumption of Afghan leadership and ownership
in governance. In that regard, the presidential and
provincial elections in 2014 will be an important
landmark for the political transition. It is critical that
the Afghan Government develop a credible electoral
framework and ensure a transparent and participatory
process, including the participation of women.

Today we are seeing the final steps in the
preparations for a united and sovereign Afghanistan
that will secure its rightful place in the community of
nations. We commend the Afghan people as they manage
three significant transitions — security, political and
economic. The United States will continue to support
Afghanistan through this critical period, as we jointly
agreed in our strategic partnership agreement and
committed to at the Tokyo and Chicago Conferences.

Gender equality and women’s empowerment should
continue to be a priority policy for the Government of
Afghanistan to pursue. To that end, the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan has a crucial role
to play in providing capacity-building and technical
assistance to Afghan institutions. An Afghan-owned
and Afghan-led national reconciliation process is
another important step in moving forward the political
transition. In that regard, we are encouraged by the
Afghan Government’s initiative on peace negotiations
with the Taliban and by the opening of a Taliban
office in Doha. It should serve to promote peace, not
complicate the process.

Afghan security and police forces continue to
grow stronger and more capable. Afghanistan reached
milestone 2013 earlier this week and is now in the lead
for security nationwide, with the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) moving into a supporting role.
We welcome the endorsement, in Brussels on 5 June,
by NATO and ISAF defence mininsters of the detailed
concept for a non-combat NATO mission to train,
advise, and assist the Afghan forces post-2013.

We hope that further progress will be made towards
achieving sustainable and lasting peace in Afghanistan.
Afghanistan and the international community now
stand at a critical juncture in achieving the agreed
goals for 2014. The timely and faithful implementation
of commitments is all the more crucial. The Korean
Government will continue to support the international
efforts for the capacity-building of Afghanistan.
Following the contribution of $150 million to the Afghan
National Army Trust Fund and the Law and Order
Trust Fund for Afghanistan over the past two years,
the Republic of Korea plans to contribute an additional
$100 million this year to support capacity-building in
the security and development sectors. We will strive
to work closely with the Afghan Government and the
international community towards a more prosperous,
stable and democratic future for Afghanistan.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, Mr. Kubiš, for his informative briefing
today. I ask that he continue to convey to the stafff of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and to the members of the United Nations
country team the deep gratitude of the United States
for the critical work they do in the face of considerable
challenges. We also wish to thank Ambassador Tanin
for his participation in this meeting.

8

As we look to Afghanistan’s political transition,
next year’s election will be a historic opportunity to
achieve a unifying moment when power is peacefully
transferred to a newly elected President. That will
reflect the success of the Afghan people in conducting
a credible, inclusive and transparent election. We
look forward to the establishment of a broadly agreed
elections legislative framework as soon as possible. The
implementation of legislation that establishes a credible
process to appoint the leaderhip of the Independent
Election Commission, guarantee the role of women and
puts in place a capable and impartial dispute-resolution
mechanism is the essential foundation for the credibility
of the election.
We support the Afghan-led peace process,
recognizing that reconciliation is the best way to
end violence and to secure a unified and sovereign
Afghanistan. With President Karzai, we continue to call
upon the Taliban to join an Afghan political process.
As President Obama has said, the opening of a Taliban
office in Qatar is an important first step. While there
may be bumps in the road, the fact that the parties have
an opportunity to talk and discuss Afghanistan’s future
is very important.
With regard to the events related to the opening of
the office this week, last January President Karzai and
President Obama jointly called on the Government of
Qatar to facilitate an office in Doha for the purposes of
negotiations between the Afghan High Peace Council
and the authorized representatives of the Taliban. The

13-36881

S/PV.6983

United States supports the opening of the political
office of the Afghan Taliban for that purpose. As we
made clear yesterday, we do not recognize the name
“Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan” and are pleased that
Qatar has clarified that the name of the office is the
“Political Office of the Afghan Taliban” and has had
the sign with the incorrect name in front of the door
taken down. We have underscored that the office must
not be treated or represent itself as an embassy or other
office representing the Afghan Taliban as an emirate,
Government or sovereign.
The United States believes strongly that no
nation can achieve sustainable peace, reconciliation,
stability and economic growth if half the population is
marginalized. The United States will continue to stand
strongly with Afghanistan’s women to protect advance
their hard-won gains. Furthermore, Afghanistan’s
economic transition will ensure that the security and
political transitions both succeed.

building of the Afghan National Security Forces is on
track and they will assume overall responsibility for
national security.
While working actively to develop the economy and
improve lives, Afghanistan is also actively working to
develop close international relations and cooperation.
China welcome the positive progress achieved in
the peace and reconstruction process. At present,
Afghanistan faces complex challenges and finds itself
in a critical transition stage. That requires that the
Afghan Government and the international community
adopt an integrated strategy. In that connection, China
supports an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace and
reconstruction process as part of a continued effort to
promote peace and reconstruction and achieve lasting
peace, stability and development at an early date. I wish
to emphasize the following four points.

Critical reforms are still necessary to achieve
economic prosperity and to integrate Afghanistan into
the regional economy. We welcome President Karzai’s
continued commitment to effect those reforms and
will work with all stakeholders to achieve that goal.
We also welcome Afghanistan’s continued engagement
with its neighbours. The third ministerial conference
on the Istanbul Process, held on 26 April in Almaty,
was encouraging and we commend China for its offer
to host the 2014 conference.

First, a successful election in 2014 is essential to
strengthening Afghanistan’s peace and reconstruction.
China welcomes the positive progress achieved in the
preparations for the election and hopes that all Afghan
parties will put the interests of the nation above all else
by properly settling their differences with regard to
electoral law, so as to guarantee the smooth conduct
the election. We appreciate the assistance provided
by the parties concerned for the election and hope
that the international community’s support will play a
positive role to ensure a smooth transition process in
Afghanistan.

The United Nations must play a central role as
Afghanistan goes through those three important
transitions. Most critical is UNAMA’s leadership
in continuing to provide support to ensure that
the 2014 Afghan presidential election proceeds as
planned. UNAMA’s support for regional diplomacy
and the political process, in coordination between
the Government of Afghanistan and donors, in
implementing the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework will also be a key part of the preparations
as Afghanistan looks towards 2014.

Secondly, a stable security situation is key for a
smooth transition in Afghanistan. The recent frequent
terrorist attacks have increased civilian casualties.
China expresses its concern in that regard. All parties
should comply with international humanitarian law
and other relevant international law and carry out their
responsibilities for the protection of civilians. When
handing over responsibility for security, the parties
concerned should adopt a responsible, prudent and
progressive approach and give priority to the capacitybuilding of the Afghan security sector.

Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Ján
Kubiš for his briefing. My thanks also go to Ambassador
Zair Tanin of Afghanistan for his statement.

Thirdly, national reconstruction must be led by
the Government and people of Afghanistan. China
has always supported national reconciliation led and
owned by all Afghans, and we welcome the positive
progress achieved in that regard. At the same time,
the international community should respect the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Afghanistan, on the basis of respect for the will of the

Thanks to the joint efforts of the Government
and people of Afghanistan and the support of the
international community, preparations for the 2014
election in Afghanistan are moving ahead steadily. The

13-368819

S/PV.6983

Government and people of Afghanistan, continue to
provide the necessary assistance for reconciliation and
work together to achieve an Afghanistan governed by
Afghans at an early date.
Fourthly, in order to achieve lasting stability and
development, the international community must provide
sustained attention and support. The relevant parties
in the international community should honour their
commitments to providing assistance to Afghanistan,
support the country in an effort to implement a national
development strategy and improve Afghans’ own
capacity for development.
China supports Afghanistan in an effort to develop
good neighbourliness with countries of the region and
to work together to respond to regional threats and
challenges. China supports the efforts of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
to improve communication and coordination with the
Government of Afghanistan and hopes that UNAMA
will continue to play a central coordinating role in
helping Afghanistan.
China has always been a good neighbour to
Afghanistan and committed itself to developing good
neighbourliness. China places great importance on, and
takes an active part in, peaceful reconstruction. China
is ready to join the rest of the international community
in its continued effort to provide all assistance within its
capacity and to play a positive role in achieving lasting
peace, stability and development in Afghanistan.
Mr. Sharifov (Azerbaijan): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ján Kubiš for
his briefing on the latest situation in Afghanistan, as
well as Ambassador Zahir Tanin for his comprehensive
statement.
We highly appreciate the efforts of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
in promoting peace and stability in the country and
assisting the Afghan Government in the realization of
its priorities, especially in light of the challenges of the
transition process. We underline the necessity adequate
funding of the Mission in order to enable it to effectively
carry out the tasks mandated by resolution 2096 (2013).
Since the Council last considered the issue in
March (see S/PV.6935), Afghanistan has continued to
progress towards the achievement of the objectives of
the transition period, which is to be completed by the
end of 2014. We positively assess the Government’s

10

increasing assertion of ownership over peace and
reconciliation in the country, as well as the ongoing
efforts by the High Peace Council and its work with
political parties and civil society. UNAMA’s support
for the Council’s activities, the implementation of the
Afghanistan Peace and Reintegration Programme and
the regional dialogue is critical in advancing a broad and
inclusive Afghan-led and Afghan-owned reconciliation
process as a basis for overall stabilization and durable
peace in the country.
In general, the implementation of the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework requires the Government
and the international community to undertake a
vigorous and sustained engagement in order to deliver
on their respective commitments. We note with
concern that, compared with last year, security-related
incidents, such as unabated armed clashes, insurgent
attacks and the use of improvised explosive devices,
have increased, including in areas under the control of
the Afghan security forces.
In this period, two reprehensible attacks by
anti-Government elements also took place against
United Nations-affiliated organizations and other
humanitarian actors. It is incumbent on all parties
in Afghanistan to take maximum measures to avoid
civilian casualties. Insurgents must renounce their
tactic of targeting civilians, which contravenes
religious and humanitarian tenets and seriously
undermines the ongoing reconciliation efforts. We hope
that the incipient contacts between the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and the Taliban will
help reverse the current situation.
The country’s stability requires full-fledged
cooperation between Afghanistan, its neighbours
and other counterparts on a wide spectrum of issues,
including peace and reconciliation, regional security
challenges, development and humanitarian assistance.
We welcome Afghanistan’s increased interaction
with its various partners within the bilateral and
multilateral frameworks. As we have noted previously,
the Istanbul Heart of Asia process is a unique regional
platform for dialogue and partnership aimed at promoting
security, confidence and cooperation. The adoption of
the implementation plans of all confidence-building
measures at the Almaty ministerial conference on
26 April marked the conclusion of the first phase
and a shift towards more practical steps within each
confidence-building measures. It is essential that these

13-36881

S/PV.6983

plans be implemented in a timely, effective and resultoriented manner, including through the development
of concrete projects, by securing necessary funding
and through the continued engagement of supporting
countries and organizations.
Azerbaijan strongly supports the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and the unity of Afghanistan. We
stand by the Government of Afghanistan and the proud
Afghan people in their legitimate aspiration to become
a self-sustaining country. In our bilateral relations,
we will continue to attach high priority to assisting
Afghanistan through the implementation of existing
programmes and the elaboration of new capacitybuilding and training programmes. My country will
continue to be a part of the international efforts in
Afghanistan. In the post-2014 period, we will remain
actively engaged within the Istanbul Heart of Asia
process, and stand ready to contribute in the framework
of other regional initiatives.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ján Kubiš, for his briefing today, as well as for his
activities undertaken as the Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. I also thank the
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, Ambassador
Tanin, for his statement.
Luxembourg fully endorses the statement to be
made by the observer of the European Union.
The international community’s attention is turned
towards late 2014, when Afghanistan will assume full
responsibility for its territory and its sovereignty. The
process leading to the full transfer or handover to the
Afghan forces for security is strewn of obstacles, but
a decisive stride forward was taken this week with the
Government’s taking control of security in all districts
of Afghanistan.
Beyond security matters, today’s discussion is an
opportunity to take a look at the political dimensions
of the transition process. I should like to focus my
statements on three major challenges to be tackled to
ensure a successful political transition.
The first challenge is the presidential and
provincial elections of 5 April 2014, when it will be
vital for the successful political transition that the
legitimacy of the election results not be questioned.
This means ensuring credible and transparent elections
that are open to everyone. That is why we call on

the Afghan Government to implement an adequate
electoral framework as quickly as possible, including
the adoption of an electoral law, the appointment of
the head of the Independent Election Commission, the
establishment of an impartial body for the management
of complaints, and guaranteeing the independence
of the Commission. It also means guaranteeing the
participation of women in the elections in line with
the commitments undertaken a year ago in the agreed
Tokyo Framework.
Another decisive step forward is national
reconciliation. If it is to succeed, the peace process
must be borne on the shoulders of Afghans themselves
because only inter-Afghan reconciliation will pave
the way for a sustainable end to violence. We note
the announcement made on 18 June in Doha on the
opening of a Taliban office, and we hope that this will
be a platform for peace negotiations and a democratic
Afghanistan. Aware that inter-Afghan reconciliation
also depends on the support of neighbours, we recall
the important role of regional players in ensuring a
peaceful and stable Afghanistan.
The third challenge is in the area of human rights.
The stability of Afghan society will also hinge on the
extent to which the fundamental rights of civilians
are upheld. Important measures have been taken in
that regard, but much remains to be done. Greater
commitment was undertaken in Tokyo last year and
recalled in resolution 2096 (2013) on the the full
implementation of the Law on the Elimination of
Violence against Women. The Afghan Government is
responsible for upholding this commitment.
We also share the strong concern of the SecretaryGeneral regarding the 25-per cent rise in civilian
casualties during the reporting period. We most firmly
condemn indiscriminate attacks perpetrated against
civilians.
As 2014 approaches, many tasks remain to be
completed, but Afghanistan has one major advantage
in meeting its challenges — the youthfulness of its
population, of whom 65 per cent is under 25 years.
This human capital must be nurtured and protected. In
particular with respect to children, we believe that the
ongoing support of the United Nations and the Afghan
Government is necessary to reviving the dynamic
created on 30 January 2011 with the signing of the
action plan against the recruitment and use of children
in the Afghan security forces.

13-3688111

S/PV.6983

In that context, it is most important that UNAMA
keep its Office for the Protection of Children open
in order to effectively help the Afghan authorities in
implementing the action plan and generally speaking
in the efforts to protect children, as well as to allocate
the necessary capacities and expertise in line with the
provisions of resolution 2096 (2013).
In conclusion, I would like to express my delegation’s
strong support for United Nations efforts to help the
Afghan Government in combating the increasing
poppy cultivation. The efforts required of the Afghan
Government need the international community’s firm
backing. The United Nations and the Security Council
in particular must remain committed in that regard.
Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French):
I thank Mr. Ján Kubiš, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for his briefing and presentation of
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/350) on the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan’s
activities in Afghanistan. I also thank the Ambassador
of Afghanistan for his statement.
The Secretary-General’s report notes the most
recent developments in Afghanistan over the past three
months. In the reporting period, significant political
developments have taken place in light of the provincial
and presidential elections, the end of the International
Security Assistance Force’s presence in 2014, and the
beginning of a new phase of transformation for the
country. In that regard, the technical and political
preparations for the elections continue, in particular
the adoption of the elctoral budget, negotiations among
the various political parties, and the launch by the
Independent Election Commission of electoral maps
while awaiting the forthcoming appointment of the
head of the Commission.
In order to attenuate tensions in many Afghan
provinces, it is important for UNAMA to organize
workshops on mediation and conflict settlement so as
to raise awareness among local peoples and religious
leaders regarding the importance of using peaceful
means for the settlement of conflict. The Afghan
Government also made efforts during this period to
implement national priority programmes and a number
of actions pursuant to commitments undertaken in
Tokyo.
On the security front, a number of difficulties
remain. The number of incidents affecting civilians
rose compared to the previous period, as did the

12

sophistication of explosives and methods used in that
context. It must also be noted that between 1 February
and 30 April, UNAMA recorded more than 533 civilian
deaths and more than 800 injured civilians, which also
represents an increase from the same period in the
previous year. At the same time, the Afghanistan Peace
and Reintegration Programme continued its expansion,
which is positive. We welcome the decision taken to
extend from three to six months the assistance provided
under the Programme to ex-combatants.
Afghanistan is part of a region facing significant
difficulties but where there is also great potential for
regional cooperation. The leaders of Afghanistan
are participating in several such regional initiatives,
including the ministerial meeting on dialogue and
cooperation in Asia. Afghanistan was also on the
agenda at the trilateral meeting between the Russian
Federation, China and Pakistan, and at the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization meeting. Those meetings
can help the parties not only to strengthen the links
between Afghanistan and neighbouring countries, but
also to work together to tackle a number of challenges,
including drug trafficking and terrorism, and strengthen
cooperation in the areas of energy, investment and
infrastructure.
Afghanistan is at a historic turning point, marked
by the presidential and provincial elections of 2014 and
the planned withdrawal of international troops before
the end of 2014. It is important to continue providing
the country with financial assistance to help it meet the
challenges it faces. The international community must
remain committed to that process through UNAMA,
whose crucially important role and activities must be
supported.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We pay tribute to the
United Nations Mission of Assistance in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) for its important work under the dynamic
leadership of Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Ján Kubiš. It needs the Council’s continued
support and greater resources.
We have heard the perspective of the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, Ambassador Zahir
Tanin. The people of Pakistan consider the people
of Afghanistan their brothers and sisters. Prime
Minister Mian Nawaz Sharif has declared Pakistan’s
commitment to strengthening ties with Afghanistan
covering the entire spectrum of political, economic,
defence, educational and cultural relations. Pakistan’s

13-36881

S/PV.6983

newly elected leadership has reiterated its resolve to
fully support Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace and
national reconciliation processes. Peace and stability in
Afghanistan are a key constituent of Pakistan’s foreign
policy, which is supported by all State institutions. The
success of that policy requires reciprocity, trust and
good will.
We thank the United States Government for
acknowledging publically Pakistan’s genuine and
constructive support for the Afghan peace process.
Over the past 10 years, the people of Afghanistan,
Pakistan, the United States and other countries have
paid a high price in blood and resources. All of those
efforts and sacrifices should not have been in vain.
The people of Afghanistan must succeed and we must
succeed with them.
I thank Ambassador Zahir Tanin for his statement
that the Government of Afghanistan looks forward to
working with the new Government in Pakistan. We
will respond in full measure. We respect Afghanistan’s
sovereignty and support its Government’s efforts to
uphold it. I reject most emphatically — root, trunk and
branch — Ambassador Tanin’s argument that terrorist
sanctuaries exist in Pakistan and that some elements
continue to use terrorism as an instrument of foreign
policy. That is not true, and he knows it. This is not
good diplomacy. By using such arguments, he casts
aspersions on our sincerity. In Pakistan, we operate not
as elements but as a whole, as a State. All institutions
of the State are in consensus that terrorism is a threat
to both Pakistan and Afghanistan, and therefore both
countries should work together to eliminate this
scourge.
I have not rebutted Ambassador Tanin’s argument
as a tit-for-tat response or to settle scores; I have said
what I have to highlight that terrorists operate on
both sides of the porous border. Many attacks against
Pakistan are planned on Afghanistan’s soil. That is why
we need more aggressive policing and surveillance of
the border. This would also help to stop the shelling.
We must not allow terrorists to manipulate and divide
the people of Afghanistan and Pakistan. This kind of
contentious polemic is disingenuous as Pakistan and
Afghanistan continue to communicate through multiple
political and military channels to address all bilateral
issues.
Pakistan’s own stability and prosperity depend on
peace and security in Afghanistan. This sense of shared

destiny drives our ties with Afghanistan. Stability in
Afghanistan will also usher in a new era of cooperation
and connectivity in the region. We must build political
trust. The joint commission chaired by Pakistan’s
Prime Minister and the President of Afghanistan is the
best forum for pursuing this objective. The tripartite
commission comprising Pakistan, Afghanistan and the
International Security Assistance Force met earlier
this month Rawalpindi to discuss border controls
and coordination along the international border. The
stability and sanctity of the Pakistan-Afghanistan
border is a shared responsibility. The robust deployment
of Pakistani troops on our side is meant to interdict
terrorist and criminals. For optimum results, this must
be matched from the other side. Bilateral channels,
including military and intelligence contacts, to resolve
issues relating to the border posts should be made more
effective and any misunderstandings addressed through
real-time communication and dialogue.
We assure the Secretary-General that Pakistan is
doing its utmost to build trust and prevent confrontation.
We agree with him that enflamed public sentiment is
not at all helpful.
Two days ago, three very significant developments
took place. Afghan security forces formally took over
security leadership, the Taliban opened an office in
Doha and announced their readiness to negotiate.
We congratulate the Government and people of
Afghanistan on the transfer of security responsibility to
the Afghan forces. Pakistan welcomed the opening of a
Taliban office in Doha and the announcement of talks
between the United States, the Taliban and the Afghan
Government. After several initiatives, this was surely a
flicker of hope for peace in Afghanistan. Subsequently,
problems arose. We hope that in the greater interests of
Afghanistan, misgivings can be removed and tensions
defused. This is a time for diplomacy and statesmanship.
A compromise must be explored to move forward.
We have urged an early end to the war. The
conflict in Afghanistan can be resolved only through a
negotiated settlement. Pakistan has released a number
of Taliban prisoners in good faith and after giving prior
intimation to the Afghan authorities. We hope that this
measure will facilitate the peace process.
We wish the people of Afghanistan success as they
negotiate wrenching but momentous political, security
and economic transitions. We should work to avert an
economic vacuum after the withdrawal of international

13-3688113

S/PV.6983

forces. Donors must fulfil their pledges in accordance
with the Mutual Accountability Framework.
Finally, Pakistan supports the role of the United
Nations in Afghanistan. The United Nations should
prepare itself to play an even more significant role
after 2014 in promoting institution-building, economic
self-sufficiency, peace and reconciliation, counternarcotics efforts and the rehabilitation of refugees. In
that context, the good offices and political outreach of
the United Nations are critical.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan for their
statements. I also align myself with the statement to be
made by the observer of the European Union.
I congratulate the Afghan authorities on assuming
the responsibility for security in the country on 18 June.
That was an important step forward and demonstrated
that Afghanistan is on the path to reassuming full
sovereignty. The Afghan National Security Forces are
now able independently to defend the entire Afghan
population against attacks by armed terrorist groups.
The international coalition will now play only a support
role in those efforts.
Only a genuine, inclusive inter-Afghan political
process will guarantee the emergence of a stable and
peaceful Afghanistan. France stands ready to support
that process, as it has in the past, including through
using levers such as the sanctions regime of the Security
Council. The dialogue must be led by Afghans, in
line with principles they themselves have defined and
endorsed by the international community in Bonn on
5 December 2011, and by the Security Council. These
principles include renouncing violence, breaking ties
with international terrorism, and upholding the Afghan
Constitution, particularly in terms of women’s rights.
In that context, my delegation has taken note of the
public announcement recently made concerning the
official opening of an office representing the Taliban,
in Doha. We hope that the office will contribute to
establishing inter-Afghan political dialogue, which
would promote progress in establishing peace in the
country.
Nevertheless, the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2013/350) notes the worrisome increase in civilian
victims, particularly children, which is obviously
unacceptable. Attacks on humanitarian workers,

14

including from the International Committee of the
Red Cross, have also increased. The report also recalls
that the Taliban has been responsible for the majority
of civilian casualties, which demonstrates that group’s
lack of concern for human life.
The friendship between France and Afghanistan is
deeply rooted in a shared past, as we celebrated last
year 90 years of diplomatic ties. Since our armed forces
withdrew from Afghanistan late last year, a new step
forward has been taken in our bilateral relations, based
on strengthened civilian and military cooperation
under the framework of our friendship and cooperation
treaty dealing with the allied forces and the civilians.
Our aid will reach nearly €300 million in 2012-2016,
representing a 50 per cent increase in our assistance
envelope, in order to assist the country in moving from
a war economy to one of peace.
The international community, having been offered
a series of guarantees, has committed to continuing
its support to Afghanistan during the transformation
decade. The presidential elections of 5 April 2014 and
the legislative elections of 2015 will demonstrate, in that
context, a decisive step forward in Afghan democracy
and long-term support for Afghanistan, in line with the
Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework.
We call on the Afghan authorities to convene
credible, inclusive and transparent elections and to
accelerate the adoption of an appropriate legislative
framework to define dynamic anti-corruption measures,
and to guarantee the independence of the Independent
Election Commission. Like the Secretary-General, we
call on the authorities to swiftly adopt structural and
electoral legislation and to appoint a consensus-based
individual to head the Commission.
Next year will see the end of the international
community’s military commitment, which took the
form of a combat mission created in response to the
attack on the United States of 11 September 2001. We
hope that the year will also be one of political transition
for Afghanistan and strengthened democracy.
Mr. Oyarzábal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
To start, I wish to thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Kubiš for his briefing, and
Ambassador Tanin for his important contribution.
Afghanistan is moving steadily forward in preparing
for the political and security transition to be completed
in 2014. Only two days ago, an historic landmark was

13-36881

S/PV.6983

reached when the Afghan forces assumed responsibility
for security throughout the land for the first time since
2001. We welcome that important step on the road to
full sovereignty. In parallel, over the next few weeks,
the country’s politicians will be taking important
decisions aimed at creating a legal framework to
guarantee the convening of credible elections that will
be accepted by the entire Afghan population. That will
mark the beginning of a new phase in the strengthening
of democracy in Afghanistan.
Together with such progress, my country believes
that a transition ensuring that Afghans will be fully
responsible for their future and their destiny must also
generate the conditions necessary to enable the country
to free itself of its dependence on donors and to work
towards independent economic development, within
a framework of regional cooperation and integration.
Along those lines, the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2013/350) offers a comprehensive overview of the
circumstances of the transition, the goals achieved and
the challenges that remain.
Many aspects are covered in the report. While
acknowledging the importance of all, I would like on
this occasion to emphasize just a few.
First, on security, we acknowledge the progress
made in the professionalization and capacity-building
of the Afghan forces to enable them to deal with
security issues. At the same time, we must voice our
deep concern at the number of civilians who continue
to be killed in armed conflict. The figures show that
the situation remains far from resolved; instead, it has
worsened. An about-turn is required so that the Afghan
people can have full confidence in the protection
provided by its own security forces in the long term.
In our view, it is important to join the appeals to the
anti-Government forces that are responsible for the
highest number of victims to end their indiscriminate
attacks against civilians. They must scrupulously
respect the difference between combatants and civilians,
which is clearly established under international law. It
should not be manipulated to justify acts that constitute
war crimes.
Secondly, after more than a decade of conflict, it
is clear that Afghanistan’s long-term stability demands
a negotiated peace emerging from a political process
to end the violence. Any initiative must be led and
conducted by Afghans themselves. We therefore support
the endeavours and role of the High Peace Council of

Afghanistan in creating favourable conditions to enable
the process to take place. We trust that the principal
national and international actors will overcome their
differences, which have made progress difficult in
efforts to open effective channels of dialogue with the
Taliban.
Thirdly, we welcome the progress made in the past
decade in gender equality and women’s empowerment
in Afghanistan. However, both in the most recent
report of the Secretary-General on sexual violence in
conflict (S/2013/149) and in reviewing certain recent
developments related to the Law on the Elimination
of Violence against Women, we are reminded that
the goals that have been achieved have not been
secured. Maintaining and firmly establishing those
achievements is not only a human rights imperative;
it must also be a strategic priority of the transition to
ensure the full participation of women at all levels and
in all economic sectors. It is an essential element in
building solid economies and strengthening stable and
equitable societies.
Under its Government’s leadership and with
the driving force of its people and the support of the
international community, Afghanistan has travelled
a long road and is preparing to embark on a new
phase of independence and sovereignty. Through its
presence and ability to interact with every sector of
Afghan political and social life, UNAMA has played a
fundamental role in helping to reach this moment that
will be even more vital as the transition progresses. We
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and all his staff and urge them to
continue their important work.
Mr. Manzi (Rwanda): I thank you for organizing
this important debate on the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), Mr. President. I
would also like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Ján Kubiš, for his in-depth
briefing on the Secretary-General’s report (S/2013/350),
and the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan for
his statement.
Despite a number of changes that have occurred
in the transitional process in Afghanistan, Rwanda
recognizes the tremendous progress achieved so
far. While the transition there is beset by multiple
challenges, including insecurity, economic hurdles,
illicit drug cultivation and a difficult humanitarian
situation, it is important to reflect on the progress that

13-3688115

S/PV.6983

has been made towards a stable political and economic
transition. Rwanda welcomes the formal transfer of
responsibility from the United States-led NATO troops
to the Afghan authorities. The official launch of the
fifth and final stage of the security transition is a
demonstration of faith in the Afghan security forces.
That is indeed a milestone in the process of withdrawal
from the country; however, we urge NATO and other
partners in peace to continue to support the Afghan
forces through enhancing their capacity in terms of
training and equipment, in order to safeguard the gains
made in the past 12 years.
The upcoming presidential and provincial council
elections in 2014 will be a major opportunity for the
Afghan authorities to translate their commitments into
concrete achievements. If Afghanistan is to pursue
stability and infuse the prospects of the post-2014
scenario with new optimism, there must be a credible,
transparent and inclusive electoral process. We
encourage the Afghan Government, with the support
of its partners, including UNAMA, to lay a solid
foundation for free and fair elections, and to spare no
effort to achieve the broadest possible consensus on the
rules of the game. We believe that engaging opposition
groups, civil society and all relevant stakeholders in
general will prove fruitful. The only way to foster
participation is to make the process more inclusive
and ensure that its outcome is legitimate. Successful
and credible elections in Afghanistan are essential to
stability and lasting peace.
My delegation is deeply concerned about the rate at
which civilian deaths have been increasing, by 25 per
cent compared to the same period last year. We strongly
condemn all acts of terror and those that target innocent
civilians. We therefore urge the Afghan Government to
put in place both political and military measures aimed
at protecting civilians.
Combating the narcotics trade is a cross-cutting
issue that should be tackled in a holistic way. Opium
production in Afghanistan has posed a threat to the
stability of the region and the overall security situation.
We welcome the Afghan Government’s commitment
to combating this scourge; but while it cannot succeed
alone, it is possible with regional cooperation and
international engagement. We therefore support the
comprehensive approach led by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime aimed not only at eradicating
poppy production but also at dealing with related areas,
such as development and law enforcement.

16

The international community has given its
assurance that it will stand by Afghanistan through the
transition process and beyond in the transition decade.
The 2012 Tokyo Conference donors made pledges
of around $16 billion, and we call on them to raise
their commitments. We urge the Afghan Government
to ensure good governance and to strengthen its
anti-corruption measures, as indicated in the Tokyo
Mutual Accountability Framework. We would like
to express our ongoing support for UNAMA in the
expectation that it will continue to play an essential role
in supporting the stabilization of Afghanistan, and to
that end, the Security Council should ensure that the
Mission’s mandate remains up to the tasks ahead.
I would like to conclude by voicing our strong
belief that the United Nations will continue to play
a crucial role in the transition process. The gradual
downsizing of the international military coalition
will test the Afghanistan’s governing capacity at the
national and subregional levels. At this critical time, we
believe strongly that UNAMA has a vital role to play in
leading and coordinating the efforts of the international
community.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome Mr. Ján Kubiš and thank him for his
briefing on the Secretary-General’s report, contained
in document S/2013/350. We also thank the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan for his statement. I wish
to make the following comments.
First, we take note of the recent developments
discussed in the report. The current situation in
Afghanistan is fraught with enormous challenges, and
its ability to overcome them will depend largely on the
success of the 2014 elections. We commend Afghans’
determination to hold the presidential elections in
accordance with their Constitution. We are also pleased
with the technical preparations for the elections and
the recent publication of a draft operational plan and
indicative budget.
However, considering that the elections are less
than a year away, we are concerned that no legislation
has been enacted creating an electoral framework,
particularly independent electoral institutions. The
international community will be evaluating the elections
not only based on who is elected but on how they are
elected, and on whether the Afghan people accept
the results as legitimate. We think that Afghanistan
should agree to international assistance and work with

13-36881

S/PV.6983

UNAMA in order to strengthen the integrity of the
electoral process.

Violence against Women, in line with the international
commitments entered into by Afghanistan.

Secondly, the reconciliation process is also at a
crucial point. The Security Council has repeatedly
recognized the fact that there is no exclusively military
solution that can assure Afghanistan’s stability; neither
have the military operations produced the decisive
results that were hoped for. In that regard, we believe
that Afghan-led reconciliation is the only way to end
the conflict and bring about lasting peace. We therefore
support the work of the High Peace Council. We hope
that all parties will take steps to eliminate the obstacles
to renewing the peace negotiations. The recent
establishment in Doha of an office for representatives
of the Taliban, on the terms explained by Ambassador
Tanin, should also facilitate that process.

Lastly, Afghanistan has a special place on the
United Nations agenda. Now more than ever, the
role of the Organization is of paramount importance
given Afghanistan’s chronic vulnerability and the
repercussions of the transition. We continue to support
a solid United Nations presence so as to ensure that
Afghanistan is prepared and able adequately to face up
to 2014 and its aftermath.

The Afghanistan Peace and Reintegration
Programme and the regional dialogue are also important
elements for promoting a unified vision of the peaceful
future of the country among all Afghans.
Thirdly, we welcome the announcement made two
days ago on the fifth tranche completing the transfer of
security tasks to Afghans. That is a historic milestone,
and we trust that with unwavering international support,
the capacities of the Afghan forces will continue to
increase. Transition means a return of sovereignty to the
Afghan people. We have therefore noted with interest
the recent approval by NATO defence ministers of the
concept of a post-2014 mission. We await with interest
the details of that concept, in particular as concerns the
renewal of the mandate of the International Security
Assistance Force for Afghanistan in October.
Fourthly, we are concerned at the fact that with
respect to the protection of civilians, the current context
of the transition has been marked by a higher level
of significant incidents. We deplore the new figures
showing that the number of civilian casualties has
increased by 25 per cent over this quarter. We appeal to
all parties to comply with international humanitarian
law. Moreover, measures must urgently be implemented
aimed at ensuring that internally displaced persons are
able to seek protection and access to humanitarian
assistance.
Fifthly, we must firmly defend human rights and
promote development. We strongly condemn all forms
of violence against women and girls. It is imperative to
safeguard the goals of the Law on the Elimination of

Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I should like
to start by thanking Mr. Ján Kubiš for having presented
the report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Afghanistan and the activities of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in the
country (S/2013/350). We thank also Ambassador Tanin
for his statement.
In this second review of the situation in
Afghanistan for the current year, we note in the report
of the Secretary-General that the country remains in
the grip of violence and instability, notwithstanding
the fact that some progress has been noted. The
security situation remains of concern, as reflected in
the increased number of attacks against national and
international institutions in recent weeks; the latest,
on 18 June, targeted a Shiite deputy during the course
of an official ceremony marking the last phase of the
transfer of responsibility for security in the country to
Afghan forces.
Such attacks have resulted in many casualties
among the civilian population, including many children
recruited primarily to carry out attacks. The attacks
represent serious violations of the rights of children,
which Togo has unremittingly condemned, as it did
on 17 June during our debate on the plight of children
caught up in armed conflict (see S/PV.6980).
We commend the special country team for its
support for the Afghan Government in the context of
the implementation of the action plan for the prevention
of underage recruitment. However, that plan cannot be
implemented by just one party. It must also involve the
Taliban and other groups affiliated with Al-Qaida.
We also appreciate the efforts being made to
strengthen the protection of women. Discussions in
Parliament must be speeded up so that the amendments
aimed at strengthening provisions on women’s rights
can be adopted. The role of UNESCO, which is working

13-3688117

S/PV.6983

tirelessly for the education of women and girls, must be
strengthened in that regard.

their praiseworthy efforts to ensure a better future for
Afghanistan.

The combat against drug trafficking remains a
major challenge for the Afghan authorities inasmuch
as there has been an increase in poppy cultivation for
the third consecutive year. Regrettably, the Ministry of
Counter-Narcotics and the United Nations have noted
that there is a close relationship between insecurity,
lack of support for agriculture and poppy cultivation.
Nonetheless, we congratulate the Afghan Government
on the initiatives it has taken to combat the scourge
of narcotics in several provinces, which have made
it possible to eradicate more than 5,000 hectares of
poppies.

Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like at the outset to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ján Kubiš for
presenting the report of the Secretary-General on the
activities of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) (S/2013/350).

It goes without saying that drug trafficking finances
terrorism and fuels conflict. We therefore encourage
the United Nations to continue its efforts to finalize,
within the set time frame, a road map for the promotion
of more effective action on money laundering.
Afghanistan has started a political transition that
will culminate in the general elections in 2014. As the
Secretary-General notes in his report, the success of
this political transition will depend on the legitimacy
of those who will be taking the reins of power. Here it
is important that all Afghan parties undertake to use
compromise solutions and to reach an understanding
on a consultative mechanism for the appointment of
the members of the electoral bodies, in particular the
Chair of the Independent Election Commission. We
appreciate the continued support of the United Nations
Development Programme, UNAMA, the media and
civil society in that respect.
On the question of national dialogue, we hope that
the opening on June 18 last of a Taliban office in Doha
will give impetus to the national dialogue and the peace
process with a view to bringing about the stabilization
of the country.
However, Afghanistan will experience real stability
only if the States of the region and the international
community as a whole are willing to make sacrifices to
help it in its quest for peace and the exercise of its full
sovereignty. The support of UNAMA is vital in that
respect, and it is therefore key to provide it with the
appropriate resources.
To conclude, I reiterate the gratitude of my country
to the United Nations, to UNAMA and all of its staff,
and to United Nations funds and programmes for

18

We listened with interest to the statement made
by the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
Mr. Tanin. Unfortunately, the current situation in the
Islamic Republic of Afghanistan is far from stable;
the trend is towards deterioration, especially with the
withdrawal of the international contingent.
There is an ongoing threat of terrorism, as reflected
in the numerous terrorist attacks that have resulted
in civilian casualties and the regrettable statistics
contained in the Secretary-General’s report. The number
of civilian casualties increased by one fourth over the
previous reporting period; children represented one
fifth of those, with the indicator for casualties among
children 27 per cent higher than last year.
In addition, there were attacks by the Taliban on
State institutions and representatives of the coalition
force, including through the use of suicide bombers,
from January through June last year. Yesterday, we
witnessed attacks by the Taliban against the Bagram
air base, just 45 kilometres from the country’s capital.
This was a clear sign that, after the 2012 withdrawal of
the foreign contingent from Badakhshan, the Afghan
security forces were unable to maintain control of
the province. As a result, a unit of the international
contingent returned there in April.
We are concerned about the ongoing rise in
terrorist activity this year, spreading from northern
Afghanistan to the countries of Central Asia, which
are our partners in the Commonwealth of Independent
States and the Collective Security Treaty Organization
(CSTO). In the first quarter of this year, the number of
attacks on the Afghan National Security Forces (ANSF)
and governmental bodies in the north of the Islamic
Republic of Afghanistan rose by 25 per cent over the
same period last year. In May, there was a 40-per cent
rise in the number of attacks by armed fighters in the
northern provinces over the same month last year.
These terrorist activities seek, inter alia, at hindering
the transfer of equipment for the international forces via
the north. Groups affiliated with the Islamic movement

13-36881

S/PV.6983

in Uzbekistan, the Union of Islamic Jihad, Gulbuddin
Hekmatyar’s Islamic Party of Afghanistan and the
Taliban in those regions can have a negative impact
on neighbouring Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan, which are
also our neighbours.
The situation in the eastern border regions with
Pakistan has sharply deteriorated. The ratio of ANSF
soldiers to detachment extremist fighters is 10 to 15 in
the province of Nuristan. That translates into only 196
soldiers against more than 200 detachments of Taliban.
According to the Governor of that border province, one
local district has been under Taliban control for two
years and is the base for the efforts and fighters in the
north-east of the country, posing the genuine risk that
control will be assumed by the Taliban and spread into
other provinces.
We are seeing the mobilization of armed groups
wherever the International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF) has transferred responsibilities to the Afghan
forces. We remain convinced that there can be no
justification for an accelerated transfer of security
responsibilities of ISAF in favour of the Afghan army
and police without due consideration of the reality of
the situation and the military capacity of the ANSF,
without which ISAF’s withdrawal will surely aggravate
the general situation in the country. The drawdown must
be mitigated by an increase in the military capacities
of the ANSF, but we have yet to see progress in that
sphere.
Like many other States of the region, we cannot
accept a long-standing foreign military presence in
Afghanistan, which we would like to see peaceful,
stable, independent and neutral. Such a foreign presence
could be used to project forceful influence in the region
as a whole and in third countries. Furthermore, it is
changing from a deterrent to terrorism into a factor for
regional instability. Following the transfer, the ISAF
presence in Afghanistan will no longer be relevant. Its
bases must be handed over to the ANSF, under Afghan
command. Full clarity is necessary with respect to the
parametres and tasks of future NATO operations in the
country, which can be mandated only by the Security
Council, and only once ISAF has reported to the
Council on the completion of its mandate.
One important factor for improving the situation
in the country is national reconciliation. In the light
of the establishment of the Taliban contact office in
Doha, we note that dialogue with the armed opposition

will have a positive impact only if it is led by Kabul.
Russia has always supported the efforts of the Afghan
Government to work for national reconciliation and
create conditions conducive to long-term stability,
including through dialogue between the High Peace
Council and representatives of the armed opposition.
To that end, the strict compliance of armed fighters
with the basic principles of reconciliation — laying
down their arms, recognizing the Constitution of the
Islamic Republic of Afghanistan, and cutting all ties
with Al-Qaida and other terrorist organizations — is
essential.
We support the Afghan Government’s approach to
the principle of the establishment and functioning of the
Taliban office in Doha, and call for strict compliance
with the Security Council’s sanctions regime, in
particular the prohibition of international visits for
those who figure on the sanctions list. We believe
it necessary to support the sanctions regime as the
most important tool of counter-terrorism with respect
to individuals, groups, entities and organizations
associated with the Taliban that pose a threat to peace,
stability and security in Afghanistan. We will continue
to work to ensure the effectiveness of the sanctions
regime and the strict compliance of States with their
relevant international obligations in that respect.
We remain seriously concerned over the illegal
manufacture, trade and transfer of drugs from
Afghanistan, which pose a threat to peace and stability.
Not only does the Afghan drug threat affect countries of
the region, but tens of thousands of people die every year
from Afghan heroin or opium in Europe and the United
States. Moreover, the illegal manufacture of and trade
in these drugs lead to other crimes, including terrorism,
corruption and money-laundering. In this context, we
attach priority importance to the implementation of the
decisions of the third ministerial conference of the Paris
Pact on preventing the spread of Afghan narcotics. An
important measure in that regard would be the agreed
inclusion of drug traffickers on the Security Council’s
sanctions lists. In the interests of effectively removing
the drug threat from Afghanistan, we would favour the
establishment of dialogue on this matter in the format
of the CSTO and NATO.
It is our view that the Istanbul process on
Afghanistan is a good platform for dialogue. At the
same time, we have the impression that the process
is evolving slower than previously planned and that
a number of participants have become entrenched

13-3688119

S/PV.6983

in their positions. We should therefore like to see
increasingly dynamic progress in established formats,
such as the Shanghai Cooperation Organization. We
intend to promote the active participation of observer
countries, including Afghanistan, in its practical work,
particularly in discussions on countering such regional
threats as drugs, terrorism and extremism.
In conclusion, I wish the people of Afghanistan
every success and express our full support for the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan in
its efforts to fulfil its mandate at this most difficult
time.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of the United Kingdom.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2013/350), Special Representative Ján
Kubiš for his informative briefing this morning, and
Ambassador Zahir Tanin for his substantive comments.
Let me begin my remarks by condemning the recent
attacks in Kabul and elsewhere in the country. We have
seen multiple deaths and injuries of civilians, including
women and children. These attacks are reprehensible
and unjustifiable.
I will focus my statement today on four key areas:
security transition, the peace and reconciliation process,
the 2014 elections and the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework.
First, the United Kingdom welcomes the
announcement of the fifth and final traunch of security
transition, which saw the Afghan National Security
Forces take lead responsibility for security across the
whole country. The Afghan National Security Forces
continue to grow in confidence and capability. We
remain convinced that they will be ready, willing and
able to effectively manage Afghanistan’s security after
2014 and to tackle any residual insurgent threat.
Secondly, an Afghan-owned and Afghan-led
peace and reconciliation process is critical for lasting
stability. In this context, the United Kingdom welcomes
the opening of a Taliban political office in Doha.
The understandable and legitimate concerns of the
Afghan Government about this development musty
be addressed. I welcome the remarks made by the
representative of the United States in this regard.
Peace processes are long, complex and difficult.
The Afghan peace process will be no exception. But it is

20

right to engage the Taliban in a peace process, not least
to confront them with the need to give up the armed
struggle and take up a political role. The international
community must do all it can to support this Afghanled process.
Afghanistan’s closest neighbours continue to have
an invaluable role to play in Afghanistan’s security,
stability and prosperity. The United Kingdom supports
the Istanbul Process and other initiatives that encourage
trade, economic prosperity and security. Central to
the regional effort is Afghanistan’s relationship with
Pakistan. In the past 12 months, both sides have done
much to advance the relationship and the dialogue about
Afghanistan’s peace process. With the new Pakistani
Government in place, we encourage both sides to
renew their focus on the benefits of a more trusting and
mutually supportive relationship.
Thirdly, with respect to the 2014 elections, the
importance of the presidential and province elections in
April 2014 cannot be overstated. We have seen positive
progress in recent months, but there is still much to
do. We strongly urge the Afghan National Assembly
to give priority to the passage of vital electoral
reforms. The United Nations has an important role to
play in preparations for elections. As we move closer
towards our shared objective of credible, inclusive and
transparent elections, UNAMA must continue to use its
ongoing dialogue with the Government of Afghanistan
to articulate the hopes and concerns of the international
community.
Turning now to the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework, it is the fundamental agreement outlining
both the steps that the Government of Afghanistan needs
to take to improve economic and political governance
for continued progress and the commitments that the
international community needs to fulfil in terms of longterm support. We reiterate our call to the Government
of Afghanistan to make significant progress with
respect to the Accountability Framework by the 3 July
senior officials’ meeting. We hope to have a productive
discussion on the steps needed to get reforms adopted.
That, in turn, will enable the international community to
continue to work towards meeting its aid effectiveness
commitments.
One issue covered by the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework is the rights of women. There
have been some positive steps in the last 12 months,
but there is still more to be done. In particular, the

13-36881

S/PV.6983

Government of Afghanistan must continue to work to
reduce the barriers that women face, including through
tackling violence against women and supporting
women’s political participation.
In conclusion, we must not underestimate the
challenges ahead. But through continued partnership
between the Government of Afghanistan, the United
Nations and the rest of the international community,
we can meet our shared objective of a stable, inclusive
and prosperous Afghanistan. The United Kingdom
will continue to play a committed role in that shared
endeavour.
I now resume my functions as the President of
the Council. I would like to remind speakers that they
should keep their comments to four minutes or less. I
shall bring down the gavel if speakers go significantly
beyond that time limit. Longer statements can, as usual,
be circulated in writing.
I now give the floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): Let me begin
with thanking the President for scheduling today’s
debate. I would also like to thank Ambassador Zahir
Tanin, the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2013/350), and
Mr. Ján Kubiš for his briefing. At the outset, I wish to
express appreciation to Mr. Kubiš for the good work of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), lest I get gavelled out by the time I get to
that part of my remarks. In the light of the President’s
instructions, we will circulate our statement but I will
still read a few extracts from it.
The security situation in Afghanistan remains
fragile, as demonstrated by a number of high-profile
terrorist attacks over the last two months. We condemn
those attacks in the strongest possible terms and convey
our condolences to the Government and the people
of Afghanistan. The sharp increase in the variety,
spread and intensity of attacks by the Taliban and their
backers shows that the Afghan national security forces
continue to require substantial assistance from the
international community in addressing the security and
terrorist challenges faced by Afghanistan. Concerted
action is needed to isolate and root out the syndicate
of terrorism, which includes elements of the Taliban,
Al-Qaida, Lashkar-e-Taiba and other terrorist and
extremist groups. It is therefore important that the
transition plan be based on the ground situation rather
than a predetermined time frame.

The efforts of the international community in
Afghanistan should remain focused on security,
development, governance and regional and international
cooperation, all of which is in alignment with the overall
objectives of the Afghan Government. Those efforts
alone will enable the Afghan Government to eventually
assume full responsibility for and take charge of
Afghanistan’s destiny without outside interference.
We welcome the fact that the third ministerial
conference of the Istanbul Process, held in Almaty in
April 2013, renewed the international community’s
commitment to those objectives. India was represented
by our External Affairs Minister, Mr. Salman Khurshid,
who endorsed India’s support for the implementation
plans. India also fully supports the Heart of Asia
process, which offers an invaluable opportunity to
develop a joint approach on issues of mutual concern
through its pillar of political consultations. The process
also offers us the opportunity to fulfil the promise of
regional cooperation that was identified at Istanbul,
Kabul and Delhi and which was further elaborated
in the deliberations on the implementation plan of
the trade, commerce and investment opportunities
confidence-building measure that India is leading.
Afghanistan’s stability and economic development
greatly depend on its neighbours and the region as a
whole. We must expand, rather than hinder, trade,
transit and transport ties, including overland transit
and trade. That is the best way of bringing the regional
dimension into play in a positive manner. Growing
economic interdependence will also help in weaning
disaffected youth away from insurgency and militancy
and in creating a zone of shared prosperity in the
region. We support the wishes of the Government of
Afghanistan to take the lead in that direction.
The holding of presidential and provincial council
elections, currently scheduled for 5 April 2014, will
be an important step forward in strengthening the
democratic framework in Afghanistan. It is also
important that the ongoing transition remain Afghanled and Afghan-owned. It must also be multifaceted,
ensure the protection and promotion of the human
rights of all Afghans and lead to the strengthening of
the Afghan State and its institutions.
In conclusion, let me state that in the arduous
journey towards lasting peace, prosperity and stability
in Afghanistan, the Afghan Government needs the longterm commitment of the international community to

13-3688121

S/PV.6983

confront the challenges that lie ahead. As a historically
close and friendly neighbour, India will continue to
stand by Afghanistan through the ongoing transitions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Çevik (Turkey): I would like to begin my
statement by thanking the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report (S/2013/350) and Special
Representative Ján Kubiš for his briefing.
We welcome the positive signals coming from
Afghanistan. On Tuesday, Afghanistan’s military
assumed the top leadership role in security matters
for the entire country. We have confidence that the
Afghan security forces have the capacity to fulfil
that challenging responsibility. Further boosting their
capacities and competencies within a rule of law
framework remains a key priority.
Preparations for the 5 April 2014 presidential
and provincial council elections are ongoing. The
appointment of the Chair of the Independent Election
Commission and the adoption of relevant electoral
legislation will help to build a credible framework
for independent, fair and free elections. We support
efforts aimed at achieving a democratic and inclusive
electoral process which involves political parties and
civil society, and commend, in that regard, the efforts
of all relevant Afghan authorities, the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the
United Nations Development Programme.
The successful continuation of Afghan-led peace
and reconciliation efforts will constitute another
important step towards security, stability and political
transition. From the outset, Turkey has supported the
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process with the
High Peace Council at its core. We are fully aware of
the difficulties and challenges of the process. We hope
that different perceptions regarding the reconciliation
process will be reconciled, leading to a sincere,
inclusive and results-oriented dialogue.
One year after the Tokyo Conference, we are glad
to see increased efforts to move on to substantive
issues in the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework,
both by the Afghan Government and the international
community, to ensure the concrete implementation of
mutual commitments. We look forward to the meeting
of senior officials to be held on 3 July in Kabul,

22

where the progress in meeting the goals of the Tokyo
Framework will be reviewed.
Despite positive signs, major political, economic
and security challenges remain. The security situation
continues to be a matter of grave concern. Recent
deplorable terrorist attacks have led to unacceptable
human costs. Civilian casualties seem to have increased.
Natural disasters, such as floods and earthquakes,
epidemic diseases, chronic poverty and increasing
internal displacement pose grave humanitarian threats.
As data put forward in the report clearly indicates,
the most vulnerable segments of society, especially
children, women and girls, continue to be at risk. The
United Nations and its partners, as well as international
humanitarian bodies, seem to be under heightened
threat. I strongly condemn the recent attacks on
international humanitarian personnel.
As Afghanistan moves forward towards a political
and security transition, we must remain in touch with
those realities on the ground. The continued display of
will by the international community will strengthen
the hopes of the Afghan people for the future and
help ensure that a smooth transition is under way. As
Afghanistan’s regional and international partners, we
should spare no effort to contribute to the vision of a
secure, peaceful and self-sufficient Afghanistan. That
is in the mutual interest of all of us.
As the international presence is being reduced,
the importance of regional cooperation for achieving
stability, security and prosperity is being increasingly
recognized. The Istanbul Process continues to gain
momentum. The spirit of regional ownership, the
engagement and technical support of the United Nations
and its agencies, and the interest and support of the
international community have made that possible. We
are pleased to see the adoption of implementation plans
for the six priority confidence-building measures at the
third ministerial conference of the Istanbul Process,
held in Almaty in April. The ministerial declaration
emphasized the need for demonstrable progress in
agreed activities and called for interim, ad hoc funding
by participants. We would also like to welcome China’s
offer to host the following ministerial conference next
year.
We welcome the recent trilateral meetings held
on issues such as development, education, trade,
investment, transportation, anti-terrorism, counternarcotic efforts and reconciliation in Afghanistan.

13-36881

S/PV.6983

We also appreciate the constructive role played by
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization in support of
Afghanistan.

process highlights the progress made in the competence
and effectiveness of the Afghan National Security
Forces.

Further connectivity will facilitate economic
development, stability and self-sustainability and help
create a more favourable business environment in
Afghanistan. We attach particular importance to the
completion and maintenance of local railroad and land
routes, the development of regional economic projects
and the enhancement of civil aviation capabilities.

The EU welcomes the convening of the presidential
and provincial council elections due to take place on
5 April 2014. We strongly urge the Afghan authorities
to continue to prioritize preparations for the elections,
based on the principles of inclusiveness, transparency
and credibility. In particular, it is important to put in
place an electoral legal framework consistent with the
Constitution, with credible measures to prevent fraud
and overseen by independent bodies. Accordingly, the
Government of Afghanistan is urged to speed up the
legislative process and engage in earnest in bringing
that work to a successful conclusion. The EU is assisting
in the preparations of the elections through technical
advice to the Independent Election Commission and
as one of the major funders of the electoral assistance
programme led by the United Nations Development
Programme.

Turkey will always remain in solidarity with the
Afghan people and continue to contribute to a safe,
secure and prosperous Afghanistan, as we have done
for many decades.
In conclusion, I would like to voice our strong
belief that the United Nations will continue to play its
crucial role during and after the transition. I would
particularly like to commend the valuable efforts of the
United Nations, and UNAMA in particular, and express
our heartfelt gratitude to Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Kubiš and his hard-working team.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Ioannis Vrailas, Deputy Head of the
Delegation of the European Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Vrailas: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States.
The acceding country Croatia, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Iceland, Serbia,
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Norway, Ukraine,
the Republic of Moldova, Armenia and Georgia align
themselves with this statement, the full version of
which is being circulated in the Chamber and will be
posted on our website.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report (S/2013/350) and Special
Representative Ján Kubiš for his briefing.
We were greatly saddened by the recent terrorist
attacks in Afghanistan. The EU condemns such
cowardly attacks on humanitarian organizations and
children. We support the efforts of the Government
of Afghanistan and the international community to
create a secure environment in which the people of
Afghanistan can live without the fear of terrorism and
violence.
We welcome the announcements of this week that
signal the potential for a better future for Afghanistan.
The announcement of the final stage of the transition

The international conference held in Tokyo last year
reaffirmed the partnership between the Government
of Afghanistan and the international community.
The full implementation of reforms, in particular on
elections, financial transparency, the rule of law and
human rights, especially the rights of women, as well
as continued efforts to combat corruption, remains
paramount in achieving a successful transition and
long-term transformation in Afghanistan.
We look forward to reviewing the progress made
by Afghanistan and the international community in that
regard at the meeting of senior officials to be held on
3 July in Kabul. The EU believes that the Government
needs to implement the following measures as a matter
of absolute urgency ahead of the meeting. First, the
electoral legislative framework should be adopted so
the elections are governed by law, the status of the
Independent Election Commission is regularized and a
credible electoral complaints mechanism is established.
Secondly, the Chief Justice should be appointed in
accordance with the Constitution. Thirdly, the mining
law, which is so important for attracting investment,
should be enacted.
Credible and sustained action is also required to
implement the statutory safeguards, most notably the
Law on the Elimination of Violence against Women,
that strengthen human rights in Afghanistan, in
particular the rights of women. The EU attaches great

13-3688123

S/PV.6983

importance to gender equality and the empowerment
of women. Afghanistan also needs to take systemic
action to advance judicial reform. The failure of the
Government of Afghanistan to develop a working
justice system plays into the hands of insurgents and
those who would resort to summary justice.
An effective justice system and police force are
critical to the rule of law in Afghanistan and something
the EU is supporting, inter alia, through its support
for police reform and the justice sector. We are glad to
announce that, on 27 May, the Council of the European
Union extended the European Union Police Mission in
Afghanistan until 31 December 2014.
The EU welcomes the outcomes of the third
Heart of Asia ministerial conference, held in Almaty.
The Istanbul Process has brought about important
measures aimed at building confidence and increasing
cooperation and inclusive sustainable development
across the region. The EU supports endeavours on
the part of the Heart of Asia countries to continue
strengthening intra-regional trust.
We are currently in the final phase of negotiating the
cooperation agreement for partnership and development,
which will form the basis of EU-Afghan relations for
the next 10 years. We are also in the early stages of
putting in place the foundations for our development
cooperation through 2020. Those are clear indications
of the long-term commitment of the EU and its member
States to support Afghanistan through a comprehensive
approach that ensures synergies between political,
security and development engagement.
The President: I now give the floor to the
represenative of Japan.
Mr. Umemoto (Japan): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ján Kubiš for
his informative briefing. I also appreciate Ambassador
Tanin’s comprehensive statement.
At the outset, I wish to express our deepest regret
and condolences at the loss of many lives, both military
and civilian, during the recent brutal attacks by
anti-Government groups. We are also gravely shocked
by the assault against the International Committee
for the Red Cross which has sought to help Afghan
for years. Japan condemns these terrorist attacks
in the strongest possible terms and reaffirms its full
determination to contribute to the Afghan Government

24

and the international community’s response in stopping
this cycle of violence.
Despite the dire security climate, we have all
witnessed the increased competence and confidence
of the Afghan National Security Forces in responding
to these incidents. We welcome the progress made by
the Afghan authorities in taking the lead for security
across the country, as well as the announcement of the
final tranche of the security transition. Challenges in
the field of security remain and are daunting, but we
have no choice but to remain united and steadfast in
our efforts.
We cannot overemphasize the crucial importance
of the meeting of senior officials to be held on 3 July,
which will serve as a transparent instrument to help
us realize our mutual commitments made at the Tokyo
Conference in July 2012. The concept of mutuality is
the key. Japan has already implemented $1.4 billion
of assistance out of $3 billion pledged at the Tokyo
Conference last July. We acknowledge the intense
efforts made by the Afghan Government in preparing
this first follow-up meeting.
At the same time, some urgent issues that constitute
the core of the Afghan Government’s commitments
remain to be addressed. A basic electoral architecture
must be in place as soon as possible to guarantee fair
and credible presidential and provincial elections in
April 2014. Corruption continues to be a major concern
that undermines the legitimacy of the State. If the
international community is to uphold its commitment
made under the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework, it is incumbent on the Afghan Government
to move forward in a constructive manner, including by
resolving the Kabul bank case fairly and rapidly. The
full implementation of the Law on the Elimination of
Violence against Women is another key Government
commitment.
We believe that all the road maps leading to a
stable and prosperous future for Afghanistan can be
realized only when accompanied by the constructive
involvement of all regional actors, meeting both in
multilateral and bilateral frameworks. In that regard,
Japan welcomes the outcome of the ministerial meeting
of the Istanbul process in Almaty in April. Japan, as
a country supporting confidence-building measures
on disaster management, is pleased to share its own
experience in this area and to contribute to this regional
initiative.

13-36881

S/PV.6983

Needless to say, Afghan-Pakistan dialogue and
good-neighbourly relations are vital to the long-term
stability of Afghanistan. It is our strong hope that the
new leadership of Pakistan and the Afghan Government
will further consolidate the mutual trust and respect
necessary to eliminate tensions over the border areas
and create further positive momentum for promoting
the Afghan-led peace and reconciliation process.
Finally, the peace and reconciliation process is the
predominant task at hand in order to achieve security
and political stability in Afghanistan. Japan welcomes
the opening of Qatar office by the Taliban and expects it
to result in the early start of reconciliation negotiations
and a peaceful resolution of the conflict. The
international community must remain united alongside
Afghanistan until peace dividends are delivered to all
Afghans.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Ragaglini (Italy) I would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/2013/350) and Special Representative Ján Kubiš for
his briefing.
Italy fully aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union. I would like to
add a few remarks in my national capacity.
As we are all aware, Afghanistan is experiencing a
very important moment. The beginning of the fifth and
last phase of the transition process has been announced.
The Afghan Government and security forces are
preparing to take over responsibility for security
operations throughout the country. The Afghan people
will increasingly assume ownership of its future. Thus,
we are at a very delicate moment, characterized by a
particularly intense fighting season that forces us to
remain vigilant. We know that the handover process
for security responsibilities to the national authorities
could involve some critical factors, but we are also
confident of the Afghan armed forces’ determination to
tackle this important challenge.
Italy will continue to assist Afghanistan and to
encourage a greater commitment from the international
community as a whole. Starting in 2015, during the socalled transformation decade, a new partnership will be
formed that will lead our presence in the field to shift
its focus mainly to training activities.

Afghanistan is about to face another crucial
challenge — the presidential elections. We expect the
Afghan authorities to take all the necessary steps to
guarantee an inclusive, transparent and credible process,
and to enact clear, shared rules that will guarantee the
participation of the many components of civil society
and the various political parties in the country.
Let us not forget the more general mutual
commitments made at the Tokyo Conference in July
2012, which should guide our future cooperation. In
confirming our presence in Afghanistan, we encourage
the Government of Kabul to honour its commitments
in the field of governance, the fight against corruption,
and the protection of human rights in a framework of
conditionality and measurable results.
Italy attaches great importance to the protection
of women’s rights and the promotion of the status of
women in Afghanistan, to which the Government of
Kabul made specific commitments in Tokyo, including
effective and uniform enforcement of the Law on the
Elimination of Violence against Women.
Internal reconciliation is also an unavoidable
crossroads on the path to the lasting stabilization
of the country. Italy supports the peace process and
recognizes Afghanistan’s full ownership. We look
forward to concrete follow-up soon. We do not expect it
to reverse the gains made in civil rights and democracy,
or to concessions to terrorism. Equally important
is the contribution of regional actors, who are called
upon to help lay the groundwork for the success of the
inter-Afghan dialogue.
At the regional level we also expect to see greater
cooperation and a more intense political dialogue.
The developments in the Istanbul process, which Italy
supports, are promising. Now we have to move forward
with the practical implementation of the plans of
actions approved at the ministerial meeting in Almaty
last April.
I take this opportunity to express Italy’s deep
appreciation for the role being played by the United
Nations in Afghanistan, starting with the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). In the
run-up to the elections, the United Nations support for
the Afghan authorities will be crucial in consolidating
the legitimacy and integrity of the process. UNAMA’s
contribution will be just as important during this
delicate transition to the transformation decade, by
supporting the Afghan Government institutions as they

13-3688125

S/PV.6983

assume a greater share of the responsibility for the
socio-economic development of their country.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to start by thanking Special Representative Ján
Kubiš for his briefing and comprehensive report of
the Secretary-General (S/2013/350) on the work of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and for his analysis of the current situation
in Afghanistan. I thank Ambassador Tanin for his
statement today, as well as the Secretary-General for
his report.
I would like briefly to touch upon a few points
regarding the prevailing situation in Afghanistan:
First, Afghanistan is at a very sensitive juncture in
its history. There is an intense focus on issues such as
the security and political transitions that will culminate
in 2014 with the end of the presence of international
forces and the upcoming presidential election. We hope
that, through the efforts of the Afghan Government
and the United Nations, this process will help to better
preserve and strengthen peace, stability and security in
Afghanistan and the region. In that regard, we support
the regional mechanisms, including the Istanbul Process
on Regional Security and Cooperation for a Secure and
Stable Afghanistan and the implementation of plans for
six confidence-building measures, as defined for the
process.
Secondly, in the area of regional cooperation, we
have continued our bilateral cooperation, particularly on
security matters, counter-narcotics efforts, developing
projects and economic cooperation in the fields of
roads, rails, energy, mining and minerals, agriculture,
and so on.
Thirdly, on the return of refugees, a tripartite
meeting between Iran, Afghanistan and the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees was held
in Tehran on 15 and 16 January. In this meeting, we
presented ways and means to encourage more safe
and sustainable return of refugees, and a number of
agreements were concluded. We look forward to the full
implementation of those agreements. We also welcome
the agreement between the United Nations and the
Government of Afghanistan on 31 March to set up a
team to seek joint solutions and integrated approaches
for refugees. We urge the international community

26

to continue to strengthen and expedite its efforts
in creating conditions conducive to the sustainable
repatriation of refugees and their full rehabilitation and
reintegration in their homeland.
We welcome the beginning of the international
military drawdown and look forward to the completion
of that process. However, we are concerned about the
increase in the loss of life and the injuries inflicted
on Afghan civilians, part of which have been caused
by the military operations of the international forces
in Afghanistan. As indicated in the report of the
Secretary-General covering the period 1 February to
30 April, UNAMA documented 533 civilian deaths and
882 civilian injuries. That is a 44 per cent increase in
deaths and a 16 per cent rise in civilian injuries. Attacks
on civilians under any pretext and by whomsoever
committed are to be condemned and must be halted.
We commend the initiatives by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and the Afghan authorities,
in particular those relating to the elimination of opium
cultivation fields. We are concerned about the prediction,
as reflected in the 2013 Opium Risk Assessment,
with regare to the possible increase in opium poppy
cultivation, in particular in the north and north-east
of Afghanistan. As indicated in the report, if current
trends continue, the total number of opium poppy-free
provinces in 2013 would drop to 14, down from 17 in
2012 and 20 in 2010. We are sure that, with the strong
commitment of Afghani and international partners
alike, the menace of drug cultivation and trafficking,
which breeds extremism, could be curtailed.
In conclusion, the future role of the United
Nations in Afghanistan is going to be more crucial,
especially in the wake of the drawdown and withdrawal
of international forces in 2014. The role of UNAMA
should evolve on the basis of the situation on the ground,
emerging realities and, above all, the aspirations of the
people and the Government of Afghanistan. As our
officials indicated in their meeting with Mr. Ján Kubiš
during his recent visit to Tehran, we support UNAMA
activities and wish Mr. Kubiš the greatest of success in
fulfilling his mission.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain.
Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): This summer
will herald a decisive moment for the international
community’s commitment in Afghanistan. Spain has
been part of that commitment from the outset and has

13-36881

S/PV.6983

devoted significant military and civilian efforts, with
the clear aim of contributing to the stabilization and
reconstruction of the country.
I join previous speakers in thanking the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2013/350) and Special
Representative Ján Kubiš for his briefing. I also
acknowledge the important work carried out by the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). I note in particular the work carried out by
my colleague and friend Ambassador Tanin.
Throughout the past 12 years, Spain has
continuously been one of the main contributors to
the Security Council-mandated NATO International
Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan (ISAF). Like
our partners in ISAF, we have now begun withdrawal.
At the present time, there are some 900 Spanish soldiers
deployed in the provinces of Herat, where the airport
is operated by Spain, Badghis, where the Spanish
provincial reconstruction team is based, Qala-i-Naw
and Kabul.
Spain resolutely supports the efforts of the Afghan
Government in the ongoing and complex transition
process, in both the security and civilian perspectives.
We welcome this week’s announcement of the
achievement of milestone 2013, whereby Afghan forces
will take the lead in security operations and of the start
of the fifth and final phase of the transition process. Last
December, Murghab district was included in tranche
4, bringing the entirety of the Badghis province into
the transition process. We are satisfied at the way in
which the transition is progressing. Spain will remain
fully engaged by providing advice, capacity-building
and support to the Afghan security forces until the
conclusion of the process.
With regard to the civilian aspect of transition,
the vast majority of the cooperation projects Spain
is carrying out in its area of responsibility is already
being managed by Afghan personnel. The transfer has
been formalized through the signing of appropriate
agreements with the competent Afghan ministries.
In July, seven years of successful presence of direct
Spanish Cooperation in Afghanistan will come to an
end. The participation of the Spanish Cooperation
will continue in the years to come under the form of
multilateral projects through our contributions to
international organizations.
The year 2012 was one of major international
events related to Afghanistan; 2013 is the time to build

upon their numerous accomplishments. For example,
the bases are currently being laid for the new allied
mission that will operate after 2014, which will focus
exclusively on training, assistance and support for the
further strengthening of the Afghan National Security
Forces after 2015.
At the regional level, we are pleased to note that
the Istanbul Process, whose main objective is to
promote cooperation and regional security to achieve
peace and stability in Afghanistan, is making decisive
progress. Furthermore, the Mutual Accountability
Framework, agreed last year in Tokyo, continues to
lay the groundwork for the political and financial
sustainability needed to uphold the current Afghan
regime. The Afghan Government must, in that
context, continue and strengthen its fulfillment of its
fundamental commitments in the areas of governance,
development, the rule of law, human rights and the
fight against corruption. In that regard, the presidential
election announced for 5 April 2014 will be a significant
logistical test, to meet which the international
community will provide support to Afghanistan. The
Afghan authorities will be responsible for ensuring
an inclusive, transparent and democratic election that
produces results that are fully acceptable to the Afghan
people. The work and support of the United Nations
will be of the utmost importance in that election. Spain
underscores the central and impartial role that the
United Nations plays in promoting peace and stability
in Afghanistan.
The Afghan election is also closely linked to the
process of reconciliation and reintegration of Taliban
elements willing to participate in the democratic
system. We support all efforts aimed at making such
reconciliation a reality, despite the enormous resistance
that the process faces both inside Afghanistan and in
the complex regional environment. We must strongly
support dialogue that leads to a sustainable and inclusive
reconciliation process that involves armed groups and
all sectors of Afghan society.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Latvia.
Ms. Freimane-Deksne (Latvia): Latvia aligns
itself with the statement made by the observer of the
European Union and would like to make a few remarks
in its national capacity.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report and Special Representative Ján Kubiš and

13-3688127

S/PV.6983

the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) team for their dedicated work in carrying
out the tasks of the Mission. Although the concrete
modalities for post-2014 cooperation between
Afghanistan and international community are yet to
be defined, the United Nations will continue to play an
important role throughout the transition and during the
transformation decade.
I would like to focus Latvia’s comments today on
two key areas, namely, regional cooperation and the
international community’s long-term commitment to
Afghanistan.
Turning first to regional cooperation, we believe
that this is critical for achieving long-term stability and
economic development in Afghanistan. We welcome in
particular regional initiatives such as the Heart of Asia
process, including the outcome of its third Ministerial
Conference, held in Almaty in April. The adoption of
implementation plans on confidence-building measures
(CBMs) between Afghanistan and its neighbouring
countries is a strong foundation for further cooperation
at the regional level. Latvia has also become an
active participant in the Heart of Asia process and is
currently exploring possibilities for supporting the
implementation of CBMs for regional infrastructure,
led by Azerbaijan and Turkmenistan.
Afghanistan and Central Asia are situated on
ancient trade routes. Their involvement in international
economic and trade processes is essential for the
security, stability and development of Afghanistan
and the whole region. In the light of that, on 11 and
12 June, Latvia hosted an annual high-level workshop
on the theme “Arteries connecting the Heart of Asia
to the global world”, which brought together more than
220 Government officials, foreign policy experts and
representatives of transport and logistics companies
from countries in Central Asia and the South
Caucasus, Afghanistan, the United States, the Russian
Federation, India, Pakistan, Qatar and others, as well
as representatives of the United Nations, the European
Union, NATO and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe. Participants concluded that
regional stability and improved trade relations were
mutually interconnected factors. Mutual economic ties
should be developed both within the region and with
global markets. Developing commercial transit routes,
for example, on the basis of experience acquired within
the Northern Distribution Network, as well as the
plans of some Central Asian States and Afghanistan

28

to seek membership in the World Trade Organization,
could be steps in the right direction. On behalf of my
Government, I would like to thank all the participants
for their contributions. We are ready to share the
conclusions of the workshop with all interested parties.
With 2014 approaching, the international
community must remain committed to Afghanistan’s
long-term stability. We look forward to reviewing the
progress of mutual commitments undertaken at the
Tokyo Conference by the Government of Afghanistan
and the international community. The principles of
good governance, the rule of law and human rights,
in particular the rights of women, are the basis for
sustained economic growth and development.
With the gradual downsizing of International
Security Assisantance Force troops in Afghanistan
and with the Afghan National Security Forces (ANSF)
assuming lead responsibility for security across the
country, building public confidence in their capacity
to protect the population is critical. While security
challenges remain considerable in the country,
international support to build up the capacities of the
ANSF after 2014 and beyond is essential. Latvia has
already committed to providing financial support to the
ANSF starting from 2015.
The support to Afghanistan in security sector should
be accompanied by support in areas that will facilitate
Afghanistan’s integration into regional and global
processes. In order to achieve a sustainable solution in
Afghanistan and in the region, the role of Central Asian
countries should be recognized. High-level dialogue
and cooperation with Central Asian countries should
be developed at different international forums, and
Latvia will contribute in that regard, including during
its presidency in the European Union Council in 2015.
Regional cooperation is also crucial in tackling such
global threats as terrorism and drug trafficking. The
NATO-Russia Council Project on Counter-Narcotics
Training, implemented in close cooperation with the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, shows where
common interests and common efforts pay off. Latvia
has provided a continuous financial contribution to the
project and is currently considering the possibilities for
technical assistance in Central Asian countries.
Integration into regional and global economic
processes will require specialists and experts. The
Latvian Government is currently looking for new ways
to step up development assistance. Latvia is already
contributing to the capacity-building of Afghan
13-36881

S/PV.6983

aviation and railroad experts and is considering new
fields of cooperation where Latvia’s specific advantage
stands out, such as customs, border guard and training
medical specialists.

judges. Tracking the law’s implementation was a key
commitment made by the Government of Afghanistan,
which will be measured on its fulfilment of that
commitment.

With many challenges and opportunities ahead
during the transition and beyond, only our common
commitment, efforts and constructive engagement can
ensure the security, stability and sustained economic
development of Afghanistan and the wider region.
Let me reassure the Council of Latvia’s continuous
involvement in that regard.

Secondly, it is essential that the Government of
Afghanistan demonstrate earnest commitment to a
robust electoral process. That includes progress in
meeting key deliverables, including the establishment
of a credible electoral dispute resolution mechanism and
legislation that allows for the appointment of qualified
individuals to that body and to the Independent Election
Commission. Candidate vetting, the preservation of
free and independent media and the participation of
civil society must be permitted to feature prominently
throughout the process.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Husain (Canada): I thank you, Mr. President,
for the opportunity to address the Council. I thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2013/350), and I
commend the work that the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) is doing in an
increasingly hostile environment.
A copy of Canada’s full statement has been
circulated among the members of the Security Council
and is available on our website. Given the time
constraints, I shall touch on only a few key points.
We are at a crossroads. Down one path a nation
emerges from generations of war and bloodshed and
steps forward into a future of freedom and prosperity.
Down the other, lie the games of the past, of regional
interests allied with the false promises of terrorists and
their tyranny, of a people suffocated by brutal warlords
and unscrupulous gangsters, of the tragic story of
lost generations. Corrosive actors are the culprits of
fragility, just as nation-builders are the pioneers for
prosperous societies.
Next month marks the one-year anniversary of the
Tokyo Conference, which saw a renewed commitment
by the international community, including Canada, to
Afghanistan’s future. On 3 July, senior officials will
gather in Kabul to take stock of the progress that has
been made over the past year on those commitments.
Three are among the most essential.
First, the Government of Afghanistan must focus on
the full implementation of the Law on the Elimination
of Violence against Women in its current form. Afghan
women and girls need and deserve the protecion that
the law is meant to provide. However, they will get that
only if the law is fully implemented by a willing and
capable justice sector, including police, prosecutors and

Thirdly, Canada will be resolutely focused on
efforts made to improve financial accountability and
combat corruption.
(spoke in French)
Canada remains determined to support Afghanistan
throughout the transition period. However, we have
stated clearly that we must continue to see progress
towards greater transparency, accountability, good
governance and respect for human rights, especially
the rights of girls and women, freedom of religion and
conscience and freedom of experience.
We have also been equally clear that terrorism
networks from neighbouring States must be held
accountable, including thsoe who support them.
Reconciliation that fails to enshrine the
indispensable rights of women, advance constitutional
democracy and confront endemic corruption will not be
viewed as genuine reconciliation.
In the face of such adversity, national organizations
of young members of civil society are emerging and
growing more confident in their capacities. They are
helping to build the institutiuons that will guaranteed
Afghanistan’s future. We must commit ourselves more
resolutely to supporting those institutions and their
ideals, rather than those who walk in their halls and
seek to subvert them for personal gain.
Along that path towards freedom and prosperity
in Afghanistan, Canada stands with those who seek to
build a better future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.

13-3688129

S/PV.6983

Mr. Berger (Germany): At the outset, I would like
to thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report. I would also like to welcome the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ján
Kubiš, and extend my thanks to him for his briefing
and his and his team’s dedicated work in support of the
Afghan people.
My Government aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier in this debate by the observer of the
European Union.
Afghanistan has come a long way in its security,
political and economic transitions, and progress has
been achieved in many respects.
In 2011 and 2012, the Government of Afghanistan
and the international community set the framework
for continued close cooperation throughout the
Transformation Decade at conferences held in Istanbul,
Bonn, Kabul and Tokyo as well as at the Chicago
summit.
Those conferences sent a clear message of the
continued support of the international community to
Afghanistan and its people.
This year is set to provide important steps by
Afghanistan in implementing the decisions taken at
these conferences. Germany will continue to support
Afghanistan in its efforts to do so.
My Government welcomes the progress made
in the transition of security responsibility. President
Karzai announced the fifth and final tranche of security
transition earlier this week. With that milestone event,
the Afghan National Security Forces have resumed lead
security responsibility throughout the country. The
security forces continue to face serious challenges, as
the latest series of attacks on Afghan and international
institutions demonstrates. However, Germany is
confident that, with evolving but persistent international
support, the Afghan security forces will continue to
prove capable of responding to those challenges.
At the Bonn and Tokyo Conferences, the
Government of Afghanistan and the international
community reaffirmed their partnership and agreed
on mutual commitments constituting the foundation
on which their long-term partnership rests. My
Government is convinced that the comprehensive and
timely implementation of the commitments contained
in the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework is of
paramount importance in achieving Afghanistan’s

30

goal of developing into a democratic and economically
thriving country.
In that regard, we acknowledge the progress made
by the Government of Afghanistan in preparing for
the presidential and provincial council elections to be
held on 5 April 2014, but further progress is a pressing
requirement. Germany is particularly concerned with
regard to the pending decisions on the legal framework
for the elections, including the establishment of a credible
electoral complaints mechanism as well as the pending
appointment of a new chairman to the Independent
Election Commission. Furthermore, effective measures
need to be put in place to prevent widespread electoral
fraud. The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan can further increase its beneficial role in
supporting that Afghan-led and -owned process. Our
shared objective is to hold inclusive, transparent and
credible elections in Afghanistan.
Preserving and consolidating gains in the protection
and promotion of human rights in Afghanistan is of
the utmost importance. We are confident that the
Government of Afghanistan will continue to ensure
the independence of the Afghan Independent Human
Rights Commission according to Afghan law and the
Paris Principles.
Germany looks forward to the senior officials
meeting to be held in Kabul on 3 July with the aim of
reviewing the progress made so far in implementing the
mutual commitments of the Accountability Framework.
Progress on those issues ahead of the meeting is strongly
encouraged.
We welcome the opening of the Taliban office in
Doha. That could well be a new beginning, one that will
take years to unfold and will no doubt experience many
setbacks. Yet, we believe that there is no alternative
to that path. All now depends upon the willingness of
all the Afghan interlocutors to engage in substantive
negotiations. As in the past, Germany remains willing
to lend its good offices, if and when needed.
I would like to conclude by underlining that
Germany will continue to support the Government of
Afghanistan through transition and beyond.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.

13-36881
