A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/51/61
28 January 1997

Fifty-first session
Agenda item 101
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/51/610)]
51/61.

United Nations African Institute for the
Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of
Offenders

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 50/147 of 21 December 1995,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General,1
1.
Commends the efforts of the United Nations African Institute for
the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders to promote and
coordinate regional technical cooperation activities related to crime
prevention and criminal justice systems in Africa;
2.
Reiterates the need for the strengthening of the Institute's
capacity to support a national mechanism for crime prevention and criminal
justice of African countries, in view of the contribution that the Institute
can make to the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice
Programme;
3.
Requests the Secretary-General to intensify efforts and to
mobilize all relevant entities of the United Nations system to provide
necessary financial and technical support to the Institute to enable it to
fulfil its mandate;

1

A/51/450.

97-76285

/...

A/RES/51/61
Page 2

4.
Also requests the Secretary-General to make concrete proposals on
strengthening the programmes and activities of the Institute and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its fifty-second session;
5.
Further requests the Secretary-General to enhance regional
cooperation, coordination and collaboration in the fight against crime,
especially in its transnational dimension, which could not be adequately dealt
with by national action alone;
6.
Appeals to all Member States and non-governmental organizations to
adopt concrete practical measures to support the Institute in the development
of the requisite capacity and in the elaboration and implementation of
programmes and activities aimed at strengthening crime prevention and criminal
justice systems in Africa;
7.
Urges the States members of the Institute to make every possible
effort to meet their obligations to the Institute.
82nd plenary meeting
12 December 1996
