United Nations

A/RES/62/66

General Assembly

Distr.: General
8 January 2008

Sixty-second session
Agenda item 82

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 6 December 2007
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/62/450)]

62/66. Report of the International Law Commission on the work
of its fifty-ninth session
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the International Law Commission on the
work of its fifty-ninth session, 1
Emphasizing the importance of furthering the progressive development of
international law and its codification as a means of implementing the purposes and
principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations and in the Declaration on
Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation
among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, 2
Recognizing the desirability of referring legal and drafting questions to the
Sixth Committee, including topics that might be submitted to the International Law
Commission for closer examination, and of enabling the Sixth Committee and the
Commission to enhance further their contribution to the progressive development of
international law and its codification,
Recalling the need to keep under review those topics of international law
which, given their new or renewed interest for the international community, may be
suitable for the progressive development and codification of international law and
therefore may be included in the future programme of work of the International Law
Commission,
Welcoming the holding of the International Law Seminar, and noting with
appreciation the voluntary contributions made to the United Nations Trust Fund for
the International Law Seminar,
Acknowledging the importance of facilitating the timely publication of the
Yearbook of the International Law Commission and eliminating the backlog,
Stressing the usefulness of focusing and structuring the debate on the report of
the International Law Commission in the Sixth Committee in such a manner that

_______________
1
2

07-46773

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/62/10).
Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.

A/RES/62/66

conditions are provided for concentrated attention to each of the main topics dealt
with in the report and for discussions on specific topics,
Wishing to enhance further, in the context of the revitalization of the debate on
the report of the International Law Commission, the interaction between the Sixth
Committee as a body of governmental representatives and the Commission as a
body of independent legal experts, with a view to improving the dialogue between
the two bodies,
Welcoming initiatives to hold interactive debates, panel discussions and
question time in the Sixth Committee, as envisaged in resolution 58/316 of 1 July
2004 on further measures for the revitalization of the work of the General Assembly,
Takes note of the report of the International Law Commission on the
1.
work of its fifty-ninth session,1 and recommends that the Commission continue its
work on the topics in its current programme, taking into account the comments and
observations of Governments, whether submitted in writing or expressed orally in
debates in the General Assembly;
Expresses its appreciation to the International Law Commission for the
2.
work accomplished at its fifty-ninth session;
Draws the attention of Governments to the importance for the
3.
International Law Commission of having their views on the various aspects
involved in the topics on the agenda of the Commission, in particular on all the
specific issues identified in chapter III of its report, 3 regarding:
(a)

Reservations to treaties;

(b)

Shared natural resources;

(c)

Expulsion of aliens;

(d)

Responsibility of international organizations;

(e)

The obligation to extradite or prosecute (aut dedere aut judicare);

4.
Invites Governments, within the context of paragraph 3 above, to provide
information to the International Law Commission regarding practice with regard to
the topics “Expulsion of aliens” and “The obligation to extradite or prosecute (aut
dedere aut judicare)”;
Reiterates its invitation to Governments, within the context of chapter III
5.
of the 2005 report of the International Law Commission, to provide information to
the Commission regarding State practice, in particular more contemporary practice
on the topic “Effects of armed conflicts on treaties”; 4
6.
Draws the attention of Governments to the importance for the
International Law Commission of having their comments and observations by
1 January 2008 on the draft articles and commentaries on the law of transboundary
aquifers adopted on first reading by the Commission at its fifty-eighth session; 5

_______________
3

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/62/10), paras. 23–32.
Ibid., Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/60/10), para. 25.
5
Ibid., Sixty-first Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/61/10), paras. 75 and 76.
4

2

A/RES/62/66

7.
Takes note of the decision of the International Law Commission to
include the topics “Protection of persons in the event of disasters” and “Immunity of
State officials from foreign criminal jurisdiction” in its programme of work; 6
8.
Invites the International Law Commission to continue taking measures to
enhance its efficiency and productivity and to consider making proposals to that
end;
Encourages the International Law Commission to continue taking cost9.
saving measures at its future sessions without prejudice to the efficiency of its work;
10. Takes note of paragraph 399 of the report of the International Law
Commission, and decides that the next session of the Commission shall be held at
the United Nations Office at Geneva from 5 May to 6 June and from 7 July to
8 August 2008;
11. Welcomes the enhanced dialogue between the International Law
Commission and the Sixth Committee at the sixty-second session of the General
Assembly, stresses the desirability of further enhancing the dialogue between the
two bodies, and in this context encourages, inter alia, the continued practice of
informal consultations in the form of discussions between the members of the Sixth
Committee and the members of the Commission attending the sixty-third session of
the Assembly;
12. Encourages delegations, during the debate on the report of the
International Law Commission, to adhere as far as possible to the structured work
programme agreed to by the Sixth Committee and to consider presenting concise
and focused statements;
13. Encourages Member States to consider being represented at the level of
legal adviser during the first week in which the report of the International Law
Commission is discussed in the Sixth Committee (International Law Week) to
enable high-level discussions on issues of international law;
14. Requests the International Law Commission to continue to pay special
attention to indicating in its annual report, for each topic, any specific issues on
which expressions of views by Governments, either in the Sixth Committee or in
written form, would be of particular interest in providing effective guidance for the
Commission in its further work;
15. Takes note of paragraphs 400 to 405 of the report of the International
Law Commission with regard to cooperation with other bodies, and encourages the
Commission to continue the implementation of article 16, paragraph (e), and
article 26, paragraphs 1 and 2, of its statute in order to further strengthen
cooperation between the Commission and other bodies concerned with international
law, having in mind the usefulness of such cooperation;
16. Notes that the International Law Commission, in accordance with
article 25, paragraph 1, of its statute, held a meeting during its fifty-ninth session
with United Nations and other experts in the field of human rights, including
representatives from human rights treaty bodies, and exchanged views on issues
relating to reservations to human rights treaties;

_______________
6

Ibid., Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/62/10), paras. 375 and 376.

3

A/RES/62/66

17. Also notes that consulting with national organizations and individual
experts concerned with international law may assist Governments in considering
whether to make comments and observations on drafts submitted by the
International Law Commission and in formulating their comments and observations;
18. Reaffirms its previous decisions concerning the indispensable role of the
Codification Division of the Office of Legal Affairs of the Secretariat in providing
assistance to the International Law Commission;
19. Approves the conclusions reached by the International Law Commission
in paragraphs 387 to 395 of its report;
20. Also approves the conclusions reached by the International Law
Commission in paragraphs 382 and 383 of its report, and reaffirms its previous
decisions concerning the documentation and summary records of the Commission; 7
21. Takes note of paragraph 385 of the report of the International Law
Commission and, without prejudice to the importance of ensuring necessary
allocations in the regular budget, requests the Secretary-General to establish a trust
fund to accept voluntary contributions so as to address the backlog relating to the
Yearbook of the International Law Commission;
22. Also takes note of the Guidelines on the publication of documents of the
International Law Commission, as endorsed by the Commission in paragraph 381 of
its report;
23. Further takes note of paragraphs 396 and 397 of the report of the
International Law Commission and encourages legal advisers to participate in the
commemorative meeting envisaged for the sixtieth anniversary to be held in Geneva
on 19 and 20 May 2008, and invites Member States, in association with existing
regional organizations, professional associations, academic institutions and
members of the Commission, to convene national or regional meetings, which
would be dedicated to the work of the Commission;
24. Notes with appreciation the expansion of the website of the International
Law Commission 8 to include all its documentation, and welcomes the continuous
efforts of the Codification Division to maintain and improve the website;
25. Expresses the hope that the International Law Seminar will continue to
be held in connection with the sessions of the International Law Commission and
that an increasing number of participants, in particular from developing countries,
will be given the opportunity to attend the Seminar, and appeals to States to
continue to make urgently needed voluntary contributions to the United Nations
Trust Fund for the International Law Seminar;
26. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the International Law Seminar
with adequate services, including interpretation, as required, and encourages him to
continue considering ways to improve the structure and content of the Seminar;
27. Also requests the Secretary-General to forward to the International Law
Commission, for its attention, the records of the debate on the report of the
Commission at the sixty-second session of the General Assembly, together with
such written statements as delegations may circulate in conjunction with their oral
_______________
7
See resolutions 32/151, para. 10, and 37/111, para. 5, and all subsequent resolutions on the annual reports
of the International Law Commission to the General Assembly.
8
www.un.org/law/ilc.

4

A/RES/62/66

statements, and to prepare and distribute a topical summary of the debate, following
established practice;
28. Requests the Secretariat to circulate to States, as soon as possible after
the conclusion of the session of the International Law Commission, chapter II of its
report containing a summary of the work of that session, chapter III containing the
specific issues on which the views of Governments would be of particular interest to
the Commission and the draft articles adopted on either first or second reading by
the Commission;
29. Recommends that the debate on the report of the International Law
Commission at the sixty-third session of the General Assembly commence on
27 October 2008.
62nd plenary meeting
6 December 2007

5
