S/PV.9249

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9249th meeting

Wednesday, 25 January 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ishikane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Liang Hengzhu
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mrs. Dime Labille
Mr. Biang
Mr. Boateng
Ms. Gatt
Mr. Fernandes
Mr. Kuzmin
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mr. Almazrouei
Mr. Wickremasinghe
Mr. Simonoff

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-02374 (E)
*2302374*

S/PV.9249

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

or simple words, but by quantifiable indicators in terms
of the number of witnesses who have been heard and
the testimony that was given by heroic survivors and
witnesses who had the opportunity of coming before
the International Criminal Court to give their accounts.

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Sudan to participate in this
meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Karim
Khan, Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court,
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Khan.
Mr. Khan: It is a great pleasure to have the
opportunity to once again brief the Security Council
on the situation in Darfur. I also want to express my
personal thanks to Ambassador Al-Harith Idriss
Al-Harith Mohamed, Permanent Representative of
the Sudan, for his presence today. I had the pleasure
of sitting with him yesterday and having certain
discussions in advance of today’s briefing.
In my most recent briefing to the Council (see
S/PV.9113) a few months ago, which I gave from
Khartoum for the first time, I was quite candid
regarding the expectations and hopes of the people of
the Sudan. I identified their yearning for justice, and I
mapped out a course that would hopefully help us, as an
Office, and the international community to discharge
our responsibilities to them.
We have tried to discharge those responsibilities
through increasingly focused investigations with
deliberate and considered action. We can therefore
rightly deserve the trust that the people of Darfur so
generously express every time that one meets them in
the Sudan, or anywhere else around the world, for that
matter. In order to deliver on that promise, I set out in
my previous report new benchmarks that would help to
identify where we are and where we are going in terms
of delivering on resolution 1593 (2005).
I am pleased to report that we have made significant
strides forward. That can be measured not by rhetoric
2/18

25/01/2023

The trial of Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman, also known
as Mr. Ali Kushayb, has made swift progress. Over
the past eight months since the trial opened, over
78 sitting days 50 witnesses were heard before the
International Criminal Court and, of course, a great
deal of documentary evidence. Their testimony brought
to life the harrowing accounts endured by victims and
survivors that compelled the Security Council to refer
the matter to the International Criminal Court almost
20 years ago. Those witnesses had the opportunity to
confront the accused and have their accounts tested
before independent impartial judges, creating a record
that will pave the way at the end of the process for a
determination to be made on what took place and
whether the accused is responsible.
I cannot tire of commending the heroism,
perseverance and dedication of the survivors who
testified in that particular case. Their courage and
perseverance — against all odds, really — are
something that I find truly humbling. Those qualities
are something that we see in victims in many parts of
the world. Despite what they endured, they somehow
truly represent the very best of us and the triumph of
hope in the face of their awful, wretched experiences.
It is something that we should take to heart, and not as
something that is without value or impact. The accounts
provided reflect the human experiences of people who
could be our mothers, our fathers, our brothers, our
sisters or our children — profound, in fact the most
profound, suffering: the loss of family members, the
loss of schoolfriends and displacement from homes. The
disruption in children’s education and the extremely
challenging and difficult years — not months, but
years and decades — that they have endured in refugee
camps as internally displaced people in their own land,
in neighbouring countries or around the world, where
they sought refuge because of what was inflicted upon
them in the Sudan.
The Court also heard about the stigma experienced
by victims of sexual and gender-based violence and,
indeed, that of the children who were the result of that.
But, amid those truly chilling accounts, it is remarkable
that hope was not extinguished. In their accounts, there
is hope, which was heard from the mouths of witnesses.
23-02374

25/01/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

If I may, I will present an example of that to the Court,
and it is in our report. But I think that the most eloquent
testimony is from those who experienced the loss that I
described. I will quote from the Court transcript. One
witness says:
“We need to know their stories. We need to
know what they say about who killed their family
members, who displaced them, who took away their
belongings, who seized their cattle. Not a single
person, not even a hundred people, can describe it
enough. We have to show the victims that there is
justice in this world.”
It is this prayer, this hope and this imperative that
compelled the Council to refer the matter to the Court.
It was not an exercise of politics; it was an exercise
of humanity, in my respectful view, as well as a legal
requirement to discharge the Council’s obligations under
the Charter of the United Nations. And I am delighted
to say that the trial is making swift progress, and the
prosecution intends to close its case by the end of next
month, as reflected in the report. That makes the pace
of the trial the most efficient since the establishment
of the Court. That has been achieved by targeted
presentation of evidence, by agreements between the
prosecution and the defence wherever possible. It has
also been achieved by excellent trial management by
the independent Judges of the International Criminal
Court and by the diligent work of the men and women
of the Registry, who often are invisible, but deal with
issues related to the witnesses, such as bringing them
to the Court, and with the Court proceedings, and the
interpreters, translators and stenographers. I think it is
only right to acknowledge all of their work. I think that
even now, before the trial is concluded, there is much to
be proud of and much to be emulated in the work by the
organs of the Court, by the legal representatives of the
victims and by the defence in other cases.
Five months have passed since my most recent
visit to Darfur, and I believe a fair assessment compels
us to reach the conclusion that the Office I have the
honour to lead has made truly sincere efforts to keep
the promises that I made to the communities I had the
honour to look in the face, to listen to and to engage
with. And through cumulative measures, the focused
deployment of additional resources and the attempt to
obtain more information, we have tried to bring back to
The Hague, to the activities of my Office, the urgency
that we felt so keenly in the camps of those displaced
in Darfur.

S/PV.9249

But there remains a key and essential part of our
collective work that must be addressed. As reflected in
the report and as is patently obvious, cooperation from
the Government of the Sudan is critically important if
we are to meet the needs of the people of Darfur. It
brings me no pleasure to say this, but the unfortunate
truth is that the Government of the Sudan is not
meeting the requirements of cooperation set out by this
Council under Chapter VII of the Charter, as contained
in resolution 1593 (2005), adopted all those years ago.
Many important promises were made, cooperation
agreements signed and commitments undertaken
by the most senior officials of the country. These
agreements, made to my face during my last visit and
signed in memorandums of understanding, have not
been honoured. It is my unfortunate duty to say that
cooperation has deteriorated, not improved, since
my most recent briefing. My report attempts to fairly
and accurately set out the unfortunate gap that exists
between the words and the action of the Government
of the Sudan.
Despite commitments made during my visit to the
Sudan, access to the country has become more difficult.
New administrative hurdles have been created, and
Sisyphean efforts are required in order to simply obtain
single-entry visas. The promise of multiple-entry visas
has not been delivered. That is only the beginning of the
story, because even when we obtain a single-entry visa,
limited in temporal duration, we have to obtain internal
travel permits to go, for example, to Darfur. And there
have been decisions to say that we cannot obtain those
before we travel, so teams must be deployed to wait
in Darfur in order to do their job. The reason I think
this is important is that we have a job to do. We will
try to do it. But while internationals may sit in hotels
in Khartoum waiting to get travel permits, we have
children, women and men waiting in refugee camps,
waiting for justice. And it is their patience, not mine,
that I am quite focused on.
Access to documentation and witnesses remains
restricted, and there are significant challenges, even
in getting access to what should clearly be public, for
example, the national archives. And in this reporting
period, over the past six months, not one request for
assistance, unfortunately, has been executed by the
Government of the Sudan. More than 34 such requests
remain outstanding, and I continue to wait for formal
approval for what was promised to me orally and what

23-023743/18

S/PV.9249

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

25/01/2023

is in a signed memorandum of understanding, namely,
the ability for us to establish an office in Khartoum.

down the clock. I expressed that in Khartoum and in my
meetings yesterday, as well as on other occasions.

It may be said that these are bureaucratic issues, that
this is evidence of dysfunction, rather than obstruction.
Time will tell, but one thing is clear — things are
getting worse. They were better, and they can get better
again if there is a will to cooperate with the will and
international obligations of resolution 1593 (2005).
With all due respect, a change of posture is needed by
those charged with responsibility or those who have
assumed responsibility in the Sudan — because what
we are talking about is the potency and the credibility,
not of the International Criminal Court or of the Office
I lead, but also of the Council.

It is truly my sincere hope that we can partner
together with the Sudan, and that the Sudan can seize
the moment for its own sake and for the sake of its
international reputation, the people that it represents
and its future. I really hope that the road map towards
accountability that I have presented can be seized,
because it will be beneficial to international justice and,
in my view, beneficial for the Sudan as well. We will
strive to ensure that anybody who seeks to frustrate the
work of the Court through non-cooperation will not be
successful. That is why we have tried to the best of our
ability to build new partnerships, to go to third States
and international organizations and to strengthen the
evidential base from a variety of other sources. I am
pleased to note that, during the reporting period, we
significantly strengthened that cooperation, and it is
paying dividends. The innovations and new approaches
put forward have allowed us to collect new evidence in
relation to some of the individuals for whom there are
outstanding warrants.

Can the decisions and obligations of the Council,
when finally achieved, be disregarded? Can any
individual, State or authority thumb its nose at the
will of the Security Council? If the answer is yes,
then what hope is there? If the answer is no, then what
are the courses of action that member States or the
Council can take or decide upon in order to encourage
the implementation and the discharge of international
obligations? I know that it may be a sensitive position in
the Sudan, and perhaps there have been many sensitive
moments there. We are trying to work in a way that
helps the Sudan in its transition and that enforces
instead of undermines peace and security and stability.
But my obligation, by dint of the Statute, is quite
focused. Over the most recent period, since 2005, not
one domestic trial has taken place in the Sudan for the
hundreds of thousands of people who were displaced,
for the pictures of property being burned and destroyed
and for the allegations of rape, of targeting children and
civilians that we have heard in the courtroom and in
many other areas as well. And if we do not see a change
of approach, I may have no option in the next report but
to commence certain other action by member States in
the next period.
But I am open to engagement. I really am
genuinely open — and I mentioned it to His Excellency
yesterday — to innovative approaches, such as engaging
with the African Union and with the Sudan, and
building partnerships. But something has to be done,
because partnerships require two people, two entities,
to be engaged. As the saying goes: “It takes two to
tango.” We cannot try to move alone — and if we do, we
will not get to the destination we are compelled to get
to, which is simply getting to the truth. Those who wish
to frustrate accountability must not be allowed to run
4/18

But more is needed. I think it is only right to
also commend the States that assisted us during the
reporting period. Everybody should be the friend
of humankind. That must not be jeopardized by
the fractures in the Council or in the international
firmament that we witness around the world. This
is not about politics, it is about basic humanity. We
can — and it is my hope to — scythe a clearing through
the thicket of disinformation that will also allow us to
discharge our responsibilities in order to get to the truth
and identify a proper road map so that I can discharge
my responsibilities under the Rome Statute and to the
Council, and to help identify a way to close the situation.
As I have said repeatedly, these situations cannot be
never-ending stories. During the reporting period, we
conducted a comprehensive mapping process with a
number of third States, which I think is going to be
extremely important, and I hope to report more about
that at my next briefing to the Council.
In addition to briefing those States, international
organizations and partners that have tried to be on the
side of humanity and justice, I also want to note that
sometimes the most valuable contributions are offered
by those who dedicate themselves completely pro bono.
In that regard, I want to commend my Special Adviser
on Darfur, who sits behind me, Mrs. Amal Clooney,
for her dedication to the cause of justice. That is not
23-02374

25/01/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV.9249

cosmetic. It really shows evidence that, when we work
together, we can make a difference. But that is what it
requires. It requires coming together in a way that is not
political — and we are not political — to independently
and impartially get to the truth. When I next brief
the Council, I hope to report that there has been a
revitalization and a renewed common effort between
my Office and the Sudanese authorities to implement
the mandate given to us by the Council. That would
also reflect the promises made by the Government of
the Sudan during my previous visits. But irrespective of
that cooperation, I have every confidence that I will be
able to report on further progress made in the current
trials. I am also hopeful that new pathways for further
accountability will have been set.

Since I commenced my responsibilities as
Prosecutor about one year and a half ago, I have
made very sincere and determined efforts, along with
my deputies and the staff of my Office, to reform,
restructure and improve the processes and functions
of my Office and inject more professionalism so that
I can better discharge my own responsibilities under
the Rome Statute. And with the greatest of respect,
perhaps the time has come — indeed perhaps it is long
overdue — for the Sudan to be similarly determined to
ensure its cooperation with my Office, as that is what is
required of it as a function of international law pursuant
to resolution 1593 (2005). Because as I said, judges will
judge what is presented in the courtroom, but history of
course judges us all.

The question really must be not whether we can
deliver on the mandate, but how. I believe that, through
the adoption of the new strategy, by adding new
resources and by running investigations more diligently,
we can ensure that steps towards justice continue to be
taken. The question of the moment, perhaps, is whether
that can be achieved and whether it will be done in
sincere partnership with the Government of the Sudan
or not. And I myself, on behalf of my Office, sincerely
hope that it will become a valued partner and willing
to work with me to deliver justice in a manner that will
allow us to tell the victims — to look them in the face
and say that there has been justice and that their lives
and experiences matter to all members of the Council.
Then we can also close the situation and dispel the
clouds that hang over the Sudan so that it can fulfil its
destiny by fulfilling the aspirations of all its citizens,
unencumbered by the burdens of the past that it will
carry until justice is delivered.

The President: I thank Prosecutor Khan for
his briefing.

The victims and the survivors can never be far from
our thoughts. And I really think that in this Chamber it is
important to remember them. If the members of Council
could visualize the faces of children — some knocking
deflated footballs around and some in an array of clothes
that may have been worn by generations, by parents
who themselves were born in the camps, because there
are many challenges being faced — I think they would
realize that there is a moment to suspend the normal
political discourse. They would realize that in those
moments of influence that we all have — the moments
of authority that the Council continues to have — we
need to be able to discharge responsibilities in a way
that we can be proud of.

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), Mr. Karim Khan, for his valuable
briefing, and to underline Switzerland’s unwavering
support for the ICC.
We have taken note of the Prosecutor’s thirty-sixth
report on the situation in Darfur, and we appreciate
his efforts to present the activities of the Court and
his Office in a transparent manner. Switzerland is
pleased with the significant progress that has been
achieved this year in the trial of Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman.
That trial is essential for the victims and the affected
communities, who have been waiting for more than 17
years for justice. It is also a historic trial because it is
the first ever resulting from a Security Council referral.
We commend the victim-centred approach taken
by the Prosecutor. We also thank the many witnesses
who testified before the Court for their courage and
determination, and we commend civil society for
its tireless efforts to support those proceedings. We
also commend the various third-party States and
international organizations for their assistance, which
played a key role as well. That trial gives a voice to
the victims and survivors. It underscores once again
the preventive and reconciliatory role played by the
ICC. The Court is a vehicle for peace and security and
therefore the spirit of both its mandate and that of the
Council are the same.

23-023745/18

S/PV.9249

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

In order for the ICC to carry out its mandate
effectively, independently and impartially, it depends
on the assistance of all of us. In that regard, we call on
all Member States to comply with their obligations to
cooperate, whether under the Rome Statute or pursuant
to resolution 1593 (2005). We also invite the Sudanese
authorities to support the ICC’s efforts by taking
concrete steps.
Combating impunity is a central element of Swiss
foreign policy. It is also at the heart of the Juba Peace
Agreement. Ensuring justice is not only a duty in terms
of accountability but also an imperative for the future
of the Sudan.
In conclusion, let me underscore once again the
essential role of the ICC as an institution of last resort
to try the most serious international crimes, bring
justice to the victims and thereby contribute to a lasting
peace. The ICC and the Office of the Prosecutor have
our full support.
Mr. Wickremasinghe (United Kingdom): I would
like to start by thanking the Prosecutor for the thirtysixth report on the situation in Darfur, submitted
pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005), and for his
briefing today.
We welcome the swift progress made in the trial
of Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman as a historic step towards
seeking accountability for survivors and affected
communities in Darfur after many years. In that
light, the United Kingdom would like to commend
the tireless commitment of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) for more than 17 years to help deliver
justice for the people of Darfur. As we heard, the trial
of Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman enabled victims and witnesses
to courageously tell their stories and to demonstrate to
other victims that justice can be delivered. Such progress
is an example of how strong cooperation with the ICC
can translate into meaningful action. It is therefore
deeply disappointing that sufficient cooperation has
been lacking from the Sudanese authorities, despite
their reassurances to the Prosecutor during his visits to
the Sudan. Stronger engagement would demonstrate that
the Sudanese authorities are serious about delivering
their commitments on transitional justice, as outlined
in the 2020 Juba Peace Agreement and the initial
framework agreement signed on 5 December 2022.
The United Kingdom urges the Sudanese authorities
to immediately enhance their cooperation with the Court,
in particular in the following three areas. First, we call
6/18

25/01/2023

on the Sudanese authorities to provide prompt access
to documentary archives and witnesses relevant to the
Court’s investigations. Secondly, a permanent presence
is vital for the Office of the Prosecutor to deepen its
engagement with affected communities. We therefore
urge the Sudanese authorities to help to facilitate the
establishment of a field office in Khartoum, remove
the unnecessary bureaucratic impediments preventing
Court staff from being permitted multiple entry visas
to the Sudan and give access to Darfur to ICC staff.
Thirdly, the United Kingdom calls on the Sudanese
authorities to respond swiftly to the Court’s outstanding
requests for assistance, noting that 34 requests currently
remain outstanding, with no responses received in the
current reporting period.
Finally, we welcome and encourage the continuation
of cooperation between the Court and third States,
which has proved particularly vital in the absence of
cooperation by the Sudanese authorities. The United
Kingdom would like to reiterate its support for the
Court in delivering justice for the people of Darfur. In
that respect, we call for action to deliver on the four
ICC warrants that remain outstanding in the Darfur
situation, and we call for the surrender of Mr. Banda,
who remains a fugitive from justice.
Mr. Simonoff (United States of America): I thank
Prosecutor Khan for his report and his briefing today
on the ongoing investigations and prosecutions of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) with regard to the
situation in Darfur. We appreciate his dedication and
the unwavering commitment of the judges, attorneys
and staff of the International Criminal Court to the
pursuit of justice for the people of Darfur.
We continue to monitor the ongoing trial
proceedings in the case involving former Janjaweed
commander Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman, also known as Ali
Kushayb. That is a landmark case — the first trial
against any senior leader for atrocities committed by
the Omer Al-Bashir regime and government-supported
forces in Darfur and, more importantly, the first real
opportunity for justice that the victims of Darfur have
had. We acknowledge the bravery of all the witnesses
and victims who have come forward. We also appreciate
the work of Court personnel who have facilitated their
participation and ensured their safety and security.
This is a crucial moment for the Sudan’s future.
Just a few weeks ago, the parties signed a framework
political agreement for the restoration of the Sudan’s
democratic transition. More than one year after the
23-02374

25/01/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

military takeover, that agreement and the recent launch
of the second phase of dialogues on outstanding issues
are promising steps towards the establishment of a
final agreement to form a civilian Government. The
framework political agreement also reflects the values
of the 2019 revolution, recognizing the diversity of the
Sudanese people and committing to creating a new State
based on core democratic principles and human rights
norms. The fact that those negotiations have happened
at all is a testament to the Sudanese women, men and
young people, who have persistently and courageously
taken to the streets to demand their rights and call for
civilian rule, despite facing violence at the hands of the
Sudanese security forces.
But some of the hardest challenges lie ahead,
as the parties begin to address a set of thorny issues
in the second phase of the dialogues, including
transitional justice, the Juba Peace Agreement and
security sector reform. The violence that we have
continued to see in Darfur, Blue Nile and elsewhere
demonstrates the importance of addressing those issues
in inclusive dialogues. As negotiations move forward,
we underscore the importance of full respect for the
freedoms of association, expression and peaceful
assembly. The impact of decades of dictatorship under
Al-Bashir will not be erased overnight. The Sudan will
need a holistic transitional justice strategy to address
the needs of victims, rebuild trust, repair relationships
among communities and set the Sudan on a path in
which human rights are respected.
As part of that broader strategy, we strongly
urge the Sudan’s authorities to comply with their
international legal obligations pursuant to resolution
1593 (2005) and move forward in cooperating with
the ICC in the areas that the Prosecutor has repeatedly
outlined as priorities. There are three suspects subject
to ICC arrest warrants who are currently in Sudanese
custody: Omer Al-Bashir, Ahmed Harun and Abdel
Raheem Muhammad Hussein. Cooperation with the
ICC on those cases is central to finally delivering justice
in Darfur. It would be a clear signal that the Sudan’s
leaders are committed to the principles of justice and
accountability as set forth in the framework political
agreement. The Sudanese authorities must continue
to permit ICC teams to travel within the country. In
addition, they must act on the many outstanding requests
from the Prosecutor for evidence, other information and
assistance, including by providing unimpeded access to
key witnesses and taking steps to facilitate an enhanced
ICC field presence.

S/PV.9249

Over the next few months, we will continue to
stand with the Sudanese people as they work to find
common ground on how transitional justice, including
accountability for the violence during many decades
of conflict, can advance truth, justice, reconciliation
and healing.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I thank Mr. Karim Khan. As always, he has
given an excellent and emotional briefing.
Darfur is the first pilot project of the Security
Council to engage the International Criminal Court
(ICC) in international efforts to normalize the situation
in a specific country, namely, the Sudan, in order to
address the intercommunal divisions there and promote
national reconciliation. That project was launched
pursuant resolution 1593 (2005) almost 18 years ago.
Since then, two Prosecutors have been replaced and the
composition of the Court has been almost completely
overhauled. After 18 years, we have finally arrived at
the first trial. In that context, I would like to share some
general observations.
First, an ordinary, routine event — namely, the
trial of the accused Ali Kushayb, who, incidentally,
voluntarily surrendered himself to the International
Criminal Court in the summer of 2020 — is, for some
reason, being portrayed as a historic milestone in the
work of international criminal jurisdiction. Some
momentum as regards the Darfur dossier is being
presented exclusively to the individual credit of the
Court. At the same time, setbacks and failures are being
attributed to the sins of third parties, such as a lack
of proper cooperation on the part of States, unfulfilled
promises and dashed expectations, inter alia. Such
behaviour, by the way, is typical not only of the ICC,
but also of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals, which inherited the worst practices
of its predecessor, the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia. The Sudan is now being reproached
for the cooling of relations with the Office of the ICC
Prosecutor. Perhaps the issue lies in the fact that the
credibility of the ICC as an unbiased, non-politicized
body has been significantly undermined in the
international community.
Secondly, the persistent attempts of the ICC
to singlehandedly rewrite the existing norms of
international law are cause for concern. What is
noteworthy in that connection is the judgment of 6 May
2019 on the Jordanian appeal, with the participation
of the African Union and the League of Arab States.

23-023747/18

S/PV.9249

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

25/01/2023

The Court’s conclusions clearly demonstrated how
far removed the ICC is from sober assessments of its
jurisdiction. Despite the ICC’s misinterpretation of
the question of immunities, not one country complied
with the illegitimate arrest warrant for the Sudanese
President Omer Al-Bashir during his official visits,
thereby recognizing his immunity under customary
international law and the very Statute of the ICC itself.

that regard by underscoring the importance of justice,
accountability and the protection of human rights. We
believe that addressing injustices is crucial in paving the
way towards accountability, reconciliation and durable
peace and security in the Sudan. In that regard, the ICC’s
mandate should be a supplementary instrument to the
peace process in the Sudan through closer collaboration
with all relevant national stakeholders.

Thirdly, since the Security Council referred the
situation in Darfur to the ICC, it would be useful for
the Council to more proactively follow the work of the
Court in that area. Of course, this is not a matter of
total oversight. There has been no need — at least thus
far — to resort to excessive measures, such as imposing
individual sanctions against the Prosecutor and other
Court officials, following the example of the United
States. It is important to consistently make it clear to
the Court that its action to bring those responsible to
justice is not an end in itself, but part of a larger effort
by the international community to consolidate the
peace processes in the Sudan.

Mozambique notes that, under the transitional
Government, the country has achieved encouraging
progress towards peace. The expression of commitment
to the Juba Peace Agreement and to combating crossborder criminal activities, as well as efforts to promote
cooperation with neighbouring countries, are, in our
view, positive steps. The Security Council referred
the situation in Darfur to the ICC almost 18 years
ago through resolution 1593 (2005). It is important
that this organ reflect on the impacts of the decision
taken in 2005 on the peace process in the Sudan. It’s
it is our understanding that there is also a need to
privilege national, regional and continental judiciary
and reconciliation mechanisms and bodies, such as
the transitional justice provisions of the Juba Peace
Agreement and the African Court on Human and
Peoples’ Rights, while reinforcing complementarity
among them.

Finally, during our briefings, we continue to hear
voices advocating for the work of the ICC on the two
situations referred to it to receive either partial or full
United Nations funding. Let us consider the reality as
set out in paragraph 7 of resolution 1593 (2005), acting
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations:
“none of the expenses incurred in connection
with the referral including expenses related to
investigations or prosecutions in connection with
that referral, shall be borne by the United Nations
and that such costs shall be borne by the parties
to the Rome Statute and those States that wish to
contribute voluntarily”.
We are confident that the Sudanese people are more
than capable of delivering justice on their own, but the
activities of the ICC raise many questions.
Mr. Fernandes (Mozambique): I thank Mr. Karim
Khan, Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), for his update on the situation in the Sudan. I
also wish to acknowledge the presence of the Permanent
Representative of the Sudan.
We recognize the important role of the ICC in
combating impunity in cases of systematic violations
of human rights and its important contribution to
international peace and security. The Juba Peace
Agreement and the National Plan for the Protection
of Civilians in Darfur brought forth useful insight in
8/18

Mozambique expresses its support for the peace
process in the Sudan and welcomes the launch of the
final phase of the political process facilitated by the
tripartite mechanism of the African Union, the United
Nations and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development. Mozambique commends the progress
made by the Government of the Sudan in supporting
the reinforcement of the presence of the Office of
the Prosecutor in in the country and welcomes the
commitments by the Sudanese authorities with a view to
strengthening cooperation with the Office. The report
of the Prosecutor shows some windows of opportunity
for constructive engagement with the Government
of the Sudan to promote an environment of healing
and reconciliation and to reinforce efforts to restore
long-lasting peace in the Sudan. In that context, we
encourage the Office of the Prosecutor to maintain and
engage in dialogue with the Government of the Sudan
and all stakeholders to create the enabling conditions
for constructive discussions on the way forward. We
also encourage the Office of the Prosecutor to continue
to engage with the African Union in the process.
23-02374

25/01/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

In conclusion, it is our expectation that the
Government of the Sudan and the Office of the
Prosecutor will continue to seek ways of working
together in delivering justice for the Sudanese people.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court, Mr. Karim Khan, for the presentation of his
report, and I welcome the presence of the representative
of the Sudan at this meeting.
We have closely followed the trial of Ali
Muhammad Ali Abd-Al-Rahman, the first case at the
Court related to the situation in Darfur and the first
based on a referral from the Security Council. As others
have noted this afternoon, we too note that it has taken
more than 17 years for him to stand trial for the crimes
he has been charged with, which began in April 2022.
We encourage the Office of the Prosecutor to focus its
work on the conclusion of the case, as it will send a
message of hope to the victims that the perpetrators of
atrocity crimes will face justice. We also call on the
Sudanese Government to execute the arrest warrants
issued by the Court against four defendants, three of
whom are in the custody of the Sudanese Government,
including former President Omer Al-Bashir, and work
with the Court to bring them to justice. We appreciate
the update provided by the Prosecutor on the progress
made in implementing the renewed investigation and
prosecution strategy, which has allowed for a more
targeted approach that includes benchmarks.
In that regard, we note with concern that
non-compliance with several of the benchmarks has
been caused by insufficient cooperation from the
Government of the Sudan. As detailed in the Prosecutor’s
report, despite the commitments made by the Sudanese
authorities during his August 2022 visit, obstacles to
the investigative work persist, such as the lack of access
to documentation and archives, the lack of responses to
requests for assistance and restrictions on the issuance
of visas. In addition, permanent changes have been made
in the appointment of focal points at national institutions
in the Sudan. We urge the Government of the Sudan to
fulfil its commitments to cooperate with the Court and
its bodies in accordance with resolution 1593 (2005),
the memorandum of understanding concluded with the
Office of the Prosecutor and the pledges made by the
country’s authorities. Their cooperation is critical not
only to meeting the goals set out by the Prosecutor in
his report, but, even more important, to avoiding the

S/PV.9249

perpetuation of impunity for those responsible for the
incidents that occurred in Darfur.
We acknowledge the cooperation that the Prosecutor
has reported having received from third countries and
international institutions, which has made possible
obtaining new forms of evidentiary material relating
to the suspects identified. We are convinced that the
referral of cases by the Council to the International
Criminal Court can become an effective mechanism for
combating impunity. To that end, we must strengthen
the level of cooperation and coordination between the
Court and the Council and ensure the provision of the
resources required for its implementation. Ecuador is a
founding member of the International Criminal Court,
and one of the pillars of its foreign policy is respect
for international law and the fight against impunity.
Therefore, we reiterate our support for the work carried
out by the Office of the Prosecutor, which we believe
will contribute to achieving national reconciliation and
sustainable peace in the Sudan.
Mr. Liang Hengzhu (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I thank Prosecutor Karim Khan of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) for his briefing and welcome
the Permanent Representative of the Sudan at
today’s meeting.
The political situation in the Sudan has been
improving. Earlier this month, the final phase of the
political process was launched in the Sudan, which is
another important sign of progress since the signing
of the political framework agreement by the main
parties in the Sudan in December 2022. We welcome
the developments and sincerely hope that all parties in
the Sudan will put the interests of the country and its
people first, actively participate in the final phase of
the negotiations and put the political transition back on
the right track as soon as possible. We also expect the
Sudan to continue to make further achievements on the
road to peace, stability and development.
Re-establishing the rule of law and achieving
justice in Darfur are the shared goals of the international
community. China appreciates the Sudanese
Government’s use of justice and accountability as an
important means to achieving lasting peace, through
establishing a transitional justice commission, consistent
with the terms of the Juba Peace Agreement, the signing
of the memorandum on understanding concluded with
the Prosecutor and welcoming his visits, among other
efforts. It should be self-evident that the implementation
of the Juba Peace Agreement and building the judicial

23-023749/18

S/PV.9249

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

capacity of the Sudanese Government require financial
support. The international community should eliminate
political interference, provide tangible assistance to
the Sudan and respond constructively to the lifting of
Security Council sanctions — an issue about which the
Sudan is concerned
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that China’s
position on the ICC’s involvement in the Sudanese issue
remains unchanged. We hope that the Court will strictly
adhere to the principle of complementary jurisdiction,
respect the judicial sovereignty of the Sudan in earnest,
fully heed the relevant opinions of the Sudanese
Government, maintain its independence, impartiality
and objectivity in the investigations, prosecutions
and trials and ensure that its work is conducive to
promoting judicial justice and achieving lasting peace
in the Sudan.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I would like to
thank Prosecutor Karim Khan of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) for his thirty-sixth report to the
Security Council pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005).
The resolution is certainly a landmark in the history
of international criminal justice. It was the first time
that the Security Council availed itself of its power to
refer a situation to the Court, although it had allowed
for selective immunities. I also welcome the delegation
of the Sudan to this meeting.
These briefings are welcome opportunities for the
Council to discuss the implementation of resolution
1593 (2005) and express the Council’s support for the
work of the International Criminal Court. There is no
sustainable peace without justice. I reiterate Brazil’s
unwavering support for the ICC as a fundamental tool
for providing accountability for the most serious crimes
under international law.
Brazil welcomes the Prosecutor’s prioritization
of Security Council referrals, including by allocating
additional resources, as outlined in the report. In
this regard, while reaffirming its commitment to the
universalization of the Court’s jurisdiction, Brazil
reiterates the need for expenses incurred due to Security
Council referrals to be borne not solely by States Parties
to the Rome Statute, but also by the United Nations.
I would like to congratulate Mr. Khan’s team
for the progress made in the Abd-Al-Rahman case.
This landmark trial is not only the first related to the
situation in Darfur, but it is also the very first case
before the Court that results from a Security Council
10/18

25/01/2023

referral. More than two decades later, justice is finally
being served.
The hearings before the Court brought to the fore
the human suffering of people who lost their families
and who could not even pay tribute to their loved ones
with proper funeral services. As the first permanent
impartial international criminal court, the ICC should
not be an instrument of political pressure on developing
countries, but a means to the realization of justice for
the benefit of victims. Brazil reaffirms their right to
reparations, including collective reparations.
Justice delayed is justice denied. We recognize the
primary role to be played by the Sudanese authorities in
effectively investigating the terrible crimes committed
against the Darfurian population and bringing
the perpetrators to justice. In the absence of such
proceedings, it is even more important to support the
ICC in its efforts to fulfil its mandated institutional role
under the Rome Statute.
In that context, Brazil commends the efforts
made by the Office of the Prosecutor towards the
establishment of a field office in Khartoum, which will
bring the Court closer to the victims and witnesses and
reinforce its ability to collect evidence. Brazil urges the
Sudanese authorities to fully cooperate with the ICC in
order to provide unimpeded access to documentation
relevant to investigations and to enhance the field
presence of the Office of the Prosecutor in Khartoum,
in accordance with its obligations set forth in resolution
1593 (2005).
Brazil deeply appreciates Mr. Khan’s visits to
Darfur and his meetings with internally displaced
persons. We welcome the first thematic round
table with civil society, dedicated to crimes against
children, and express our support to the Office of the
Prosecutor’s initiatives to empower victims, witnesses
and affected communities.
I would also like to reiterate our support for
the 5 December political framework agreement, its
ongoing phase of political talks and the restoration of
a civilian-led transition to democracy in the Sudan.
We fully endorse the vital facilitation work done by
the trilateral mechanism composed of representatives
of the African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development and the United Nations. Brazil trusts
that the signatories of the Agreement will agree on
achievable, realistic and, above all, inclusive road
maps sooner rather than later. We are confident that the
23-02374

25/01/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

signatories will keep engaging in inclusive workshops
to address complex yet critical challenges, such as
accountability and transitional justice.
We concur with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Sudan with regard to the
hopes of a fair political solution to the long-standing
crisis in Khartoum. As Special Representative Perthes
pointed out recently, resolving the crisis would mean
that the Sudanese people would soon form a civilianled Government. We hope such a milestone will enable
the Sudan, its leaders and the Sudanese people to
work together further, appreciate the legitimacy of the
institutions they are building and address the remaining
challenges in Darfur.
Finally, as a proud founding member of the ICC,
Brazil has an absolute commitment to international
law and international justice. As a permanent, treatybased tribunal, the ICC represented a breakthrough for
ensuring accountability for the most serious crimes
under international law. The international community
must offer its support for and cooperation with the
Court to be able to fulfil its crucial responsibilities.
Ms. Gatt (Malta): We thank Prosecutor Karim Khan
and his team for presenting the report on the situation
in Darfur and for their commitment to continuing
the pursuit of justice. I also welcome the Permanent
Representative of the Sudan to today’s meeting.
Impunity sows the seeds of further violence.
Ensuring accountability for the people of Darfur is
essential if we are ever to stop the cycle of violence.
We remain firm in our belief that there is room for a
deeper and improved relationship between the Security
Council and the International Criminal Court, in
particular through referrals by the Council to the Court,
to ensure accountability for atrocity crimes committed
in all regions. The referral of the situation in Darfur
demonstrates that when we act together, the Council can
make real progress towards achieving accountability.
We welcome the progress achieved in the trial
of Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman, and we are also pleased that
the Prosecutor anticipates concluding his case in
February. The enhanced cooperation with third States
and international institutions, which secured new
forms of evidentiary material, is commended. Most
importantly, we want to applaud the profound courage
and determination of the witnesses, especially the
victims of sexual and gender-based violence, without
whom that would have been impossible.

S/PV.9249

As mentioned in the report, a round table dedicated
to crimes against children was organized. We strongly
encourage these efforts and improved engagement with
both civil society organizations and representatives of
affected communities.
Let me also thank Prosecutor Khan for his open
approach to reporting and the continued prioritization of
Security Council referrals, as evidenced by the allocation
of dedicated resources to this investigation. We take
this opportunity to stand with him in underlining that
the full cooperation of Sudanese authorities remains
central for the investigative work on all cases and for
delivering on the legitimate expectations of survivors.
We regret the lack of progress over the reporting
period across the four priority areas identified
by the Prosecutor and call for unimpeded access
to documentation and witnesses, support for the
establishment of a field presence in Khartoum and
the required visas, and prompt responses to requests
for assistance.
Before concluding, let me express Malta’s
commitment to the Sudan’s path towards political
stability, which is underpinned by a meaningful political
transition. We welcome the signing of the political
framework agreement last December which effectively
lays the groundwork for a final accord that will usher in
a new reality for the Sudan and its people. We reaffirm
our full support for the efforts of the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan,
the African Union, and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, in making coordinated efforts in the
peace process. We reiterate the importance of the full,
equal and meaningful participation of women and youth
in the transitional process and encourage the parties to
include their aspirations in the final agreement.
Our collective aim in this context is to ensure
a durable and sustainable peace in the Sudan. That
aim can only be achieved if there is justice for the
victims and survivors of atrocity crimes. The Office
of the Prosecutor and the Court can count on Malta’s
unwavering support towards accountability.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing today’s debate on the
thirty-sixth report of the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) on the situation in Darfur
pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005). I thank Prosecutor
Karim Khan for his update on the activities of the Court

23-0237411/18

S/PV.9249

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

and welcome the participation of the representative of
the Sudan in today’s meeting.
We note of the ongoing judicial proceedings as part
of the investigations conducted by the ICC during the
reporting period with a view to concluding outstanding
trials, as we believe that they will help to meaningfully
shore up international criminal justice and build peace
nationally, regionally and internationally. Significant
progress has been made in the case against Ali
Muhammad Ali Abd-Al-Rahman, including the charges
brought against him, which is an important milestone.
Gabon welcomes the reassessment of the strategy
of the Office of the Prosecutor, which is geared towards
accelerating criminal cooperation in order to improve
the coordination of investigations and prosecution, as
well as legal assistance. We recall the commitments
made by the Sudanese authorities to fully cooperate
with the Court in support of its work, of course without
renouncing their principal judicial jurisdiction or their
national sovereignty.
The fact that, on 12 August 2021, the Sudanese
authorities agreed to sign an agreement that establishes
the modalities of the vital cooperation between the
Sudan and the Office of the Prosecutor remains an
important step. Of course, that agreement must be
implemented to help the Court to renew its strategy in
order to continue its investigations into allegations of
war crimes and crimes against humanity, within the
expected time frames and with respect for the principle
of legality and in the spirit of mutual and extensive
dialogue with the Sudanese authorities.
We support all initiatives facilitating the Court’s
update and follow-up on commitments made by the
Sudan in the context of that agreement with the aim
of building upon the initial momentum and envisaging
additional support measures, including the allocation
of essential resources. We welcome the partnerships
that have been created or envisaged among the
ICC and States parties, non-State parties, civil
society organizations and regional and subregional
organizations to strengthen legal cooperation on
outstanding and recent cases, with evidence linked to
new suspects or related cases.
We emphasize the importance of paying special
attention to civil society representing the victims and
the survivors of the conflict in Darfur, as well as to the
protection of witnesses. We encourage the Prosecutor
to continue to take steps to improve the effectiveness
12/18

25/01/2023

and delivery of services, while noting that his visit to
camps for displaced persons has helped to strengthen
dialogue with those affected. We applaud capacitybuilding for investigators and the inclusion of Arabicspeaking experts in the team, which is valuable as it
also guarantees the principle of legality and establishes
trust specifically with victims and witnesses.
Of course, the effectiveness of those various
measures continues to hinge on improvements in the
political and security situation in the Sudan, which,
as we know, is faced with manifold security, political
and economic challenges. We commend international
efforts, specifically the trilateral mechanism, which
consists of the African Union, the United Nations and
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development. We
call upon all parties to demonstrate responsibility and
restraint in order to ease tensions and put an end to the
violence that claims new victims in Darfur.
As part of efforts to deliver justice for alleged
crimes committed in 2003, we have no doubt that
the Office of the Prosecutor will take into account
the delicate political situation in the Sudan. To that
end, the swift restoration of constitutional order will
facilitate greater cooperation between the Court and
the Sudanese authorities. However, we must not lose
sight of the fact that the Sudan is at a pivotal point in its
history, requiring special understanding, and that there
are several priority decisions to be made with regard
to the country’s stability and security, responses to
humanitarian challenges and, of course, accountability
and justice for the atrocities that were committed.
In conclusion, Gabon wishes to reaffirm its full
support for the efforts of the Prosecutor and his Office
and encourages the Sudanese authorities to continue
to fully cooperate with the Office of the Prosecutor.
That partnership remains vital for the effective
implementation of resolution 1593 (2005).
Mr. Boateng (Ghana): I would like to thank
Mr. Karim Khan for his thirty-sixth briefing to
the Security Council on the activities of the Office
of the Prosecutor on the Sudan file. Let me also
warmly welcome the representative of the Sudan to
today’s meeting.
The report demonstrates the Office’s seriousness in
dealing with impunity in the Sudan based on the swift
progress made with regard to the trial proceedings in
the case against Ali Muhammad Ali Abd-Al-Rahman.
As will be recalled, this is the first trial at the Court
23-02374

25/01/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

that is based on a referral from the Council. Ghana is
therefore particularly encouraged by the courage of
the victims and witnesses who have braved all risks
by coming forward to provide their testimonies. The
courage shown demonstrates that the victims of atrocity
crimes, no matter how long it takes, will always strive
for justice, as amply reflected in paragraphs 15, 16 and
17 of the report, which contains witnesses’ testimonies.
We applaud the efforts of the Office for increasing
the avenues through which it engages with witnesses
and for launching a public appeal for information in
relation to the situation in Darfur. The public appeal
will allow individuals to contact the Office and provide
information about what they know or witnessed
in relation to cases on which the Office is seeking
further information.
Ghana believes that the visit of the Prosecutor to
the Sudan in August 2022, and in particular his visit
to Darfur and camps for internally displaced persons,
provided an important platform for dialogue and the
strengthening of collaboration with local communities,
as well as public relations efforts.
With regard to the cases linked to Wadi Salih and
Mukjar, concerning crimes within the localities of West
Darfur, including acts of murder, rape, destruction of
property and pillaging, it is gratifying to note that the
Office is working with the benchmark submitted to the
Council during the thirty-fifth briefing (see S/PV.9113)
to conclude its case in February.
On cooperation between the Office and the
Sudanese authorities, Ghana wishes to take this
opportunity to encourage the full cooperation of the
competent Sudanese authorities, which remains central
to accelerating the investigative work of the Office
and making sure that the legitimate expectations of
survivors are addressed. Ghana recalls that, in the
thirty-fifth report, the Prosecutor detailed some areas
that are key to the work of the Office. Unfortunately,
the report indicates that those commitments have not
been kept, and only little real progress has been made
across the priority areas outlined by the Prosecutor in
the previous report to the Security Council. We note
the continuing concern with the issuance of visas,
which seems to have taken a downturn, as applicants
are now required to submit their curriculum vitae as
part of the application process for the issuance of only
single-entry visas. In that regard, we encourage the
relevant Sudanese authorities to give consideration
to the following: first, provide unimpeded access to

S/PV.9249

documentation and witnesses in the Sudan; secondly,
support the establishment of a field presence in the
Sudan; and, thirdly, ensure prompt responses to
requests for assistance submitted by the Office to the
Sudanese authorities.
In calling for the full cooperation of the competent
Sudanese authorities, I wish to reiterate Ghana’s
position that such cooperation should not be overtaken
by the principle of complementarity, which is a core
principle of the Rome Statute. In that regard, we
encourage the Office to continue to work with the
Sudanese judicial system and provide the necessary
technical and capacity-building support.
Ghana commends the continuous efforts of
the Office to empower victims, witnesses and the
affected communities by bringing its work closer to
such communities through the proposed increase in
the frequency of missions to Darfur, as well as the
enhancement of the Office’s permanent field presence,
for which Ghana called for the cooperation of the
Sudanese authorities.
We further note that, during the period under review,
the Office broadened and deepened its engagement with
third States and entities in support of its investigative
and prosecutorial activities. It is gratifying to note that
the significant cooperation and assistance received
from a number of those States has helped with the
progress made in the trial of Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman. We
call on States and non-States parties to the International
Criminal Court to continue to cooperate with the Office
by giving timely responses to its requests so as to
enable the latter to effectively and efficiently discharge
its mandate pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005).
We urge the Office to continue its efforts to increase
cooperation and dialogue with African States, as well
as the African Union. As we have always emphasized,
that approach not only could help to address the lack
of cooperation between the Court and the Sudanese
authorities, but also could garner the broadest support
to address issues of accountability in other cases that
the Court is investigating.
I wish to conclude by once again thanking Mr. Khan
for his leadership of the Office and by commending
States and non-States parties that are cooperating with,
and assisting, the Office in carrying out its mandate
pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005), being the first
referral by the Security Council. We hope that the
Council can be unified in its support for the work of

23-0237413/18

S/PV.9249

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the Office as a strong message to would-be perpetrators
of atrocity crimes that the international community
abhors such crimes and that perpetrators will not
enjoy impunity.
Mrs. Dime Labille (France) (spoke in French):
Allow me too to thank the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), Mr. Karim Khan, for the
comprehensive presentation of his twenty-sixth report
on the activities of his Office. His visit to the Sudan, in
particular to the internally displaced persons camps, in
August 2022 brought hope to the victims of the conflict
and local communities and is a welcome initiative.
The investigation into the situation in Darfur by
the International Criminal Court, at the request of
the Security Council, is all the more essential at this
time of fragile transition in the Sudan. The political
crisis continues to impede the peace process in Darfur.
Building a lasting and inclusive peace in the region
will not be possible without justice. The fight against
impunity for the perpetrators of the most serious
crimes is part of the restoration of democratic life,
reconciliation and the success of the rule of law.
We appreciate that the events in the Sudan have had
a very worrisome impact on the progress of the Court’s
investigations. We therefore call on the Sudanese
authorities to cooperate fully with the Office of the
Prosecutor and to fulfil their obligations under not
only resolution 1593 (2005), but also the Juba Peace
Agreement and the memorandum of understanding
concluded the Office of the Prosecutor. All necessary
assistance must be provided to the investigators,
who must be given safe access to Sudanese territory,
particularly to crime scenes, evidence and witnesses,
including when the latter are held in detention centres.
Under the agreements with the Sudanese Government,
a local office of the International Criminal Court should
be established in Khartoum as soon as possible.
France welcomes the significant progress in the
case against Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman, also known as Ali
Kushayb. That is the first case before the International
Criminal Court to proceed to a trial on the situation in
Darfur and the first following a referral by the Security
Council. We commend the efficient conduct of the trial,
thanks to the work of the Prosecutor and the judges,
to ensure that justice is done within a reasonable time.
The trial represents a crucial moment for the survivors
and families of the victims. In that regard, we recall
that it is essential that witnesses in that case be able to
14/18

25/01/2023

testify in complete safety, without risk of reprisals and
without hindrance.
In addition, while complementarity remains a
cardinal principle, the enforcement of outstanding arrest
warrants is crucial. We call on the Sudan to surrender
Mr. Harun to the ICC as soon as possible. We once again
urge Mr. Banda to surrender immediately to the Court
so that he can be tried there. We commend the increased
cooperation between the Office of the Prosecutor and
third States and international organizations, which
helped to advance the Court’s various investigations
and obtain new evidence.
While the Prosecutor is carrying out essential
investigations into all the abuses within his jurisdiction,
we reaffirm France’s support for the International
Criminal Court, the only permanent international
criminal jurisdiction with a universal mandate.
Let me take advantage of the presence of the
Sudanese authorities and representatives to make
some more general remarks, which may also influence
cooperation with the Court. France’s commitment to
the Sudan since 2019 is closely linked to the ongoing
democratic transition. The political impasse in which
the military authorities have found themselves has
jeopardized many achievements of the past two
years. The political instability particularly affects
the security situation in Darfur. It led to an increase
in violence, including intercommunal violence. Those
responsible for that violence must be held accountable.
We also reiterate our call for the deployment of the
joint protection force provided for in the Juba Peace
Agreement The protection of civilians, including
humanitarian and medical personnel, and the guarantee
of full, safe and unhindered humanitarian access are
the responsibility of the Sudanese authorities. Those
issues must remain priorities.
The framework agreement signed on 5 December
between the military and the Forces for Freedom
and Change, which we welcome as an important step
towards peace and democracy, must now allow for the
restoration of a civilian-led democratic transition. In
that regard, we support the efforts of the United Nations,
the African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development to facilitate dialogue between the
Sudanese parties. It is now important that the Sudanese
parties move forward as soon as possible to finalize
the various workshops provided for in the framework
agreement. Once a new civilian Government has been
23-02374

25/01/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

formed, France will be able to fully recommit to its
cooperation with the Sudanese authorities.
In conclusion, allow me to say that, alongside its
partners, particularly European and others, France will
remain mobilized in support of the political transition in
the Sudan, as well as accountability for the perpetrators
of crimes, including those within the jurisdiction of the
International Criminal Court.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): Let me thank Prosecutor
Khan for his briefing. We commend him and his team,
including the Special Adviser on Darfur, for their
dedication to bringing about justice for the victims of
the war crimes and crimes against humanity committed
in Darfur. We strongly support the International
Criminal Court (ICC) in fulfilling its mission. The
ICC’s commitment to accountability is the only anchor
of hope for the survivors and the victims’ families. The
welcoming of Prosecutor Khan to Darfur in August
2022 demonstrates that.
We praise the progress made on the trial of Ali
Muhammad Ali Abd-Al-Rahman, as mentioned by
Prosecutor Khan. That is an important tangible step
towards delivering justice to the people of Darfur. At
the same time, as a landmark trial, that serves as a
strong reminder to all the perpetrators of war crimes
and crimes against humanity that justice will be served,
however long it may take — for the sake of the people.
Impunity, at the end, will be only history.
We regret to hear that 34 requests for assistance
from Office of the Prosecutor remain pending and
that the Office has faced unnecessary hurdles, even
to access public archives and documentation. Those
actions are nothing other than a further attempt to
delay justice. We took note of the information shared
by Prosecutor Khan on cooperation with the Sudanese
authorities and urge them to stick to their written
commitments and cooperate with the Office of the
Prosecutor, in accordance with resolution 1593 (2005)
and the memorandum of understanding with the ICC.
Albania calls on the Sudanese authorities to provide
unimpeded, secure access to crime scenes, relevant
documentation, public archives and Government
witnesses and to support executing the ICC arrest
warrants for senior officials so that they can face justice
and allow the Court to establish a permanent office
with a greater field presence. As Prosecutor Khan said,
enhanced cooperation between the ICC Prosecutor and
the Government of the Sudan is a must for the ICC to

S/PV.9249

achieve its mission. In our view, it requires honest and
inclusive dialogue with representatives of the political
spectrum and civil society, especially women and youth.
In conclusion, we believe that it is important that
the Council keep its promise to ensure accountability,
as set out in resolution 1593 (2005), give the right
signals to promote justice and ensure accountability for
the atrocities committed in the Sudan.
Mr. Almazrouei (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I thank the Prosecutor, Mr. Karim
Khan, for his thorough briefing on the updates relating
to the activities of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) in Darfur. I also welcome the participation of the
Representative of the Sudan, Ambassador Al-Harith
Mohamed, in today’s meeting.
Last year alone, the Sudan went through exceptional
circumstances. During that period, we witnessed
tireless efforts by the Sudanese stakeholders, supported
by international and regional partners, particularly
the tripartite mechanism, in order to launch a new
phase. Those efforts culminated in the signing of the
political framework agreement last month by a wide
range of Sudanese parties. That is an important step
towards realizing the aspirations of the brotherly
Sudanese people.
We also welcome the recent positive development
that we witnessed early this year, namely, the launching
of the final phase of the Sudan’s political process. In that
regard, we express our sincere wishes for the success of
the Sudanese parties in their upcoming journey towards
completing the transitional period.
In parallel to those developments, the Sudan
continued its engagement with the Office of the
Prosecutor, which included facilitating the Prosecutor’s
important visit to the Sudan in August 2022, during
which he met with Government officials as well as
relevant individuals in the Sudan. With the recent
positive political developments, we hope that those
engagements will continue and will be accompanied by
a sincere and constructive dialogue between the ICC and
the Sudan, based on the principle of complementarity
stipulated in the Court’s statute and in line with the
national laws of the Sudan.
The United Arab Emirates stresses its support for
the Sudan’s efforts to implement transitional justice
mechanisms in accordance with the provisions of the
Juba Peace Agreement in order to ensure justice for the
victims of Darfur. My country also supports the Sudan’s

23-0237415/18

S/PV.9249

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

25/01/2023

recent efforts to de-escalate tensions in Darfur through
local reconciliation agreements, which contributed to
its stability.

General mentioned in his statement earlier this month
in the Chamber (see S/PV.9241), the ICC is the central
institution of the international criminal justice system.

In conclusion, we emphasize that the Juba Peace
Agreement has created a new reality in the Sudan, in
general, and in Darfur, in particular, which requires
the international community to provide the necessary
support to the Sudan in order to complete the
implementation of all the provisions of the Agreement.

We would like to reiterate Japan’s continued
support for the Court and our readiness to continue
providing both human and financial resources to it.
Japan is honoured to assume the role of focal point of
the Council for the ICC-related agenda, together with
Switzerland, and we look forward to concrete progress
on this topic.

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Japan.
Let me begin by thanking Prosecutor Khan for
the thirty-sixth report on the situation in Darfur. The
International Criminal Court (ICC) is key to upholding
the rule of law; its contribution to the fight against
impunity is critical. Japan would like to reaffirm our
unwavering commitment to the ICC and our support
for the tireless efforts, dedication and leadership of the
Office of the Prosecutor.
In 2005, Japan, as a Security Council member at
that time, supported resolution 1593 (2005) given the
importance of the fight against impunity and the role of
the ICC, which is essential for reconciliation among the
parties to conflict in order to achieve sustainable peace
and security. In that resolution, the Security Council
decided that the Government of the Sudan and all
other parties to the conflict in Darfur shall cooperate
fully with, and provide any necessary assistance to,
the Court and the Prosecutor. The Sudan is obliged
to accept and carry out that decision. We recall that
in resolution 1593 (2005), the Council also urged all
States and concerned regional and other international
organizations to cooperate fully with the ICC.
In that regard, we welcome the substantial progress
in the trial of Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman, also known as
Ali Kushayb — the first case referred to the Court by
the Security Council. Now 18 years since the referral,
we are finally witnessing what the Council has long
sought — justice becoming a reality for the victims. We
urge the Sudanese authorities to fully comply with their
obligations under the resolution so that we can meet the
long-overdue and legitimate expectations of survivors.
It is also encouraging to learn that the Prosecutor
has increased engagement with victims, witnesses and
affected communities through his visit to Darfur and
camps for internally displaced persons. We commend
the ICC’s renewed strategic approach, including such
engagement and empowerment. As the Secretary16/18

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
country’s election to membership of the Security
Council and also on your presidency during the current
month. We are ready to cooperate with you on issues of
mutual interest. I would also like to thank Mr. Karim
Khan, Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), for his briefing today on Darfur, as per resolution
1593 (2005).
Achieving justice in Darfur is an important
pillar of the aspirations of the Sudanese transitional
Government in order to establish security and stability
in the region. Justice is also one of the three pillars on
which the December revolution in the Sudan was based.
The Sudan therefore will continue to be committed
to accountability within a permanent integrated
legal context. There is no doubt that the basis and
backbone of that justice is preventing impunity and
ensuring accountability and redress for the victims
in Darfur.
The Sudan’s commitment to achieving justice
in Darfur flows not only from our commitment to
fulfilling our international obligations, but also in
response to popular demands for the establishment
of justice and the implementation of the slogans of
the revolution. From that standpoint, the Sudan will
continue its endeavours to take the means to achieve
justice in Darfur, convinced that peace and justice
are indivisible. While the Government is doing so, it
pursues a comprehensive approach aimed at improving
the overall lives of our citizens in Darfur.
The Juba Peace Agreement was signed to that end,
and the authorities are currently working closely with
all parties to the Agreement in order to implement it
23-02374

25/01/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

in a manner that achieves comprehensive and sustained
stability and peace despite the emerging difficulties.
It is important to note that the issue of justice is one
of the main matters dealt with in the Agreement by
emphasizing cooperation with the ICC, adopting
arrangements for transitional justice and establishing
a special commission for that purpose. The authorities
are also working in that context to implement their
National Plan for the Protection of Civilians, with the
participation of the parties to the Juba Peace Agreement.
Based on what I have just said, I would like to mention
the following three points.
Since achieving justice for Darfur crimes is a
priority for the transitional Government, it has opened
a door for cooperation with the ICC, as a memorandum
of understanding was signed between the Sudan and the
Court in August 2022 to frame that cooperation and
facilitate the tasks of Court delegations and investigators
visiting the Sudan. I would like to point out that the
challenges referred to by the Prosecutor in his report
related to Sudan’s cooperation with his Office are
mainly due to the Sudan’s current circumstances and
the challenges associated with its exceptional transition
path. That is well known to the Security Council. We are
confident that the democratic transition path will soon
be resumed and a civilian Government will be formed.
That, in turn, will reflect positively on cooperation
with the Court.
During the period when the Sudan received
requests for assistance from the Office of the
Prosecutor, the transfer of the executive competence for
cooperation between the Sudan and the ICC from the
Ministry of Justice to the Ministry for Foreign Affairs
was not completed, which prevented the decision on
those requests according to the expectations of the
Prosecutor. The Sudanese authorities facilitated the
visit of the Prosecutor to Khartoum and Darfur, without
restrictions, during which he met with officials, visited
Darfur and heard from a wide range of stakeholders
and victims. The fact that the Prosecutor addressed the
Council in August 2022 from Khartoum (see S/PV.9113)
is a proof of the magnitude of the cooperation between
the Sudan and the Court, which was something that no
one else could have imagined. The Sudan will continue
on that cooperative path, but is it necessary that the
country’s exceptional political circumstances be taken
into account.
The authorities are working to change the reality
of life in Darfur, which is witnessing a fundamental

S/PV.9249

transition from war and conflict to peacebuilding,
through the formation of a transitional justice
commission as a means of achieving justice in cases in
which it is difficult to use ordinary means of justice, and
would operate by revealing the truth, achieving justice,
providing reparations and facilitating reconciliation,
which means through restorative justice. Once
established, the commission will lead a broad dialogue
to meet the aspirations of victims and achieve justice,
as desired.
The Sudan has demonstrated its goodwill and
will continue to do so. We are genuinely interested in
cooperating with the ICC to achieve justice on Darfur,
which has led to the signing of two agreements of
cooperation with the ICC. Full and ideal cooperation
is also related to completing the ratification of the
Rome Statute, as per Sudanese law, because the modes
of cooperation mentioned require a legal basis and
detailed information about the locations and identities
of the individuals concerned. In that unprecedented
and exceptional circumstance, the Government of the
Sudan is dealing with the ICC in the same manner
that it deals with other international organizations and
diplomatic missions. There are no restrictions on the
Court or its activities. Implementing the requests for
cooperation, as per article 99, paragraph 4 (a), of the
Rome Statute, will take place at the right time and as
per the processes specified by our national law, so long
as it does not prohibit the requests.
With regard to the process of ratifying international
conventions, every convention is submitted to the
Ministry of Justice to verify its compliance with
national law, then it is submitted to the Council of
Ministers for approval, and finally it is submitted to the
presidency of the Republic and the Legislative Council
for ratification. There are a number of conventions
that have not been ratified yet because the organs
comprising the transitional phase are not fully formed.
The report does not mention the reasons that prevented
the Court from receiving the documents it demanded
in its request for assistance of November 2022. The
report simply mentions those as challenges that are
unnecessary and impediments for the work of the
Office of the Prosecutor.
Criminal justice falls within the transitional justice
agenda, which was not fully implemented because of the
many political priorities in the Sudan. The Sudan stands
in solidarity with the victims of war crimes and crimes

23-0237417/18

S/PV.9249

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

against humanity and is committed to international law
that addresses such heinous violations.
Criminal justice that is based solely on the
principle of punishment does not provide reparation
for the victims. Therefore, restorative justice should be
adopted to meet the needs and rights of the victims who
swarm the camps of refugees and internally displaced
persons in Darfur, forming a very painful image.
Criminal justice also requires an integrated
criminal justice system that is not in conflict with the
Sudan’s commitments flowing from its international
obligations and human rights conventions. Haste will
not make it possible to meet those requirements, as per
the American proverb which says “unsafe at any speed”.
Due diligence and a careful approach are necessary to
expand the participation base and to reflect the cultural
diversity of the Sudan, which requires the means to
include all stakeholders, of whom many are women
and young people, so that we do not adopt a piecemeal
approach so long as the final purpose is to end impunity.
The agenda is in accordance with our national security
vision. That cannot be achieved in an ideal manner
because of the exceptional pressures on the transitional
regime in the Sudan now, as the Council well knows.
Therefore, we believe that the situation with the
ICC has experienced tangible progress, which I referred
to in the beginning of my statement. However, there
is a need for the organs of the transitional system to
be completed so as to meet the demands of the ICC,
especially given that the armed movements of Darfur
have now become part of the Government and the Juba
Peace Agreement.
Combating impunity is one of the purposes of
achieving justice. That is not a disputable issue. As
mentioned, that is one of the priorities of the transitional
Government and one of the most important components
for achieving peace in my country. Accordingly, we are
firmly committed to combating impunity, in particular
the international crimes related to Darfur. The Sudan
cooperates with the ICC prosecutor, but we are faced
with our current circumstances.
According to the Rome Statute, there is no time
frame for trials. However, the Sudan must agree with
the ICC in advance with regard to the legal choices.
No details have been presented to clarify the aspects
of the progress achieved through the cooperation of
the Sudan with the ICC and the road map that was
mentioned in the report, despite the efforts by the
18/18

25/01/2023

Sudan and the facilitation it provided to the Court and
to the Office of the Prosecutor, whose members I have
met personally in Khartoum more than twice, which
has enabled the Court to achieve progress on the case of
Darfur. To my knowledge, the Court has not provided
a specific written strategy, set of priorities or a work
plan established with the Sudan to move forward and
avoid disagreements.
The Sudan hopes that the Security Council will
understand its current political situation, taking into
consideration the complexity of the political transition
and the ongoing efforts to ensure peace and security
and their impact on the general situation in the Sudan.
We also look forward to the support of the international
community in achieving justice, peace, peaceful
coexistence and sustainable development and on the
likely influence of the Sudan on peace and security in
the region.
There is no need for us to mention that the Sudan
has cooperated with the international community
in a number of areas, including unprecedented
positive cooperation for countering terrorism, violent
extremism, illegal migration, human trafficking,
crimes related to drugs and transnational crime. All
that, in turn, promotes the rule of law and the concept
of combating impunity.
We call on the Security Council to take into
consideration the current political situation and the fact
that the required haste is sometimes based on subjective
criteria. However, with our goodwill and what we will
agree upon through dialogue, which we discussed
yesterday during my meeting with the Prosecutor, we
hope that all bureaucratic impediments will be removed
and that we will clear a path towards criminal justice
through ideal cooperation between the two sides in a
manner that respects the Sudan’s sovereignty, national
entity and its criminal law, which is compatible with
international law.
We know that the Sudan has thus far not signed
the Rome Statute. However, our cooperation is in
compliance with resolution 1593 (2005). Therefore, I
am hopeful that the requests will be met within a time
frame according to the circumstances in Khartoum, and
not as per international standards. We are in a seriously
critical situation that requires special understanding.
I thank the Council and extend all due respect to
the Prosecutor.
The meeting rose at 4.55 p.m.
23-02374
