S/PRST/2008/42

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
7 November 2008
English
Original: English/French

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6014th meeting of the Security Council, held on 7 November 2008, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Côte d’Ivoire”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council takes note that, as mentioned in the report of the
Secretary-General dated 14 October, the peace process has crossed a critical
milestone with the launching of the identification and registration of voters
operations on 15 September 2008. It also however notes that the delays
occurred since the launch of the identification and voter registration processes
on 15 September 2008 have proven greater than expected. It takes note that the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General indicated on the 27 October
2008 that, if the elections scheduled for the 30 November 2008 were delayed,
they were likely to be delayed by several months, due mainly to some
logistical difficulties. The Security Council expresses its deep concern about a
possible third consecutive delay since the signature of the Ouagadougou
Political Agreement, which could put at risk the entire Ivorian peace process.
“The Security Council commends the Facilitator for convening a meeting
of the permanent consultative framework on the 10 November 2008, in order
for the Ivorian political actors to address all the main difficulties of the
electoral process, and in particular with a view to finding an agreement on the
new electoral time frame. It urges all the Ivorian political actors to cooperate
fully with the Facilitator, with the support of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and to demonstrate their political determination to fulfil the
commitments taken in the Ouagadougou agreement and in the framework of its
follow-up mechanisms.
“The Security Council further urges to this end the President of the
Independent Electoral Commission, which is in charge of the organization of
the elections, to share publicly this new timeline, including in particular the
full roll out of the identification process and some other stages such as the
publication of the provisional and final versions of the electoral list, the
fabrication and distribution of the identity and voter’s cards and the date of the
presidential election. It emphasizes that all political actors must pay a
particular attention to the accumulating logistical delay.
“The Security Council urges the Ivorian parties to take immediately and
as a priority the concrete steps necessary to complete the identification and
08-59389 (E) 071108

*0859389*

S/PRST/2008/42

registration of voters operations in a credible and transparent manner before
the end of January 2009. It expresses its determination to bring its full support
to a credible electoral process in Côte d’Ivoire, on the understanding that the
presidential elections will be organized before the end of spring 2009. The
Security Council recalls that all political parties agreed to abide by the Code of
Good Conduct for elections they signed under the auspices of the
Secretary-General on the 23 April 2008.
“The Security Council recalls that, pursuant to resolutions 1572 (2004)
and 1842 (2008), any threat to the electoral process in Côte d’Ivoire shall
constitute a threat to the peace and national reconciliation process and it
reaffirms its determination to impose targeted measures against any person
designated by its Sanctions Committee concerning Côte d’Ivoire to be
responsible for these threats. The Security Council expresses its willingness to
review the sanctions regime at the latest three months after the presidential
elections.
“The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to keep it informed
of the evolution of the situation. It reaffirms its full support to the efforts of his
Special Representative and his certification mandate, including the explicit
certification of the electoral list. It expresses its intention to take the progress
of the electoral process fully into consideration when it will review the
mandate of UNOCI and the French forces which support it, before 31 January
2009.”

2

08-59389
