Resolutions adopted on the repo1·ts of the Second Committee

10. Instructs the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the Director-General of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, to report
to the General Assembly in due course on the progress
achieved in the implementation of the present resolution.
1391st plenury mcctin_q,
8 December 1965.
2044 (XX). United Nations Institute for Training
and Research
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1827 (XV II) of 18 December 1962 and 1934 (XVIII) of 11 December 1963
relating to the United Nations Institute for Training
and Research,
Noting with i14terest the progress made so far in
establishing the Tnstitute's preliminary activities,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolutions 1037 (XXXVII) of 15 August 1964 and 1072
( XXXIX) of 26 July 1965. and of the reports submitted by the Secretary-General1 2 and the statement
made hy the Executive Director of the Institute, 13
1. Expresses the hope that the U:nited ~at_ions Institute for Training and Research will begm its regular
operations as soon as possible and not later than the
end of 1965;
2. Renews its appeal to Governments of States
Members of the United Nations and members of the
specialized agencies and ~>f th~ I~ter~ational. Atomic
Energy Agency and to private 111st1tut1ons. which ru~ve
not yet financially contributed to the lnstltt!te to give
it their generous financial support now that it has been
established ;
3. Requests the Executive Director of the Institute
to report annually to the General Assembly an1, as
appropriate, to the Economic and Social Council on
the activities of the Institute.
1391st plenary meeting,
8 December 1965.
2082 (XX). Science and technology
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its conviction, which was greatly
strengthened by the results of the United Nations Conference on the Application of Science and Technology
for the Benefit of the Less Developed Areas, that
science and technology can make an outstanding contribution to the economic and social development of the
developing countries,
Recalling its resolution 1944 (XVIII) of 11 December 1963 concerning international co-operation in the
application of science and technology to economic and
social development,
Noting with appreciation the comprehensive response
made by the Advisory Committee on the Application
of Science and Technology to Development to the
request in resolution 1944 (XVIII) that the Advisory
Committee examine, in keeping with its terms of
reference, the possibility of establishing a programme
of international co-operation in science and technology
12 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentieth
Session, Annexes, agenda item 48, document A/6071; Official
Records of the Economic and Social Council, Thirty-ninth
Session, Annexes, agenda item 24, document E/4049.
13 A/C.2/L.817. For summary, see Official Records of the
General Assembly, Twentieth Session, Second Committee, 987th
meeting, paras. 1-8.

23

for econorn1c and social development, with special reference to the study of the problems of the developing
countries and the exploration of suitable solution,;,
I. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution
1083 (XXXIX) of 30 July 1965, in which the Council
warmly commended the Advisory Committee on the
Application of Science and Technology to Development
for its second report, 14 approved the plans of the Advisory Committee for the next phase of its work and
transmitted to the General Assembly the second report
as an exposition of the steps that must be taken to
achieve the ohjectiws envisaged in Assembly resolution
J<J44 (XVIII);
2. Also endorse.!> the views of the Advis-ory Committee that:
(a) 1t would be not only possible, but highly desirable, to develop a programme of the kind envisaged in
resolution 1944 (XVIII) in order to strengthen existing programn1es and to adcl appropriate new arrangements for rounding out the total effort, and also designed to draw the attention of workl opinion lo the
work of the Adwsory Committee;
( b) The Economic and Social Council itself should
he the appropriate body, under the authority of the
(;eneral Assembly, to initiate ancl guide the programme,
through its links with organizations in the United
:\Jations family, the regional economic commissions and
non-governmental organizations. and through the cooperation of the States iVIembers of the United Nations
and members of the specialized agencies ancl of the
fnternational Atomic Energy Agency;
3. Commends the comprehensive proposals and suggestions, made by the Advisory Committee in chapter
IV of its second report, to the attention of States
lVIembers of the United Nations and members of the
specialized agencies and of the International Atomic
Energy Agency, all organizations of the United Nations
family concerned with the application of science and
technology to development and to :ill similarly interested non-governmental organizations;
4. Invites the Advisory Committee, as its programme of work evolves and in the light of its second
report, to continue to examine in more detail the needs
and possibilities ,,i1d, where appropriate, the role of
the United Nations family in relation to:
(a) The establishment of national policies for the
application of science and technology to development by
developing countries ;
( b) The establishment or strengthening of institutions for scientific and technological research in the
developing countries, and of co-operative arrangements
among such institutions, especially on a regional basis,
with a view to the widest dissemination of the possibilities of applying scientific and technical knowledge
to development :
( c) The more extensive undertaking, by appropriate
institutions in the highly developed countries, of researth on problems of special concern to the developing
countr~es;
( d) The encouragement of co-operative links between universities, research institutes, laborntories and
similar institutions in the highly developed countries
and those in the developing countries.
1404th plenary meeting,
20 December 1965.
14 Official Hecords of the Fconomic and Social Council,
Thirty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 14 (E/4026 and Corr.I).
