United Nations

A/RES/57/166

General Assembly

Distr.: General
16 January 2003

Fifty-seventh session
Agenda item 98

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/57/545)]

57/166. United Nations Literacy Decade: education for all
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 56/116 of 19 December 2001, by which it proclaimed
the ten-year period beginning on 1 January 2003 the United Nations Literacy
Decade,
Recalling also the United Nations Millennium Declaration, 1 in which Member
States resolved to ensure that, by the year 2015, children everywhere, boys and girls
alike, will be able to complete a full course of primary schooling and that girls and
boys will have equal access to all levels of education, which requires a renewed
commitment to promote literacy for all,
Reaffirming that a basic education is crucial to nation-building, that literacy
for all is at the heart of basic education for all and that creating literate
environments and societies is essential for achieving the goals of eradicating
poverty, reducing child mortality, curbing population growth, achieving gender
equality and ensuring sustainable development, peace and democracy,
Convinced that literacy is crucial to the acquisition, by every child, youth and
adult, of the essential life skills that enable them to address the challenges they can
face in life, and represents an essential step in basic education, which is an
indispensable means for effective participation in the societies and economies of the
twenty-first century,
Affirming that the realization of the right to education, especially for girls,
contributes to the eradication of poverty,
Deeply concerned about the persistence of the gender gap in education, which
is reflected by the fact that nearly two thirds of the world’s adult illiterates are
women,
1.
Takes note of the report of the Director-General of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization on an international plan of action
for the United Nations Literacy Decade; 2
_______________
1
2

02 54915

See resolution 55/2.
See A/57/218 and Corr.1.

A/RES/57/166

2.
Welcomes the International Plan of Action for the United Nations
Literacy Decade;
3.
Appeals to all Governments to reinforce political will, mobilize adequate
national resources, develop more inclusive policy-making environments and devise
innovative strategies for reaching the poorest and most marginalized groups and for
seeking alternative formal and non-formal approaches to learning with a view to
achieving the goals of the Decade;
4.
Urges all Governments to take the lead in coordinating the activities of
the Decade at the national level, bringing all relevant national actors together in a
sustained dialogue on policy formulation, implementation and evaluation of literacy
efforts;
5.
Appeals to all Governments and professional organizations to strengthen
national and professional educational institutions in their countries with a view to
expanding their capacity and promoting the quality of education;
6.
Appeals to all Governments and to economic and financial organizations
and institutions, both national and international, to lend greater financial and
material support to the efforts to increase literacy and achieve the goals of education
for all and those of the Decade, through, inter alia, the 20/20 initiative, 3 as
appropriate;
7.
Invites Member States, the specialized agencies and other organizations
of the United Nations system, as well as relevant intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations, to intensify their efforts to implement effectively the
International Plan of Action;
8.
Decides that the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization should take a coordinating role in stimulating and catalysing the
activities undertaken at the international level within the framework of the Decade
in a manner that is complementary to and coordinated with the ongoing process of
education for all;
9.
Requests the Secretary-General, in cooperation with the Director-General
of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, to prepare
a report on the implementation of the International Plan of Action for submission to
the General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session;
10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-ninth session,
under the item entitled “Social development, including questions relating to the
world social situation and to youth, ageing, disabled persons and the family”, a subitem entitled “United Nations Literacy Decade: education for all”.
77th plenary meeting
18 December 2002

_______________
3

See Report of the World Summit for Social Development, Copenhagen, 6–12 March 1995 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.8), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II, para. 88 (c).

2
