A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/53/3
9 November 1998

Fifty-third session
Agenda item 113
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/53/485)]
53/3.

Analysis of savings resulting from the improved overall cost-effectiveness
achieved pursuant to the ninth session of the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development, including the restructuring of the
intergovernmental machinery and the reform of the secretariat, as
requested by the General Assembly in its resolution 52/220 of
22 December 1997, and proposals pursuant to Assembly decision 52/462
of 31 March 1998

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 41/213 of 19 December 1986 on the review of the efficiency of the
administrative and financial functioning of the United Nations and subsequent relevant resolutions,
Recalling its resolutions 51/167 of 16 December 1996 and 52/220 of 22 December 1997 and its
decision 52/462 of 31 March 1998,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the analysis of savings resulting from the
improved overall cost-effectiveness achieved pursuant to the ninth session of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development, including the restructuring of the intergovernmental machinery
and the reform of the secretariat,1

1

A/52/898 and Corr.1.

98-77575

/...

A/RES/53/3
Page 2

Having considered also the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions,2
Emphasizing the need to strengthen the capacity of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, in particular, in priority areas,
1. Endorses the proposals of the Secretary-General, contained in his report,1 on the understanding
that the amount to be utilized by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development should not
exceed 5,526,600 United States dollars;
2. Agrees to the use of the amount of 1,088,000 dollars for the expenses of experts attending, in
their personal capacity, expert meetings convened by the commissions of the Trade and Development
Board in accordance with paragraph 114 of the document entitled "A Partnership for Growth and
Development",3 on the understanding that:
(a) It would only involve a one-time expenditure within the framework of the biennium 1998–1999,
made possible because of extra resources that have been allocated as a result of underspending;
(b) The financing of the expenses of the experts should not set a precedent regarding the financing
from the regular budget of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development of expenses of
experts attending, in their personal capacity, expert meetings convened by the commissions of the Board,
in accordance with paragraph 114 of the document entitled "A Partnership for Growth and Development";
(c) Special consideration would be given to the needs of developing countries, in particular, the least
developed countries;
3. Invites the Trade and Development Board to take a final decision, at its forty-fifth session from
12 to 23 October 1998, on the question of the selection, nomination and appointment of experts to
participate in the expert meetings of its commissions, so as to enable the secretariat of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development to carry out the activities foreseen without further delay;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session a
report on the implementation by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development of the
activities financed from the unspent balance referred to in paragraph 1 above, and on how the
accomplishments had contributed to strengthening the capacity of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, in particular, in priority areas;
5. Considers that significant savings have been achieved by the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development as a direct result of decisions of the ninth session of the Conference, including
the restructuring of the intergovernmental machinery and the reform of the secretariat;

2

A/53/7/Add.2. For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-third Session,
Supplement No. 7.
3

See A/51/308.

/...

A/RES/53/3
Page 3

6. Regrets the lack of clear information concerning the savings achieved pursuant to the ninth
session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, including the restructuring of the
intergovernmental machinery and the reform of the secretariat, and takes note, in this context, of the
indication in paragraph 8 of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions2 that an amount of 2 million dollars, which is part of the above-mentioned savings, could be
traceable to the reduction in the conference-servicing requirements of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development undertaken as a result of the ninth session, and agrees with the Advisory
Committee that this information should have been reflected in the report of the Secretary-General;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session,
comprehensive information on the savings, including the amount of 2 million dollars referred to in
paragraph 6 above, resulting from the improved overall cost-effectiveness achieved pursuant to the ninth
session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, including the restructuring of the
intergovernmental machinery and the reform of the secretariat, as requested in its resolutions 51/167 and
52/220;
8.

Decides to continue consideration of this question during the main part of its fifty-fourth session.
36th plenary meeting
12 October 1998
