A /70/PV.64

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventieth session

64th plenary meeting

Tuesday, 24 November 2015, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lykketoft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Denmark)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Gumende
(Mozambique), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Agenda item 38 (continued)
Question of Palestine
Draft resolutions (A/70/L.10, A/70/L.11,
A/70/L.12 and A/70/L.13)
The Acting President: Before the Assembly takes
action on the draft resolutions one by one, I should like
to remind members that they will have an opportunity
to explain their votes on all four draft resolutions before
and after action is taken on all of those resolutions.
The representative of Israel has asked to speak in
explanation of vote before the voting. I should like to
remind her that explanations of vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Ms. Meitzad (Israel): For the past three months,
Israeli citizens have been terrorized on a daily basis.
Men, women and children are being attacked all over
Israel — on the streets of Tel Aviv, Beersheba and
Jerusalem and in cities throughout the nation. Over
the past week alone, the onslaught of terrorist attacks
against Israelis has claimed the lives of nine people.
Two were stabbed in the street on the way to afternoon
prayers at the synagogue; two were shot on their way
to a wedding; and all were murdered in cold blood
while going about their lives. Yet despite the horrific

events, we have not heard any strong condemnation of
the attacks on Israelis during these discussions. The
Assembly must condemn all types of terrorism in the
strongest possible terms and state clearly that terror is
terror, wherever it takes place and whoever the victims
are. Unfortunately, at the United Nations, it is business
as usual. Once again, the Assembly is about to vote on
a package of draft resolutions that serves those who
prefer to ignore the facts.
The six draft resolutions that are being considered
today under agenda items 37 and 38 not only fail to
promote dialogue or build trust but also have wasteful
budgetary implications. First, they fail to address the
recent rise in terrorism and to acknowledge the fact
that Israelis are being attacked and murdered on a
daily basis. They also conveniently ignore Hamas,
an internationally recognized terrorist organization,
which continues to oppress its own people in Gaza
and to actively impede the efforts to reconstruct Gaza
by using building materials intended for civilians
to enhance its militant capabilities. If the Assembly
truly wants to have an honest debate on the IsraeliPalestinian conflict, it must stop ignoring the facts
and demand that the Palestinian leadership answer the
following questions. Why does it fail to condemn acts
of terror committed by Palestinians? Why, over the
past 20 years, has it preferred violence over dialogue
and incitement over negotiations? Why does it continue
to refuse to assume responsibility for the Gaza Strip?
Why were the peace proposals offered by several Israeli
Prime Ministers repeatedly rejected by the Palestinian
leadership? Lastly, why does President Abbas continue

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-38836 (E)

*1538836*

A/70/PV.64

to ignore Prime Minister Netanyahu’s repeated calls to
resume negotiations?
Much has been said on the subject of the Temple
Mount today and yesterday. Israel has repeatedly
affirmed its commitment to maintaining the status
quo. We do that out of a deep and abiding respect
for the principle of the freedom of religion and the
historic connection of the three monotheistic faiths to
the Temple Mount. Yet it is clear that that respect is
not mutual. Recently, the Palestinians asked to submit
a proposal to UNESCO to include the Western Wall,
the site of Jewish prayer for millenniums, as part of
the Al-Aqsa Mosque. It is evident that Palestinian
leaders are determined to deny any historic connection
between the Jewish people and our holy sites, and we
can see that the same approach is evident in the draft
resolutions that we have before us today. While Israel
continues to recognize the connection that Muslims
have with their holy sites, these draft resolutions
completely disregard the connection of other religions
to Al-Haram Al-Sharif. They even fail to include its
Jewish and Christian name, the Temple Mount — in
case it has been forgotten.
The complex reality of the Middle East demands
full attention and appropriate financing on the part of
the United Nations. As political transformation and
violence wreak havoc in the Middle East, and as the
world deals with one of the biggest and most serious
humanitarian crises in its history, the Assembly is
about to decide, yet again, to adopt draft resolutions
and divert precious financial resources to inefficient
programmes and units whose only purpose is attacking
Israel. They include the special information programme
on the question of Palestine and the Division for
Palestinian Rights of the Secretariat, which alone in
the Secretariat are dedicated to one specific conflict
or — more precisely — to public relations activities on
behalf of one side of the conflict. And for its part, the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People is a hotbed of anti-Israel activity.
It is quite baffling to learn that the United Nations
is spending approximately $6.5 million every year
on bodies that are dedicated solely to promoting the
Palestinian narrative, while it admits to suffering from
a severe budgetary deficit. I ask the question: Why does
the United Nations divert that money to further a purely
anti-Israel agenda instead of allocating it to those who
are in dire need of humanitarian assistance?

2/12

24/11/2015

The bitter reality is that the draft resolutions
offer a one-sided account of the situation and will
perpetuate a zero-sum approach to the conflict. That
sends a message that the only way to support the
Palestinians is by criticizing Israel. Let no one delude
himself or herself. Supporting these draft resolutions
will not advance the cause of peace. It will only make
peace harder to achieve. I call on the members who
genuinely wish to assist in achieving a durable solution
for Israel and the Palestinians to take a stand against
these draft resolutions and to take steps to facilitate
direct negotiations, without preconditions, between the
parties.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
decisions on draft resolutions A/70/L.10, A/70/L.11,
A/70/L.12 and A/70/L.13.
We turn first to draft resolution A/70/L.10, entitled
“Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian People”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of draft
resolution A/70/L.10: Brunei Darussalam, Cuba, the
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Senegal,
South Africa and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
The Acting President: A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda,
Argentina,
Azerbaijan,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Cambodia,
Chad, Chile, China, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba,
Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia,
Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic

15-38836

24/11/2015

Republic, Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Qatar, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, TimorLeste, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, Palau,
United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cameroon,
Colombia, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Sudan, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo,
Tonga, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland
Draft resolution A/70/L.10 was adopted by 102
votes to 8, with 57 abstentions (resolution 70/12).
[Subsequently, the delegation of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela informed the Secretariat
that it had intended to vote in favour.]
The Acting President: We turn next to draft
resolution A/70/L.11, entitled “Division for Palestinian
Rights of the Secretariat”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department of General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, and

A/70/PV.64

in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of draft
resolution A/70/L.11: Brunei Darussalam, Cuba, the
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Senegal,
South Africa and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
The Acting President: A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda,
Argentina,
Azerbaijan,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Chad, Chile, China, Congo, Costa
Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon,
Gambia, Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Philippines, Qatar, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, Palau,
United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cameroon,
Colombia, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland,

15-388363/12

A/70/PV.64

Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Samoa, San
Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Sudan,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland
Draft resolution A/70/L.11 was adopted by 99 votes
to 8, with 59 abstentions (resolution 70/13).
[Subsequently, the delegation of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela informed the Secretariat
that it had intended to vote in favour.]
The Acting President: We now turn to draft
resolution A/70/L.12, entitled “Special information
programme on the question of Palestine of the
Department of Public Information of the Secretariat”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department of General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of draft
resolution A/70/L.12: Belarus, Brunei Darussalam,
Cuba, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Malaysia,
Senegal, South Africa and the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela.
The Acting President: A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh,
Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran

4/12

24/11/2015

(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Palau, United
States of America
Abstaining:
Cameroon, Honduras, Nauru, Paraguay, South
Sudan, Togo, Tonga
Draft resolution A/70/L.12 was adopted by 155
votes to 7, with 7 abstentions (resolution 70/14).
[Subsequently, the delegation of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela informed the Secretariat
that it had intended to vote in favour.]
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/70/L.13, entitled
“Peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department of General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of draft

15-38836

24/11/2015

A/70/PV.64

resolution A/70/L.13: Belarus, Brunei Darussalam,
Cuba, Kyrgyzstan, the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Malaysia, Senegal, South Africa and the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.

Against:
Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Nauru, Palau, United States
of America

The Acting President: A recorded vote has been
requested.

Abstaining:
Australia, Cameroon, Honduras, Papua
Guinea, Paraguay, South Sudan, Tonga

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh,
Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe

New

Draft resolution A/70/L.13 was adopted by 155
votes to 7, with 7 abstentions (resolution 70/15).
[Subsequently, the delegation of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela informed the Secretariat
that it had intended to vote in favour.]
The Acting President: Before giving the floor
to the speakers in explanation of vote, I would like to
remind delegations that explanations of vote are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union
(EU).
The European Union thanks the Palestinian
delegation for the successful outcome of our
negotiations on a number of resolutions on which
the General Assembly took action. As an outcome of
those negotiations, the European Union confirms its
consolidated voting pattern on those resolutions. At this
time, we would like to put on record that, with regard
to all resolutions that are adopted during the General
Assembly at its seventieth session, the European Union
and its member States consider that whenever the term
“Palestinian Government” is mentioned, this refers to
the Palestinian Authority. Furthermore, the use of the
term “Palestine” in any of those resolutions cannot
be construed as recognition of a State of Palestine,
and its use is without prejudice to the individual
positions of the Member States on that issue, and hence
on the question of the validity of an accession to the
conventions and treaties mentioned therein. We also
point out that the European Union as a whole has not
expressed a legal qualification with regard to the term
“forced displacement”, which is used in a number of
resolutions submitted under agenda items 38 and 55.
Finally, some of the texts adopted today also refer
to the ongoing tension over the holy sites in Jerusalem.
I wish to stress that the European Union is concerned
about the worrying developments in that regard and the
recurrent violent clashes at the Al-Haram Al-Sharif/

15-388365/12

A/70/PV.64

Temple Mount. We fully acknowledge the special role
of Jordan in relation to the Muslim holy shrines in
Jerusalem. We welcome the agreements that have been
reached between Israel, Jordan and the Palestinian
Authority on that issue last month. We recall the
agreements previously reached in October 2014, and we
call for their full implementation.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): The
United States of America remains profoundly troubled
by the repetitive and disproportionate number of
one-sided General Assembly resolutions designed to
condemn Israel, amounting to a total of 18 this year. That
one-sided approach damages the prospects for peace by
undermining trust between the parties and the kind of
international support critical to achieving peace. All
parties to the conflict have responsibilities for ending
it, and we are disappointed that States Members of the
United Nations continually single out Israel without
acknowledging the responsibilities and difficult steps
that must be taken on all sides. It is manifestly unjust
that the United Nations, an institution founded upon
the idea that all nations should be treated equally, is so
often used by Member States to treat Israel unequally.
Of these annual resolutions, three are particularly
troubling: those concerning the Division for Palestinian
Rights of the Secretariat, the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, and
the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices
Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian People
and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories. Those
resolutions renew mandates for United Nations bodies
established decades ago, wasting valuable resources
and reinforcing the systemic United Nations bias
against Israel.
All Member States should evaluate the effectiveness
of supporting and funding those bodies. The United
States remains firmly committed to advancing a
two-State solution. We continue to urge all sides to
take steps to stop the violence, improve conditions
on the ground in the West Bank and Gaza and move
the diplomatic process forward. That means reversing
current trends where terrorism, violence, settlements
and demolitions are increasingly creating a one-State
reality and imperilling the viability of a two-State
solution. It means resuming the Oslo transition to
greater Palestinian civil responsibility. We believe that
doing so will enhance security and stability for the
Israelis and the Palestinians alike.

6/12

24/11/2015

United States Secretary of State John Kerry
is currently in the region meeting with the senior
leadership on both sides to discuss how to help stabilize
the situation and show meaningful progress towards a
two-State solution. Those are the same goals expressed
in the 30 September Quartet statement, goals that are
shared by our partners. We believe it is past time for
the genuine advancement of a two-State solution. In
mid-November, Prime Minister Netanyahu discussed
with President Obama and Secretary Kerry concrete
ideas for stopping the violence, improving conditions
on the ground in the West Bank and Gaza and moving
the diplomatic process forward.
We condemn all acts of violence directed at unarmed
civilians, including stabbings, shootings, arson and
vehicular attacks. The victims of those attacks have
included American citizens, most recently 18-year old
Ezra Schwartz, who was killed by terrorists less than
a week ago. The United States will support Israel’s
right to defend innocent civilians against terrorism,
and we mourn any loss of innocent life. It is critical
that every possible effort be taken to show restraint and
de-escalate tensions.
I would like to reiterate that the United States has
consistently opposed every effort to delegitimize Israel
or undermine its security at the United Nations, and
we will continue to do so with vigour. Our continued
opposition to the resolution entitled “Israeli settlements
in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East
Jerusalem, and the occupied Syrian Golan”, however,
should not be understood to mean that we support
settlement activity. On the contrary, we view Israeli
settlement activity as illegitimate and counterproductive
to the cause of peace. During the past year, we have
been deeply concerned by Israel’s advancement of plans
for thousands of additional housing units in the West
Bank and East Jerusalem. We have made clear that such
action only draws condemnation from the international
community, poisons the atmosphere and undermines
the prospects for peace.
While the United States of America unequivocally
rejects Israeli settlements in territories occupied in 1967,
that does not justify the repetitive and one-sided General
Assembly resolutions facilitating the condemnation of
Israel. Those resolutions set back our collective efforts
to advance a peaceful resolution to the conflict between
the Israelis and the Palestinians, and they damage the
institutional credibility of the United Nations. Biased
resolutions will not advance peace. Only hard choices

15-38836

24/11/2015

made in the context of bilateral negotiations will do
that. The cause of peace would be well served by more
balance and less bias in the General Assembly of the
United Nations.
Mr. Teo (Singapore): I have the honour to speak
in explanation of vote after the adoption of resolutions
70/12, 70/13, 70/14 and 70/15. Singapore voted in favour
of resolution 70/12, entitled “Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People”,
on the understanding that the reference in paragraph
2 to the achievement of the two-State solution on the
basis of the pre-1967 borders should be interpreted
in the same manner as set forth in paragraph 1 of
resolution 70/15, “Peaceful settlement of the question
of Palestine”, namely, the two-State solution of Israel
and Palestine living side by side in peace and security
within recognized borders, based on the pre-1967
borders.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 38.
Agenda item 37 (continued)
The situation in the Middle East
Draft resolutions (A/70/L.14 and A/70/L.17)
The Acting President: Members are reminded that
they will have an opportunity to explain their votes on
the two draft resolutions before and after action is taken
on each.
We turn first to draft resolution A/70/L.14, entitled
“Jerusalem”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of draft resolution A/70/L.14,
the following countries have become co-sponsors:
Brunei Darussalam, Cuba, Ecuador, Malaysia, Mali,
Senegal and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
The Acting President: A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,

A/70/PV.64

Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh,
Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Nauru, Palau, United States
of America
Abstaining:
Australia, Cameroon, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, South Sudan, Togo, Tonga
Draft resolution A/70/L.14 was adopted by 153
votes to 7, with 8 abstentions (resolution 70/16).

15-388367/12

A/70/PV.64

The Acting President: We now turn to draft
resolution A/70/L.17, entitled “The Syrian Golan”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of draft resolution A/70/L.17,
the following countries have become co-sponsors:
Brunei Darussalam, Malaysia and Mali.
The Acting President: A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belize, Bhutan,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo,
Costa Rica, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon,
Gambia, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, TimorLeste, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against:
Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Palau, United States of
America

8/12

24/11/2015

Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cameroon,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro,
Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Panama, Paraguay, Poland, Portugal, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San
Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Sudan,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland
Draft resolution A/70/L.17 was adopted by 105
votes to 6, with 56 abstentions (resolution 70/17).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic
expresses its heartfelt appreciation and gratitude to
the General Assembly for adopting again, as it has
every year without exception since 1981, when Israel
imposed its illegitimate laws on the Syrian Arab Golan,
the resolution entitled “The Syrian Golan” (resolution
70/17) and other draft resolutions under items 38 and
37, “Question of Palestine” and “The situation in the
Middle East”, respectively. Once again, my country
expresses its thanks to all the States that sponsored
the resolution entitled “The Syrian Golan” and to all
delegations that voted in its favour.
The ongoing support of the majority of member
States for those resolutions shows that they are attached
to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, that they reject foreign occupation and that
they support our inalienable right to recover the Syrian
territories that have been occupied by Israel since 1967.
There is no doubt that the overwhelming vote in favour
of those resolutions sends a clear message to Israel that
the international community rejects its occupation of
territory, its massacres and its policies and practices
of expansion, aggression, racism, settlement-building,
fait accompli and the annexation of land by force. Such
practices violate international agreements and norms,
the most prominent of which are the Charter of the
United Nations and the Fourth Geneva Convention of

15-38836

24/11/2015

1949. Those practices are therefore condemned by all
who truly uphold international law, seek to end foreign
occupation, reject the acquisition of land by force, and
wish to punish all those whose actions run counter to
international law and the provisions of the Charter.
The Acting President: Several representatives have
asked to speak in exercise of the right of reply. I remind
members that statements in exercise of the right of reply
are limited to 10 minutes for the first intervention and
five minutes for the second intervention and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Mazzeo (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the delegations of
Argentina and Brazil in order to explain our vote, as
we have done in previous years, on the resolution on
the Syrian Golan, which has just been adopted by the
General Assembly as resolution 70/17.
Brazil and Argentina voted in favour of the
resolution because we believe that in its essence it is
linked to the illegal nature of the acquisition of territory
by force. Paragraph 4 of Article 2 of the Charter of
the United Nations prohibits the threat or use of force
against the territorial integrity of any State. At the same
time, I wish to clarify the position of our delegations
with regard to paragraph 6 of the resolution.
Our vote does not prejudge the content of that
paragraph, particularly the reference to the line of
4 June 1967. Brazil and Argentina believe that it is
important to make progress in the search for a solution
to the conflict between Syria and Israel in the Middle
East with a view to ending the occupation of the Golan
Heights. Therefore, on behalf of the Governments of
Brazil and Argentina, I highlight the importance of
resuming negotiations to find a permanent solution to
the situation in the Syrian Golan in accordance with
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973),
and the principle of land for peace.
Ms. Meitzad (Israel): In the past two days, the
United Nations has once again ushered in its annual
anti-Israel festival, which is characterized by the
adoption of outrageous and outdated resolutions. This
charade has only been made worse by the preposterous
remarks made by several representatives, which clearly
demonstrate their increasing detachment from reality.
I was deeply moved by the Lebanese representative’s
call to fight terror and injustice (see A/70/PV.62). If
only Lebanon would take its own advice. It is a fact that

A/70/PV.64

the Lebanese Parliament is dominated by Hizbullah,
a terrorist group that assists Al-Assad regime in
slaughtering civilians in Syria. The blatant insincerity
of Lebanon’s statement is also evident in its call for
accountability for injustice. One need only look at the
Palestinian refugee camps in Lebanon, which have
some of the worst conditions in the region, to see the
hypocrisy of its words. Palestinians in those camps are
subject to continual violent, extreme discrimination and
economic and social oppression. Talk about injustice!
I would therefore suggest that that representative take
a good look at his own country before he decides to
preach to others.
It is unfortunate that the Syrian representative
believes that he is in any position to lecture others in
this Hall. The statement that he made earlier today was
as empty as the legitimacy of the regime he represents. I
would like to remind him that the repetition of baseless
accusations and continuous lies, even when uttered in
his overly lengthy manner, will not make his words
valid or true.
We have heard some outrageous statements from
countries — such as Cuba, Venezuela and Nicaragua
(see A/70/PV.62) — that can only be construed as
demonstrating a complete lack of familiarity with
all matters pertaining to the situation in the Middle
East. Indeed, it seems that their geographical distance
from the region is as large as the gap between their
perception of the situation and the actual facts. As for
Venezuela, I was amazed that its representative was
not ashamed to justify acts of terror committed against
innocent Israelis. Such a statement by a member of
the Security Council undermines the credibility of the
entire Council.
The representative of Pakistan arrogantly stood
before the Assembly and talked about victimizing
civilians (see A/70/PV.62). Might I suggest that Pakistan
take a good, hard look at itself and that it address the
continuing violations committed by its Government
against innocent Afghan civilians. Police brutality
against Afghans in Pakistan have resulted in the death
of 145 people, including 132 children, in the past year
alone.
Yesterday, the representative of Libya delivered a
series of accusations against Israel (see A/70/PV.62).
As I listened to him, I had to wonder which of the
Governments and groups that control Libyan territory
he represents. Regardless of the answer to that question,

15-388369/12

A/70/PV.64

I can say with confidence that every party to the
conflict in Libya is guilty of the repression of human
rights and indiscriminate killing of civilians. Serious
abuses and violations of international law have been
reported, including indiscriminate shelling, abduction
of civilians, as well as torture and execution.
Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I apologize for asking for the floor at this
late stage. However, I must reply to the lies of the
representative of the occupying Power, who has tried
to divert our attention from the subject matter under
consideration today — the Israeli violations in the
occupied Arab territories, including the occupied Syrian
Golan, and how we can end that unjust occupation,
which has been ongoing since 1967.
The representative of the occupying Power must
understand what my delegations and others have been
saying are neither allegations, lectures nor propaganda.
These are facts documented in reports issued by
the United Nations and human rights organizations
around the world, including countries that are allies
and supporters of Israel. The result of the voting on
resolutions 70/12, 70/13, 70/14 and 70/15 demonstrate
that the majority in the Assembly support such
resolutions because they contain facts.
There is not enough time for me to talk lay out
all the Israeli violations and crimes in the occupied
territories. I simply wish to reiterate our statement
earlier today (see A/70/PV.63) on the situation in the
Middle East concerning an announcement made by an
Israeli soldier to the residents of the Aida refugee camp
on 29 October. Speaking in Arabic, he threatened the
residents of the camp as follows.
“Residents of the Aida refugee camp, we are
the Israeli military. If you throw stones at us, we
will spray tear gas at you until you all fall dead.
Men, women and the elderly — you will all die. We
will not leave anyone alive. We have arrested one
of you. He is with us now. We have taken him from
his home, and we will slaughter and kill him before
your eyes. Go back to your homes or else we will
shoot you with tear gas until you die.”
The Israeli soldier said that a month ago. He
represents the terrorism, racism and hatred inherent in
Israeli policies, including Israel’s support for terrorist
groups in the occupied territories, including the
Al-Nusra Front, which is affiliated with Al-Qaida. That
is not an allegation; these claims are documented and

10/12

24/11/2015

supported in reports of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force. The
Assembly can review all reports that Israel has been
dealing with these terrorist groups in the separation
zone.
Mr. Forés Rodríguez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): I
apologize for taking the floor again, but unfortunately
I am obliged to answer the representative of Israel, who
seems to be unaware of the living conditions in her own
country in regard to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. I
shall read out some statements to bring her up to date.
First, “Every terrorist should know that he will not
survive the attack he is about to commit.”
Secondly, “Anyone who stabs Jews or hurts
innocent people is due to be killed.”
Thirdly, “You have to shoot to kill whoever takes
out a knife or a screwdriver or whatever.”
Does she know who made each of those statements?
I shall remind her. The first was the Israeli Minister of
Public Security, Mr. Gilad Erdan, who is responsible for
that country’s police service. The second was Jerusalem
Police Commander Moshe Edri. The third was Mr. Yair
Lapid, a member of the Knesset. All are public officials
of Israel. The lack of response on the part of the Israeli
authorities demonstrates that the country’s policy
has tilted to the shoot-to-kill mode — an invitation
to violence and extrajudicial killings, which are a
fundamental pillar of Israeli democracy and respect for
human rights in the purest Israeli sense. Other pillars
of Israel’s protection of human rights include targeted
assassinations, the repression of protests through the
use of snipers and other physical violence, preventive
arrests and the detention of minors.
Those are the reasons why, since 1947, our people
has defended the cause of the Palestinian people and
will continue to defend them. We know what the
Palestinian people are suffering. We know about all
the trials they have gone through and all the crimes
committed against them. That is why we will continue
to defend them until the Palestinian people can exercise
their right to self-determination and have a State like
those enjoyed by the rest of us in the Assembly.
Mr. Vallejos (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation wishes to exercise its right of reply to respond
to the Israeli representative, who referred to us with a
lack of respect for the intelligence of our people. She
argued that because of our distance or our region, we

15-38836

24/11/2015

are unable to feel the injustice being committed against
the Palestinian people. What a deplorable argument that
is in such a solemn organization as the United Nations.
Fortunately, the majority of the Members of the
Organization demonstrated their solidarity when they
voted in favour of Palestine’s status as non-member
observer State. Our Government has not held back. It
has been committed to the Palestinian cause since the
establishment of the Organization. We have always
voted with the majority. It is not we who have isolated
ourselves; we believe that it is Israel that, by its actions,
has isolated itself.
We therefore call on Israel to end the vicious cycle
of aggression and settlement construction that, despite
international condemnation, continues with impunity,
without regard for the prohibitions of international law,
which are not weakened by distance. No country can
interpret international law differently from any other
country simply because it is located on a different
continent. International law has no borders, and that is
what makes it possible for our countries to live in peace.
I reiterate that until a resolution is adopted
establishing the State of Palestine. within its pre-1967
borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital, as the
only genuine solution, there will be no just and durable
peace in the Middle East, which we so sorely need.

A/70/PV.64

of support for a very principled position upholding
international law and sends a very strong message to
our people that the international community is not
abandoning them. The international community is
standing with them in their ongoing struggle to end the
occupation, to achieve the independence of the State
of Palestine and to save, in a concrete way, the twoState solution. The message tonight to our people will
be received with the very positive understanding that
the Assembly is not listening to a distorted single voice
trying to show that the victims — the Palestinian people
living under Israeli military foreign occupation — are
responsible for the horrible prevailing situation of
foreign occupation.
In that connection, the Israeli representative’s
position is no different from that of all colonial Powers,
especially settler colonial Powers, which throughout
history have always blamed the victims for all the evil
crimes of the victimizer and occupier. We wonder when
the occupying authority will wake up from its denial
and face the reality that it is occupying the land of
the State of Palestine, including East Jerusalem. The
sooner it wakes up to realize that it is an occupier and
begins negotiation in a serious way to end occupation in
a relatively short period of time, the closer all of us will
be to achieving peace.

Mr. Mansour (Palestine): At the outset, allow me,
on behalf of the State of Palestine and my delegation,
to express our gratitude to all those who sponsored
the resolutions under the agenda items on the
question of Palestine and the situation in the Middle
East, particularly resolution 70/16 on occupied East
Jerusalem. We also wish to express our thanks and
gratitude to all countries that have voted in favour of
those resolutions, reaffirming again this year their
strong, principled position in support of the just cause
of the Palestinian people and our people in their
struggle for the attainment of their inalienable national
rights, including their right to self-determination and
statehood and the right of the Palestine refugees to
return and compensation.

But if it continues to crush the will of the Palestinian
people, it will not succeed in doing so. If it continues
to try to besiege our people in Gaza, East Jerusalem
and Al-Khalil, it will not succeed in breaking the will
of the Palestinian people. We are like all of the peoples
who have representatives in the Hall when they voted
against colonialism and succeeded in acquiring their
freedom and their dignity. We are exactly like the
members of the Assembly, and that is why each year
they vote overwhelmingly to support our cause and
our rights. We are not trying to isolate anyone, except
the ruthless occupation system. It should be isolated, it
should be exposed and it should be defeated, because
the occupation is the source of all of the evils from
which all of our people suffer. We thank the Assembly
very much for helping us in its own way to uphold
international law and for adopting today’s resolutions as
a contribution to the struggle of the Palestinian people
on the ground and everywhere else, and for trying to
end the evil occupation and to allow the Palestinian
people to enjoy their independence.

We are very grateful for this strong message from
the General Assembly, which reflects the essence

When we raised our flag in front of the United
Nations, it is not true that it had no meaning. The flag is

The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote.
I call on the observer of the observer State of
Palestine.

15-3883611/12

A/70/PV.64

a symbol of the rights of the Palestinian people and their
eagerness for freedom and an end to the occupation.
When members of the Assembly not only voted in
favour of raising the flag, but also participated with us
in the garden outside this building, in that very historic
moment they gave additional strength to our people to
continue their just struggle. We are like all the countries
of Africa, Asia and Latin America that acquired
independence after putting an end to colonialism. We
are the last outpost to defend the freedom of people
who live under foreign occupation and colonialism.
We appreciate the efforts of all Member States that
are helping us to join them by ending the occupation
of our land and allowing the State of Palestine to be
independent.
We are very confident that one day, with the
struggle of the Palestinian people and the contribution
of the General Assembly in adopting resolutions and
programmes to help our people against that ruthless
occupation, we will reach the moment of achieving
peace and putting an end to occupation, with the State
of Palestine living in peace and freedom in the Middle
East, side by side with all the States surrounding the
State of Palestine, including Israel. Then we will be able
to open the door to a meaningful new future, not only
for us, our people and our children, but for everyone,
including the people of Israel.
We are ready and willing to do so not through
gimmicks — come and negotiate with us — but through

12/12

24/11/2015

a meaningful collective process with all Member
States, as they have conducted in more than one place,
in order to convince the ruthless, stubborn occupier
to come down from the top of the hill and negotiate
through a collective process, in good faith, the end of
occupation and all the final status issues that are known
to all: borders, refugees, Jerusalem, settlements, water,
security and prisoners.
When that moment is imposed by the collective will
of all Member States, then we will be closer to peace. It
will not come through invitations to talk while illegal
facts are being created on the ground. That will never
happen. We have tried it in the past and it pushed us
from a bad situation into a worse, catastrophic situation.
Those who want to negotiate with us in good faith have
to acknowledge that they are the occupier and that they
have to end their occupation.
I want to thank the President and this respectable
international body, the General Assembly, which reflects
the collective will of humankind, for its principled
position in support of today’s and other resolutions
that have been adopted by the various United Nations
bodies. None of the lies and posturing can be sold in
this Hall, because the General Assembly represents an
outstanding group of diplomats that cannot accept lies
or distorted stories. Its members know the truth, they
advance the truth and justice, and we thank them very
much for all that they do.
The meeting rose at 4.15 p.m.

15-38836
