General Assembly-Fifteenth Session

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE SIXTH COMMITI'EE

CONTENTS
Page

1504 (XV). Report of the International Law. Commission covering the work of
its twelfth session ( 12 December 1960) ( Item 65) .
1505 (XV). Future work in the field of the codification and progressive development of international law (12 December 1960) (item 65) . . . .
..
1506 (XV). Question of the publication of a United Nations juridical yearbook
( 12 December 1960) ( item 66)

59
59
60

Considering that the conditions prevailing in the
world today give increased importance to the role of
international law-and its strict and undeviating observance by all Governments-in strengthening international peace, developing friendly and co-operative relations among the nations, settling disputes by peaceful
means and advancing economic and social progress
throughout the world,
Recalling its resolutions 1236 (XII) of 14 December
1957 and 1301 (XIII) of 10 December 1958,
Mindful of Article 13, paragraph 1, of the Charter
of the United Nations, which provides that the General
Assembly shall initiate studies and make recommendations for the purpose of encouraging the progressive
development of international law and its codification,
Considering the extent of the progress made hy the
International Law Commission in the codification of
topics listed in paragraph 16 of the report covering
its first session,l1
Expressing its appreciation to the Commission for
the work it has accomplished in the field of 1he codi
fication and progressive development of international
law,
Considering that many new trends in the field of
international relations have an impact on the devcltJpment of international law,
Considering that it is desirable to survey the present
state of international law, with a view to ascertaining
whether new topics susceptible of codification or conducive to progressive development have arisen, whether
priority should be given to any of the topics already
included in the Commission's list or whether a broader
approach may be called for in the consideration of any
of these topics,
Deeming it necessary therefore to reconsider the
Commission's programme of work in the light of recent
developments in international law and with clue regard
to the need for promoting friendly relations and cooperation among States,
l. Decides to place the question entitled "Future
work in the field of the codification and progressive
development of international law'' on the provisional

1504 (XV), Report of the International Law
Commission covering the work of ite twelfth
session

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the I~ternational
Law Commission covering the work of its twelfth
session,1
Considering that, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1450 (XIV) o_f 7 D~c~mber 1959,
an international conference of plempotentianes has been
convoked and is to be held at Vienna in the spring of
1961 to consider the question of diplomatic intercourse
and immunities,
1. Takes note of the report of the International Law
Commission ;
2. Expresses its appreciation of the work accomplished by the International Law Commission at i!s
twelfth session and its hope that work on the topic
entitled "Consular intercourse and immunities" will be
completed in time for consideration by the Sixth Committee at the sixteenth session of the General Assembly;
3. Decides that the draft articles on special missions
contained in chapter III of the said nport shoul? be
referred to the United Nations Conference on Diplomatic Intercourse and Immunities to be held at Vienna
in 1961, so that they may be considered together "':ith
the draft articles on diplomatic intercourse and immunities adopted by the Interna: 'onal Law Commission
at its tenth sessir ,. 2
943rd plenary meeting,
12 December 1960.
1505 (XV). Future work in the field of the
codification and progressive development of
international law

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the purposes and principles of the
United Nations,
1 Official Records of ihe General Assemb/3•, Fifteenth Sessio11,
Supplement No. 9 (A/4425).
2 [bid., Thirteenth Session, Supplement No. 9 (A/3859 and
Corr.I), para. 53.

3 fbid., Fourth Session, Sur,p/e,nrnt Vo.

59

lO (A/9:?5).

60

General Assembly -

agenda of its sixteenth session in order to study and
survey the whole field of international law and make
necessary suggestions with regard to the preparation
of a new list of topics for codification and for the progressive development of international law;
2. Invites Member States to submit in writing to
the Secretary-General, before 1 July 1961, any views
or suggestions they may have on this question for
consideration by the General Assembly.
943rd plenary meeting,
12 December 1960.
1506 (XV). Question of the publication of a
United Nations juridical yearbook

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1451 (XIV) of 7 December
1959 by which it decided that a United Nations juridical
yearbook which would include documentary materials

Fifteenth Se11sion

of a legal character relating to the United Nations
should be published,
Considering that encouragement of the development
of international law and of compliance therewith are
essential functions of the United Nations and that the
publication of the said yearbook should constitute a
useful measure to that end,
Taking into account that, in the light of the discussion in the Sixth Committee, further study is required
on the form and contents of the proposed yearbook and
on the financial implications of its publication,
1. Decides to place the question of the publication
of a United Nations juridical yearbook on the provisional agenda of its seventeenth session;
2. Invites Member States to submit to the SecretaryGeneral, not later than 1 June 1962, written comments
or observations on the form and contents of the proposed yearbook.
943rd plenary meeting,
12 December 1960.
