64

General Assembly-Seventh Session

1. Decides to establish a Special Committee of
fifteen members, each representing one of the following Member States: Afghanistan, Australia, Chile,
China, Czechoslovakia, El Salvador, France, Iran,
N·etherlands, Norway, Philippines, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America and
Uruguay;
2. Requests this Special Committee to cons1aer the
Secretary-General's mrmorandum and any other relevant information communicated to it by Member States
and to submit its recommendations to the General
Assembly at its eighth session;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
Special Committee's report to Member States for comment and to include the item in the provisional agenda
of the eighth session of the General Assembly.
410th plenary meeting,
21 December 1952.
B
The General Assembly,
Having examined the memorandum O submitted by
the SecretaryrGeneral on measures to limit the duration of regular sessions of the General Assembly,
Recognizing the need for adopting measures calculated to accomplish this purpose, without restricting
the rights of States Members, including the right to
speak fully and freely in the debates of the plenary
meetings and in the various Committees,
Amends rule 2 of the rules of procedure of the
General Assembly to read as follows :
"On the recommendation of the General Committee, the General Assembly shall, at the beginning
of each session, fix a closing date for the session".
410th plenMy meeting,
21 December 1952.
690 (VII). Status of claims for injuries incurred
in the service of the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report 10 of the Secretary9

/bit!.

General on the status of claims for injuries incurred in
the service of the United Nations,
Noting that the Secretary-General, pursuant to
General Assembly resolution 365 (IV) of 1 December
1949 has presented international claims for reparation
to governments in connexion with the death of agents
of the United Nations,
Recommends that such claims be settled by the procedures envisaged in resolution 365 (IV).
41fltJ plenary meeting,
21 December 1952.

691 (VII) . Correction of the Chineae text of the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide
The General Assembly,
Considering that the Government of China has made
a request for correction of the authentic Chinese text
of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment
of the Crime of Genocide, with a view to bringing the
Chinese text into greater harmony with the other authentic texts of the Convention, and had for this purpose submitted a corrected text, 11
Considering the memorandum 12 submitted to the
General Assembly by the Secretary-General,
Requests the Secretary-General to transmit a certified copy of the corrected Chinese text of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide, as well as a copy of the present
resolution, to all Members of the United Nations and
to the non-member States contemplated in article XI
of the Convention, and to request States signatories
of or parties to the Convention to notify him of their
acceptance or objection.
411th plenary meeting,
21 December 1952.
See document A/2180.
See document A/2221, annex III.
12 See document A/2221.
10
11
