S/PV.8039

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8039th meeting

Monday, 4 September 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Alemu. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ethiopia)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Seck
Ms. Schoulgin-Nyoni
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Mrs. Haley
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-27481 (E)
*1727481*

S/PV.8039

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President: As this is the first public meeting
of the Security Council for the month of September, I
should like to take this opportunity, on behalf of the
Security Council, to pay tribute to His Excellency
Ambassador Amr Aboulatta, Permanent Representative
of Egypt, for his service as President of the Council for
the month of August. I am sure I speak for all members
of the Security Council in expressing deep appreciation
to Ambassador Aboulatta and his delegation for the
great diplomatic skill with which they conducted the
Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of the Republic of Korea to participate
in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Feltman.
Mr. Feltman: In a statement by its official news
agency on 3 September, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea announced that it had successfully
conducted a sixth nuclear explosive test. The Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea characterized the event as
a “perfect success in the test of a hydrogen bomb for
intercontinental ballistic missile”. The Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea further said that it also
“marked a very significant occasion in attaining the
final goal of completing the state nuclear force”.
The Executive Secretary of the Preparatory
Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty Organization (CTBTO), in Vienna, said in a
statement that the organization’s monitoring stations
had picked up an unusual seismic event in the area
2/15

04/09/2017

of the site used in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea for its previous nuclear tests. The CTBTO’s
data indicated that the event measured approximately
6.0 in magnitude. Governmental sources from United
Nations Member States measured a yield as high as 6.3.
In any case, it is evident the yield of the device was
larger than any of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s previous nuclear tests. Experts have estimated
a yield of between 50 and 100 kilotons, or on average
more than five times more powerful than the weapon
detonated over Hiroshima and at the low end of the
yield of a modern thermonuclear weapon.
The CTBTO detected a second smaller seismic event
at the location of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea test site eight and half minutes after the main
event. The CTBTO has not yet completed its analysis
of this second event, but experts have speculated that
it could have been caused by the collapse of the tunnel
used in the nuclear test.
In an earlier statement the same day, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea official media reported that
their leader had inspected what they claimed to be a
hydrogen bomb, which was conspicuously displayed
in front of a payload fairing for a Hwasong-14
intercontinental ballistic missile. The Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea article stated that the
hydrogen bomb was
“a multi-functional thermonuclear nuke with great
destructive power which can be detonated even at
high altitudes for super-powerful EMP attack”.
This was a rare reference by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to the use of an electromagnetic
pulse, which, triggered by a nuclear weapon, would aim
for widespread damage and disruption to electricity
grids and sensitive electronics, including on satellites.
This is the second emergency Security Council
meeting on non-proliferation and the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea in less than a week, and
the tenth time the Security Council has met to discuss
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea this year.
On 31 August, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea Foreign Ministry issued a statement rejecting
the Security Council’s recent presidential statement
S/PRST/2017/16, and said that the ballistic missile
launch of 29 August was the “first step taken by the
Korean People’s Army in its Pacific operation and a
meaningful prelude to restraining Guam”. There are
reports today indicating that the Democratic People’s
17-27481

04/09/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Republic of Korea may be preparing new ballistic
missile tests.
We are alarmed by this dangerous provocation.
The Secretary-General condemns the underground
nuclear test announced by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. This act is yet another serious
breach of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
international obligations and undermines international
non-proliferation and disarmament efforts. This act
is also profoundly destabilizing for regional and
international security. The Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea is the only country that continues
to break the norm against nuclear test explosions. The
Secretary-General reiterates his call on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea leadership to cease such acts
and to comply fully with its international obligations
under relevant Security Council resolutions.
The Secretary-General counts on the Security
Council to remain united and take appropriate action.
As was said in the Security Council meeting last week
(see S/PV.8034), as tensions rise so does the risk of
misunderstanding, miscalculation and escalation. The
latest serious developments require a comprehensive
response in order to break the cycle of provocations
from the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. Such
a response must include wise and bold diplomacy if it
is to be effective.
As the Council considers its reaction, the SecretaryGeneral reiterates the importance of responding to
humanitarian imperatives regardless of the political
situation. The people of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea rely on the international community
to provide humanitarian assistance to those in need. We
will continue to follow the developments and remain
in close coordination with the concerned international
organizations, members of the Council and other
Governments concerned.
The President: I thank Mr. Feltman for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): We want
to thank you, Sir, for allowing us to have this meeting
so promptly, as it is very urgent. We also want to thank
the Ambassador of Egypt and his team for the steady
hand and the calm way in which they led the Council
last month.

S/PV. 8039

For more than 20 years, the Security Council has
taken actions against North Korea’s nuclear programme,
and for more than 20 years North Korea has defied our
collective voice. It is worth taking a few moments to
recount some of the history.
In 1993, the Council adopted resolution 825 (1993),
calling on North Korea to remain in the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. That did
not work. North Korea withdrew from the Treaty and
continued its nuclear pursuit. In 2006, the Six-Party
Talks faltered, and North Korea conducted several
ballistic missile launches. That led to resolution 1695
(2006), condemning them. The same year, North Korea
conducted its first nuclear test. That led to resolution
1718 (2006), establishing a United Nations sanctions
regime aiming to stop all nuclear, ballistic missile and
other weapons of mass destruction programmes.
After the Six-Party Talks fell apart again in 2009,
North Korea conducted additional missile launches
and its second nuclear test. That led to resolution 1874
(2009), which expanded sanctions, including an arms
embargo and cargo inspection obligations. In 2012, the
leap day deal failed, and North Korea conducted two
new space launches. The Security Council responded
with the adoption of resolution 2087 (2013). Following
North Korea’s third nuclear test in 2013, the Council
adopted resolution 2094 (2013), expanding sanctions
to restrict financial, maritime, aviation and diplomatic
activities. By 2016, North Korea had conducted
its fourth nuclear test and another space launch. It
followed that with more missile launches. In response,
the Council adopted multiple resolutions expanding
sanctions even further, targeting whole sectors of North
Korea’s economy.
Finally, this year, the Council got even more serious.
First, we adopted resolution 2356 (2017), designating
high-ranking North Korean Government officials
and the military’s Strategic Rocket Forces Command
for individual sanctions. Then, just last month,
after the regime’s first two intercontinental ballistic
missile (ICBM) launches, we adopted resolution 2371
(2017) — the strongest sanctions we have ever imposed
on North Korea. That resolution banned North Korean
exports of coal, iron and seafood, and imposed several
other measures that will significantly cut off the
revenues needed to fund its nuclear programme.
Why did I take the time to go through this history?
I did so to make this point. The Security Council has

17-274813/15

S/PV.8039

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

spoken with unusual unity and consistency on North
Korea. That is a good thing. Along the way, there have
been problems with implementation, and the Council
has at times been too slow and too weak, but this is not
a situation in which we have allowed divisions among
us to stop any action.
Still, here we are. Despite our efforts over the past
24 years, the North Korean nuclear programme is more
advanced and more dangerous than ever. It now fires
missiles over Japanese air space. It now has ICBM
capabilities. it now claims to have tested a hydrogen
bomb. And just this morning, there are reports that the
regime is preparing for yet another ICBM launch.
To the members of the Security Council, I must
say, “enough is enough”. We have taken an incremental
approach and, despite the best of intentions, it has not
worked. Members of the Council will no doubt urge
negotiations and a return to talks. But as I have just
outlined, we have engaged in numerous direct and
multilateral talks with the North Korean regime, and
time after time they have not worked. The time for
half measures in the Security Council is over. The
time has come to exhaust all of our diplomatic means
before it is too late. We must now adopt the strongest
possible measures.
Kim Jong Un’s action cannot be seen as defensive.
He wants to be acknowledged as a nuclear Power, but
being a nuclear Power is not about using those terrible
weapons to threaten others. Nuclear Powers understand
their responsibilities. Kim Jong Un shows no such
understanding. His abusive use of missiles and his
nuclear threats show that he is begging for war. War
is never something the United States wants. We do not
want it now, but our country’s patience is not unlimited.
We will defend our allies and our territory.
The idea that some have suggested of a so-called
freeze-for-freeze is insulting. When a rogue regime
has a nuclear weapon and an ICBM pointed at you, you
do not take steps to lower your guard. No one would
do that. We certainly will not. The time has come to
exhaust all diplomatic means to end this crisis, and that
means quickly enacting the strongest possible measures
here in the Security Council. Only the strongest
sanctions will enable us to resolve this problem through
diplomacy. We have kicked the can down the road long
enough. There is no more road left.
This crisis goes well beyond the United Nations.
The United States will look at every country that does
4/15

04/09/2017

business with North Korea as a country that is giving
aid to its reckless and dangerous nuclear intentions.
What we do in connection with North Korea will have
a real impact on how other outlaw nations that seek
nuclear weapons choose to conduct themselves in the
future. The stakes could not be higher. The urgency
is now. Twenty-four years of half measures and failed
talks are enough.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): We appreciate the presidency’s
swift convening of this urgent briefing, which was
jointly requested by the United States, the Republic of
Korea, France, the United Kingdom and Japan. We also
appreciate the briefing by Mr. Feltman.
Less than a week ago, the members of the Security
Council gathered to condemn the launch of a ballistic
missile by North Korea, which flew over Japan (see
S/PV.8034). Yesterday, North Korea announced that
it had succeeded in miniaturizing a nuclear warhead
that could be attached to an intercontinental ballistic
missile. Only hours later, North Korea conducted
its sixth nuclear test. Seen together, it is clear how
belligerent and dangerous North Korea’s actions are
and how it is not a problem merely for North Korea’s
neighbours, but for the entire international community.
The Security Council must waste no time in ending
such an outrageous and unacceptable challenge to the
security and safety of the world.
With regard to nuclear testing, North Korea is the
only country to have conducted nuclear tests in the
twenty-first century. Almost exactly one year ago,
North Korea conducted its fifth nuclear test, and the
members of the Council were united in expressing their
condemnation in the strongest terms (see S/PV.7821).
The international community urged North Korea to
stop, but North Korea poured precious resources into
enhancing its nuclear capabilities. As a result, the sixth
nuclear test exhibited an explosive magnitude of force
far greater than the previous one, and has raised the
threat to an unprecedented level.
Concerning missile launches, the Security Council
adopted a stern presidential statement (S/PRST/2017/16)
less than a week ago. I will not repeat the discussion (see
S/PV.8034), but let me just remind Council members
that missile launches and nuclear tests are part and
parcel of North Korea’s nuclear development. Taken
holistically, the threat that it poses truly has entered a
new level, which is more grave and imminent.
17-27481

04/09/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

S/PV. 8039

The nuclear test by North Korea is a clear violation
of the relevant Security Council resolutions and a
brazen challenge to the international disarmament and
non-proliferation regime based on the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. It also violates
the Japan-Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
Pyongyang Declaration, as well as the Joint Statement
of the Fourth Round of the Six-Party Talks.

Yesterday, North Korea once again crossed a
major red line towards escalation. After launching two
intercontinental ballistic missiles and placing one of the
countries of the region in clear and present danger, last
night it carried out its sixth nuclear test. The event was
immediately detected by the International Monitoring
System of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty Organization.

Japan strongly condemns North Korea and has
directly lodged a protest against North Korea. Japan
welcomes the fact that many countries in the world,
members of the Council and Secretary-General Guterres
have already issued statements strongly condemning
North Korea, but, beyond condemnation, the Security
Council must act to stop North Korea from continuing
down this road. We should make it clear to the North
Koreans that continuing their current policy will entail
serious consequences. We must put the maximum
amount of pressure on North Korea to change its policy.

Through its highest ranking officials, my country
has voiced its most vehement condemnation of that
event. In addition to the expression of solidarity that I
offer to the countries of the region on behalf of France,
with deep concern, I am calling on the countries of
the international community to be lucid and firm.
Obviously, each one of us is concerned today because
each on of us is threatened.

It continues to be critically important for all
Member States to faithfully implement the relevant
existing resolutions, which have been unanimously
adopted, including resolutions 2270 (2016), 2321 (2016),
2356 (2017) and 2371 (2017), but that is not sufficient.
Japan stresses the need for the Council to adopt swiftly
a new resolution with further robust sanction measures.
In paragraph 29 of resolution 2371 (2017), the Security
Council expressed its “determination to take further
significant measures in the event of a further DPRK
nuclear test or launch.” The Council must act on in
accordance with that affirmation.
Japan is looking forward to continuing to work
closely with all the members of the Council on this
ever-more urgent and grave threat to the peace and
security of the world.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I should like to thank Egypt for its outstanding
presidency of the Security Council last month and
to congratulate Ethiopia through you, Sir, for having
assumed the presidency for the month of September.
You can naturally count on France’s full support for
the coming month, which looks to be particularly
busy. I thank you for having convened this emergency
meeting upon our joint request alongside the United
States, the United Kingdom, the Republic of Korea
and Japan. I also thank Jeffrey Feltman for his very
enlightening briefing.

Let us make no mistake. In just a few months,
the threat has changed in its dimensions and even its
nature. The threat is no longer merely regional. It is
global. It is no longer merely virtual. It is immediate.
It is no longer merely serious. It is existential. This
serious and global threat endangers our security,
strategic stability and international peace. Through its
sixth nuclear test, the Pyongyang regime continues to
violate its obligations, and defy us. Every one of the
actions taken by the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea corresponds to its relentless, continuous and
methodical work to make its dangerous obsession into
a reality as quickly as possible. I am speaking of the
possession of an operational nuclear arsenal aimed at
changing not only the regional but the international
balance. The combination of nuclear capability, to
which I referred, and North Korean intercontinental
ballistic missiles constitutes henceforth an erga omnes
danger everywhere.
In that regard, weakness or prevarication is not an
option. That is why France calls for a swift, firm and
unified response from the Security Council, based in
particular on three specific points: the rapid adoption
of new sanctions on the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, very strict implementation of existing
sanctions by all actors concerned and the adoption of
additional measures by the European Union. Let us be
cognizant of the fact that time is running out. We know
that Pyongyang does not hesitate and will not hesitate
to sacrifice its own people in order to flout the most
basic rules we have devised on non-proliferation and
so on. That is understood to be a major threat to the
very foundation of our entire law and security system;

17-274815/15

S/PV.8039

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

one that we cannot accept. We are all responsible for
ensuring that that system is respected, preserved and
even strengthened; our credibility is at stake.
There are those who believe that the international
community is not willing to engage in dialogue but,
regrettably, the current situation is not at all conducive
to negotiations. My country has always supported
dialogue. Nonetheless, it must be noted that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has not given
us even the smallest sign or assurance that it would
perhaps be willing to negotiate on its nuclear and
ballistic activities. In the light of such blatant disregard
for international law and the authority of the Security
Council, there can be no compromise. We have stated
on multiple occasions that the violation of Council
decisions cannot be treated as a commodity. We cannot
allow others to dictate our response.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea must end
its nuclear and ballistic programme in a comprehensive,
verifiable and irreversible manner and meet its
international obligations without delay. France also
believes that it should join the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty. A firm collective response alone will
be effective in successfully bringing the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, without conditions, to the
negotiating table. We must remain accountable in fully
implementing existing sanctions. They are not an end
in themselves, but they are indispensable.
Let us recall that major economic sanctions were
adopted by the Council only in 2016, and they are
having an effect. Nonetheless, in the light of new
developments, we must put maximum pressure on the
Pyongyang regime. France therefore supports the swift
adoption of new sanctions, in particular economic and
sectoral sanctions, by the Council. As I said, we remain
resolute and committed to similar efforts within the
European Union.
In the worrisome spiral of one-upmanship and
provocation in which it finds itself, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea must bear the consequences
of its unremitting obstinacy. The only response that we
can provide is a very stringent, unambiguous policy,
with the end goal of a complete dismantling of the
Republic’s programmes. Only through a strict policy
and maximum pressure on the regime will we be able
to change the course of events, bring the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to the negotiating table,
6/15

04/09/2017

without conditions, and embark on the path to a political
settlement to the crisis.
Given the acute and extremely serious threat, the
Security Council must shoulder its responsibility. Rest
assured of France’s resolute commitment in that regard,
as a permanent member of the Security Council.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): This is the sixth
time that the Security Council has come together to
condemn a nuclear test by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea; the sixth time that the world has
held its breath. The Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea is the only country in the twenty-first century
to have conducted such tests, against all international
standards of behaviour. In addition, we have met many
times in recent months, following other provocations
from the Republic, most recently, just last week, in
response to its reckless missile test over Japan.
Yesterday’s nuclear test explosion was by far the
largest yet. Combined with the increasing range of its
missiles, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
poses a threat, not simply to its region, but truly to
global peace and security. The most recent test has
been quite rightly condemned already by most of the
Governments represented here today. We have adopted
eight sanctions resolutions on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. The country is subject to the most
stringent sanctions currently applied by the Council,
and yet the Republic continues to put its illegal missile
and nuclear programmes ahead of international law,
international security and the will of the Council.
It is a disturbing and unprecedented situation.
Rarely has a State remained so defiant in the face
of overwhelming international condemnation and
repeated powerful rounds of sanctions. It is clear that
existing sanctions applied by the Security Council on
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea are having
an effect, in particular the measures against commodity
exports and the financial sector that have been applied
since 2016. Those sanctions are making its harder and
harder for Pyongyang to acquire the hard currency
necessary to fund its programme. Each day, that gets
harder still, thanks to the efforts of many States around
the table.
Those who doubt that impact need only read the
statements coming from the regime. They rail against
the sanctions that we have placed upon them. But it
is also clear that the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea is uniquely willing to put its illicit programmes
17-27481

04/09/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

ahead of the well-being of its people. Those people
suffer appalling repression and struggle even to feed
themselves. The leadership of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea has chosen that path of defiance at
great cost.
Faced with this unique threat to international peace
and security, the Security Council must condemn the
test and the entire nuclear and missile programme of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. We continue to
wish for a peaceful way forward. Dialogue will always
be our end goal, but returning to dialogue without a
serious sign of intent from Pyongyang would be a set-up
for failure. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
must change course to allow a return to dialogue. Were
it to do so, the opportunity exists to end the crisis. Until
that moment, we must stay the course on sanctions and,
as the Secretary-General has called for, continue to
present a united front.
When we met last week, I stated that the United
Kingdom believed that a new resolution was required
in response to the Republic’s dangerous and illegal
test flight of the missile over Japan. In the light of
yesterday’s nuclear test, our resolve to act has increased
further. We must increase the pace of implementation
of existing sanctions and work rapidly towards the
adoption of a new and effective resolution. While
continuing to enforce the measures that the Council has
already agreed, we should go further by taking steps
to sever the funds on which the regime relies in order
to pursue its illegal and destabilizing programmes.
Not least, we should further restrict the unethical
exploitation of overseas workers of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has
created a deeply dangerous and unstable situation. The
United Kingdom will work with our partners on the
Council and beyond to tackle the challenge. I urge all
States to join us.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): On
3 September, despite the broad opposition of the
international community, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea disregarded the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council and once again conducted
a nuclear test. The Chinese Government resolutely
opposes and strongly condemns the nuclear test
conducted by the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea in violation of Security Council resolutions.
Achieving the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula

S/PV. 8039

and maintaining the nuclear non-proliferation system
and peace and stability in North-East Asia constitute
the firm stand of the Chinese Government, as well as
the overall aspiration of the international community.
We strongly urge the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to face up squarely to the firm will of
the international community on the issue of the
denuclearization of the peninsula and earnestly abide
by the relevant resolutions of the Council; stop taking
actions that are wrong, that lead to the deterioration
of the situation and that are not in line with its own
interests; and to return to the track of solving the issue
through dialogue.
The situation on the Korean peninsula continues to
deteriorate as we speak, falling into a vicious circle.
The peninsula issue must be resolved peacefully.
China will never allow chaos and war on the peninsula.
The parties concerned must strengthen their sense of
urgency; take due responsibility; play their due roles;
take practical measures; make joint efforts to ease
the situation together; restart the dialogue and talks;
and prevent further deterioration of the situation on
the peninsula.
China and Russia proposed a two-track approach
that promotes the denuclearization of the peninsula and
the establishment of a peace mechanism in parallel. The
suspension-for-suspension initiative, which calls for the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to suspend its
nuclear and missile activities and for the United States
and the Republic of Korea to suspend their large-scale
military exercises, and the step-by-step concept by
Russia are the basis on which both countries jointly
proposed a road map to resolve the peninsula issue.
That joint initiative by China and Russia is practical
and feasible and is aimed at addressing the most urgent
security concerns of the parties concerned; easing the
tension as soon as possible; preventing the continuous
escalation of the situation; achieving through dialogue
the denuclearization of the peninsula; and maintaining
the peace and stability of the peninsula and the region.
We hope that the parties concerned will seriously
consider that proposal and actively respond to it.
China calls upon the international community to
jointly and comprehensively implement the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, firmly push forward the
goal of denuclearization of the peninsula and firmly
maintain the peace and stability of the peninsula.

17-274817/15

S/PV.8039

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I thank Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman for his briefing on this alarming issue, and the
United States of America, Japan and the Republic of
Korea for initiating today’s Security Council briefing.
The open format of our meeting is important, as it
leaves no doubt as to what the North Korean regime
will hear from every member of the Security Council.
We need to express our attitude to their policies loudly
and clearly.
Ukraine is deeply concerned about the conduct
of yet another nuclear test by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, which represents a threat to
international peace and security and constitutes
a flagrant breach of the non-proliferation regime,
including universal norms prohibiting nuclear testing.
In that regard, I would like to recall the statement issued
today by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine:
“In conjunction with Pyongyang’s aggressive
ballistic missile programme, it now poses a real
threat not only to neighbouring countries, but
also to the entire international community. As the
country that voluntarily renounced its third-largest
nuclear arsenal along with the strategic means of
its delivery, Ukraine regards Pyongyang’s recent
actions as a conscious, reckless and dangerous
provocation. It is most deplorable that the North
Korean leadership has once again defied — bluntly
and cynically — numerous United Nations Security
Council resolutions.
“Ukraine calls on Pyongyang to refrain from
any demonstration of force, cease all nuclear tests
without delay and restart a constructive dialogue,
without preconditions, in order to ensure the
complete, irreversible and verifiable renunciation
of its nuclear and missile programmes. Ukraine
stands ready to join other members of the
international community, including as a current
non-permanent member of the Security Council,
in taking stronger and more decisive measures to
curb future nuclear and missile threats. In order to
strengthen the nuclear non-proliferation regime,
we call upon the Security Council to undertake an
in-depth investigation into the development of the
North Korean nuclear and missile programmes, in
order to expose any possible foreign assistance to
Pyongyang in this area.”
There are some points that the Ukrainian delegation
would like to highlight in that regard. Pyongyang’s
8/15

04/09/2017

policy has proved to be very persistent and clear in
ignoring international law and the numerous calls to halt
its illegal activity. That leaves no hope for compliance
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea with
existing norms and prohibitions. Moreover, Pyongyang’s
aggressive rhetoric is aimed at legitimizing such acts
by blaming other States for raising the tensions in the
region. That is absolutely unacceptable.
Needless to say, the Council should use
every instrument at its disposal to ensure the full
implementation of its resolutions. At the same time,
we cannot but recognize that we urgently need even
more robust measures to respond comprehensively and
effectively to the growing nuclear threat on the Korean
peninsula. Ukraine remains ready for constructive
work with all delegations on this issue in order to ensure
positive changes in the current situation and to move
closer to the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): The latest nuclear test by
North Korea represents, in our view, a grave and
reckless provocation that violates successive Security
Council resolutions. Our Minister for Foreign Affairs
immediately condemned this act in the strongest terms.
Since the early hours after the test, Prime Minister
Gentiloni has been in close contact with our main
European and international partners, confirming
that Italy will continue to do its part for a firm
and cohesive response at the international and the
European Union levels to pressure Pyongyang to desist
from its continued provocations. As our Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Alfano, stressed, by pursuing its
nuclear and ballistic programmes, Pyongyang poses
a clear threat to international peace and security and
is increasingly and seriously challenging the global
non-proliferation regime. North Korea is the only
country, as was recalled, that has tested a nuclear
device in the twenty-first century. Such a breach of the
international moratorium on nuclear tests highlights
once more the urgent need for the entry into force of
the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty.
Also following an initiative by the Italian presidency,
this morning the leaders of the Group of Seven issued
a statement urging the full implementation of Security
Council resolutions, stating their readiness to adopt
further measures to ensure that North Korea reverts
to international legality and recalling the primary role
of the Council to that end. We therefore express our
full solidarity with the Governments of the region,
17-27481

04/09/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

as well as their peoples, who are directly affected by
the consequences of Pyongyang’s irresponsible acts,
and reaffirm that North Korea’s nuclear and missile
programmes are a global threat that concerns us all.
The regime of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea continues to systematically defy the authority of
the Council and the will of the international community
as a whole. Its latest nuclear test poses a new level of
threat. It is imperative that the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea immediately put a complete stop to
the development of its missile and nuclear programmes
in a verifiable and irreversible manner.
While underlining the importance that Italy
attaches to the continued unity of the Security Council
on this matter, we believe that under the current
circumstances a firm and determined response by
the Council is the right course of action. Therefore,
we encourage the Security Council to adopt further
measures in response to the latest nuclear test. We will
conduct our work constructively to that end, bearing in
mind that sanctions must remain a tool that is part of
a broader strategy aimed at a peaceful and long-term
solution of the issue of the Korean peninsula and the
region as a whole. In that vein, we are committed to
ensuring, as we affirmed in resolution 2371 (2017), that
the sanctions regime does not have a negative effect on
the humanitarian situation in the country.
Finally, as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), I will continue our
efforts to ensure the entire United Nations membership’s
comprehensive and further implementation of the
sanctions regime. We will soon be organizing another
briefing open to the whole membership on resolution
2371 (2017), and I hereby appeal to all Member States
to attend it. An effective sanctions regime will continue
to be essential to ensuring that the leadership of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea calculates the
price of its challenge to the international community
and comes back to the negotiating table for credible
multilateral talks.
Ms. Schoulgin-Nyoni (Sweden): I would like to
thank Mr. Feltman for his briefing.
Just a few days after we last met to discuss the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (see S/PV.8034),
we once again find ourselves called together to respond
to Pyongyang’s provocative actions. Sweden condemns
yesterday’s nuclear test in the strongest possible terms.
It clearly represents a threat to international peace and

S/PV. 8039

security, an unacceptable provocation and a breach of
the international obligations of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, in defiance of numerous Security
Council resolutions. The Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea’s dangerous and destabilizing course of action
further exacerbates its precarious humanitarian situation
in another example of the regime’s determination to
pursue its nuclear ambitions with utter disregard for the
well-being of its own people.
This latest action further raises the tensions in the
region, already heightened as a result of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s actions in recent months.
The potential for mistakes, misunderstandings and
miscalculations is high. There is a pressing need for
measures to reduce those tensions and to consider how
the Council can facilitate a comprehensive solution
to the situation. We renew our call to the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to abandon the dangerous
path it is pursuing, comply with its international
obligations and take positive steps in line with the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
The Council must deliver a firm response and
remain united in the face of the threat to peace that the
actions of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
represent, not only to its neighbours and the region but
to global non-proliferation generally. We are ready to
explore new sanctions, but to have the desired effect,
sanctions must be duly implemented. That is also a
matter of credibility for the United Nations system.
All countries have a duty to effectively implement the
relevant sanctions in line with the Security Council’s
resolutions. Yet the sanctions on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea continue to be implemented
inadequately and extremely inconsistently. All States
Members of the United Nations must do their utmost
in that regard. The Council should make full use
of the tools at its disposal, and in that context, we
look forward to the briefing on 11 September by the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718
(2006) and to discussing further measures to strengthen
the implementation of the sanctions already in force.
Sanctions alone, however, will not solve the
situation on the Korean peninsula, and there can
be no military solution to this tense situation. In the
light of the continually growing tensions, we urgently
need to avoid escalation and take steps to prepare for
a peaceful, diplomatic and comprehensive solution to
the problem. Intensified, creative diplomatic efforts

17-274819/15

S/PV.8039

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

are urgently needed. A medium-security mechanism
should be a medium-term goal. The pursuit of weapons
of mass destruction represents an extremely grave
threat to international peace and security. Preventing
the development and use of such weapons is one of
the Council’s crucial responsibilities. Sweden stands
united with Council members in condemning actions
that jeopardize international peace and security.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for the information he has given us on
the recent events that have led to the convening of this
emergency meeting.
Bolivia firmly and energetically condemns the
underground nuclear test conducted by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea on 3 September. According
to press reports, it was 10 times more powerful than that
conducted in 2016, and 100 times more powerful than
the country’s first nuclear test, in 2006. Based on its
pacifist status, Bolivia rejects all nuclear tests, as well
as the proliferation of nuclear weapons, in accordance
with the various international treaties on the subject.
We also reject the manufacture of such arms, in line
with the ban on nuclear weapons in Latin America and
the Caribbean, better known as the Treaty of Tlatelolco,
under which Latin America and the Caribbean became
the world’s first nuclear-weapon-free zone, and we call
for that example to be followed in other regions.
We would like to echo the words of the SecretaryGeneral on the subject when he said that
“[t]his act is yet another serious breach of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
international obligations and undermines international
non-proliferation and disarmament efforts.”
We therefore urge the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to abandon its nuclear and ballistic-missile
programmes fully, verifiably and irreversibly, and to
comply with the relevant Security Council resolutions.
We also urge all the parties involved to avoid the
increasing tensions and escalating rhetoric that are
putting international peace and security in jeopardy,
especially on the Korean peninsula, and especially to
avoid any provocative or unilateral acts and any act
that infringes international law or the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. We urge them to halt this
spiral into confrontation and threats of military force,
10/15

04/09/2017

including a nuclear response, which can only lead to a
major catastrophe.
Once again, we reiterate our welcome of, and
support for, the Chinese initiative of dual restraint,
which seeks to enable a simultaneous freeze on
actions on the peninsula. We also support the efforts
to revive a path to the resumption of negotiations. We
emphasize the importance of compliance with the
Charter’s provision that the Security Council is the
sole body legally empowered to take measures needed
to maintain or restore international peace and security
and that any unilateral action is to be eschewed. In that
regard, we reject unilateral sanctions, which not only
constitute a flagrant violation of international law but
also undermine the work of multilateral organizations
such as ours and seek to impose one State’s jurisdiction
and domestic legislation on another, in violation of the
principles of the equality, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States.
Sanctions are not an end in themselves, and there
can be no military solution to the situation on the
Korean peninsula. In that regard, we remind the parties
involved of their duty to comply with paragraph 5
of General Assembly resolution 71/86, adopted on
5 December 2016, which reaffirms support for the SixParty Talks, and in accordance with paragraph 27 of
Security Council resolution 2371 (2017), which calls for
the resumption of the Talks with the goal of achieving
the peaceful and verifiable denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula.
Lastly, Bolivia reiterates its call to all the parties
involved to reject the possibility of any kind of military
solution or threat of the use of force and to resume a
dialogue and negotiations aimed at a peaceful, diplomatic
and political settlement that, we repeat, can ultimately
lead to the Korean peninsula’s denuclearization.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman for his briefing
on the latest North Korean nuclear test.
The provocative nuclear missile activity by
Pyongyang recently gained dangerous momentum. We
are deeply troubled by the testing of a thermonuclear
explosive device for an intercontinental ballistic
missile, as announced by Pyongyang officials. There is
no doubt that we are experiencing one of the gravest and
most dramatic stages of developments on the Korean
peninsula. It is no exaggeration to state that peace in
the region is being sorely tested, and the threat of this
17-27481

04/09/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

conflict morphing into an active conflict is greater
than ever.
The latest blatant display of North Korea’s
disregard of the relevant Security Council resolutions
and the norms of international law warrants the most
vehement condemnation. We cannot but regret the
fact that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
leadership, through its action to undermine the global
non-proliferation regime, is posing a grave threat
to peace and stability on the Korean peninsula and
globally. The pursuit of such a policy is fraught with
serious repercussions for the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea itself.
At the same time, it is evident to us that military
solutions cannot settle the issues plaguing the North
Korean peninsula. Given the unfolding situation,
there is an urgent need to maintain a cool head and
to refrain from any action that could further escalate
tensions. We reaffirm the need for comprehensive and
full compliance by all stakeholders with the relevant
Security Council statements and resolutions, including
the recent resolution 2371 (2017), adopted by concensus.
Many today delved into the history of attempts to
halt the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea nuclear
and ballistic programme. That historical exploration
only serves as evidence that we have failed to resolve
this issue through Security Council resolutions that were
geared only towards leveraging sanctions mechanisms.
We call upon all stakeholders to immediately return to
dialogue and negotiations, as that is the only way to
comprehensively settle the issues besetting the Korean
peninsula — including nuclear issues. We reaffirm our
willingness to engage in concerted efforts along those
lines, including in the context of the implementation of
the Russian-Chinese road map.
The Russian Federation calls on the international
community to not yield to emotions and to act in a
calm and balanced way. We once again stress that a
comprehensive settlement to the nuclear and other
issues plaguing the Korean peninsula can be arrived
at solely through political and diplomatic channels,
including by leveraging the mediation efforts of the
Secretary-General.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
The seriousness of the item under consideration
notwithstanding, I would like to express my delegation’s
congratulations to you, Mr. President, upon your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council,

S/PV. 8039

as well as to thank Egypt for carrying out its duties as
President of the Council during the month of August.
We also thank the delegations of the United States,
France, Japan, the United Kingdom and the Republic
of Korea for having convened this meeting. I would
also like in particular to thank the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, for
his briefing — which my delegation fully supports.
Uruguay is gratified that an issue of this nature should
be addressed today in an open meeting of the Security
Council. We believe that goes a long way towards
lending transparency to the Council’s working methods
and helps optimize its operation.
Uruguay expresses its most emphatic condemnation
of the detonation of a nuclear weapon yesterday by
North Korea — the sixth such test it has carried out
since 2006. The paradox is that the world is moving in
a different direction when it comes to weapons of mass
destruction and denuclearization. No one carries out
such nuclear tests anymore — only North Korea — in
flagrant violation of Security Council resolutions, with
a clear confrontational stance and, what is worse,
in utter contempt of the adverse effects those tests
could have on its own territory, its own people and its
neighbouring countries.
Last week, on the International Day against Nuclear
Tests, my delegation echoed the call of the international
community for the swift entry into force of the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. Promoting the
universality and entry into force of the Treaty must be
a priority in addressing the danger that the carrying out
of nuclear tests poses to the international community.
We regret the obstinate behaviour of North Korea. As
has been pointed out several times here in the Chamber,
it is the only country that has carried out nuclear tests
in the twenty-first century. Its actions are a serious
threat to international peace and security and a flagrant
violation of the resolutions of the Council. Those
nuclear tests and the launching of ballistic missiles are a
continuous provocation of the international community,
and they exacerbate instability in the Korean peninsula
and tension in the zone.
As such, Uruguay once again urges North Korea
to completely abandon its nuclear programme, in a
verifiable and irreversible manner, and immediately
halt all related activities, including the launching of
ballistic missiles using proscribed technology and other
provocative actions. We also urge it to return to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and

17-2748111/15

S/PV.8039

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

the International Atomic Energy Agency’s safeguards
regime. We reiterate our call for strict compliance with
the resolutions adopted by this organ.
We must continue to develop actions and measures
that are in accordance with the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations. Our delegation is
ready to consider the adoption of new and more robust
sanctions in the Council. However, as has been pointed
out here in the Chamber as well, it is necessary to
ensure the effective implementation of sanctions by all
Member States, while avoiding adverse humanitarian
consequences for the people of North Korea.
Uruguay is of the view that a solution to this delicate
situation can come about only in the form of diplomacy,
in the context of an international strategy to which
all countries are firmly committed — in particular
those with influence in the Korean peninsula. As part
of that process, it is crucial to safeguard the unity of
the Security Council and to act with a single voice in
search of a peaceful, diplomatic and political solution
to the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We would like to
commend the delegation of Egypt for its very able
presidency last month, as well as to congratulate our
Ethiopian colleagues on taking up the proceedings of the
Security Council. We thank the Ethiopian presidency
for the prompt convening of this meeting of the Council.
I also thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman
for his briefing as well as the delegations of the United
States, the United Kingdom, France, Japan and the
Republic of Korea for calling for today’s meeting on
this most flagrant violation by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea.
It is absolutely unacceptable for the international
community to have to see the detonation of bombs
by North Korea through the six nuclear tests it has
undertaken in the twenty-first century. Such actions
undermine the collective efforts of the international
community to establish a nuclear-weapon-free world. It
is even more frustrating to receive this news just as we
have celebrated the International Day against Nuclear
Tests. It should be noted that General Assembly
resolution 64/35, establishing the International Day
against Nuclear Tests, was unanimously adopted by
all Member States, including the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea.
The world once again calls on the North Korean
regime to abandon its nuclear ambitions and return to
12/15

04/09/2017

the negotiating table. At the recent special meeting of
the General Assembly, all participating Member States
unanimously condemned the nuclear threat caused by
Pyongyang’s provocative actions.
We believe that in the light of today’s tensions,
we have to continue tirelessly to seek mutually
acceptable solutions, with a view to achieving concrete
agreements — both bilateral and multilateral — on
freezing the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
nuclear programme and to initiate the step-by-step
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula. No matter
what the cost, we must not slide into fuelling the
conflict, the consequences of which will be most
hazardous not only for North Korea itself but also
for regional and international security. The military
approach has never led to any sustainable and lasting
solution of the problem.
Kazakhstan holds the firm conviction that nuclear
weapons are not a true guarantor of national security.
The global nuclear-weapon Powers and the international
community have demonstrated that ensuring one’s own
defence through the possession of weapons of mass
destruction is not a viable strategy.
As a country that has survived the horrors and
tragedy of the consequences of nuclear testing, we
firmly believe that nothing can justify conducting such
inhuman acts. We stand in solidarity with the countries
of the region as well as the entire world to find a
comprehensive and collective solution to the situation.
A new bold diplomatic and political plan, combined
with smart and robust actions, is necessary if we are
to avert the dangerous trend towards nuclear-weapon
development on the Korean peninsula. We call on all
member States to join in this effort.
We strongly call on Pyongyang to change its course
and think about a prosperous and non-nuclear future
for itself and the region. We hope that the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and others can learn from
the very clear and undisputed example of Kazakhstan,
which not only renounced its nuclear weapons but,
together with its Central Asian neighbours, created a
nuclear-weapon-free zone.
Once again, we call on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to heed the message of humankind
and seek the path of prudence and dialogue.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Egypt
vehemently condemns the nuclear test that was
17-27481

04/09/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

S/PV. 8039

conducted by the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea early yesterday, 3 September, and, through our
ongoing commitment to the importance of safeguarding
the credibility of the nuclear non-proliferation regime,
we stand by this position.

take this opportunity to thank you, Mr. President, for
having agreed to convene it so swiftly. I also offer
thanks to the Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, Mr. Feltman, for having given us a clear and
factual briefing.

There is a need to uphold the credibility of the
Security Council itself. We reject any double standards
in this regard and we are committed to setting an
example in dealing conscientiously and strictly with
any threat posed to the nuclear non-proliferation
regime, regardless of any of the justifications that
may be put forward. Egypt fully grasps the nature
of the threats posed by North Korea in its violation
of Security Council resolutions; these threats are a
danger to international and regional peace and security,
particularly in North-East Asia.

Once again, we find ourselves brought together
following the latest in a long line of acts of defiance
against the international community, in particular the
Security Council, carried out by the authorities of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, namely,
the nuclear test carried out yesterday, Sunday,
by Pyongyang, which stated publicly that it had
successfully tested a thermonuclear hydrogen bomb of
unprecedented power, which could be installed on its
new intercontinental missiles. This sixth nuclear test
by North Korea follows the two that were conducted
last year and the tenth ballistic missile launch, which
was carried out just last week. Together with the
international community, Senegal strongly condemns
in the strongest possible terms this attitude of defiance
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, which
are a yet another serious breach of its international
obligations, undermines international non-proliferation
and disarmament efforts and greatly heightens tensions
and strategic instability in the Korean peninsula and
even beyond.

Egypt calls on North Korea to immediately cease all
violations and activities that are in breach of Security
Council resolutions and urges it to refrain from any
action that might further escalate tensions or jeopardize
international and region stability and security. Egypt
reaffirms its condemnation of all such violations. We
also reaffirm our support for the Security Council
assuming its responsibility in this regard.
Egypt once again reiterates its call on all
stakeholders to seek to find a peaceful settlement to the
issues plaguing the Korean peninsula, craft a solution
that eliminates all nuclear weapons, establish a lasting
peace between the two Koreas and show restraint in
line with provisions of Security Council resolutions
aimed at safeguarding peace, stability and international
security, with a view to breaking this very dangerous
vicious cycle of ongoing violations of Security Council
resolutions by the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. In this context, Egypt once again welcomes
any initiative or constructive idea that can lead to a
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula and to a
lasting peace in the region.
I would like to conclude by once again voicing our
great interest in safeguarding Security Council unity
in dealing with a matter that is of concern to us all. In
ensuring international unity, it is a sine qua non that the
goals of the various measures adopted by the Council
be attained.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank the American, British, French and
Japanese delegations for calling for today’s emergency
meeting of the Security Council. I would also like to

Once again, the credibility of the Security Council
is put to the test. Despite all the Council’s resolutions,
all sanctions and other measures taken against North
Korea, the country’s authorities, far from having
relinquished their military nuclear ambitions, are now
going so far as to call into question the very authority
of the Security Council to take up the problem posed
by its illegal military nuclear programme. There is
indeed a problem. What more must we do to make that
country come to its senses and respect its international
obligations in this area in a clear, irreversible and
verifiable manner? But the Council must first remain
united and firm in its condemnation of those actions
and in its resolve to adopt the new necessary measures,
in accordance with its prior resolutions, including the
latest, resolution 2371 (2017).
Each and every State Member of the United
Nations must also implement the provisions of the
many resolutions and sanctions imposed on North
Korea, however complex they may be. In that regard,
the regular briefings and special informational
meetings convened by Italy, in its capacity as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718

17-2748113/15

S/PV.8039

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

04/09/2017

(2006), concerning the implementation of sanctions,
remain of great importance.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

In conclusion, and as we all agree that there can be
no military solution, my country urges the authorities
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
respect the resolutions of the Security Council, end
its illegal military nuclear programme, refrain from
threatening to use weapons of mass destruction against
States Members of the United Nations, and return to
the negotiating table in the framework of the Six-Party
Talks, which it chose to abandon several years ago.

I give the floor to the representative of the Republic
of Korea.

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Ethiopia.
We believe that the situation surrounding the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is becoming
progressively more complex and increasingly fraught
with incalculable danger, not only for the Korean
peninsula but for global peace and security as a whole.
The latest nuclear test by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea is indeed a dangerous escalation,
with potentially catastrophic consequences. We join
all Council members in condemning it in the strongest
possible terms. This latest provocation by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea came only a few days after
we adopted presidential statement S/PRST/2017/16,
which calls on it to abandon all nuclear weapons and
to immediately cease all related activities, while also
underscoring the need for a peaceful diplomatic and
political solution to the situation.
There have indeed been overtures in that direction,
but they have not been seized. Without any doubt,
the recent nuclear tests by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea clearly indicate that we might be at
the edge of a cliff. We agree with all Council members
that we are in a very dangerous phase of this problem.
We believe that the Council should use all means at its
disposal to bring the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea back to the negotiating table, and we are open to
proposals that could be considered in that regard.
We hope that we will be able to take appropriate
action to bring pressure to bear on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, while maintaining the
unity of the Council on this very delicate issue, which
has far-reaching implications for peace and security on
the Korean peninsula and beyond. We attach extremely
great importance to the unity of the Council on
this matter.
14/15

Mr. Cho Tae-yul (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Sir, for convening this
emergency meeting of the Security Council on North
Korea’s sixth nuclear test, which was conducted this
past Saturday. I am also grateful to be invited to take
part in this important discussion.
It is with a deep sense of disappointment, frustration
and even anger that I address the Council today. One
year ago, when North Korea conducted its fifth nuclear
test, the Security Council issued a stern warning
that North Korea’s continued nuclear and missile
provocation would not be tolerated (see S/PV.7821).
Despite that warning, however, North Korea has since
fired 20 ballistic missiles, on more than 15 occasions,
in flagrant violation of multiple Security Council
resolutions. While spending considerable amounts of
time and energy in responding to such reckless ballistic
missile provocations by North Korea, we held on to one
last ray of hope that North Korea might, at least, refrain
from additional nuclear tests.
Regrettably, yet again, the country has chosen a
dangerous path in defiance of the stern warning of the
international community. The nuclear test conducted
by North Korea two days ago has proven to be its
most powerful thus far. Since the two intercontinental
ballistic missile launches in July, which led to the
adoption of resolution 2371 (2017) on 5 August, North
Korea has been maximizing the level of threat and
now claims that the purpose of the most recent test
is to develop nuclear warheads to install on top of its
intercontinental ballistic missiles.
North Korea’s do-or-die behaviour has invited a
very harsh and scathing reaction from the international
community. Indeed, over the past two days, numerous
States from around the world have spoken in a unified
voice by issuing statements strongly condemning North
Korea’s nuclear test. Even those countries that have
been trying to be as sympathetic as possible vis-à-vis
North Korea’s security concerns have added their own
voice to such condemnations without exception this
time. That is clear evidence that North Korea’s recent
nuclear test is an immense challenge that threatens
peace and security not only on the Korean peninsula or
in North-East Asia, but in the entire world.
17-27481

04/09/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

S/PV. 8039

Therefore, the Security Council must respond to
this serious provocation with the adoption of a new
draft resolution including much tougher measures
corresponding to the magnitude and gravity of the
test. Now is the time to take measures that are strong
and robust enough to compel North Korea to seriously
engage in dialogue. The new draft resolution must
include not only additional measures to further block
funds that could possibly flow into North Korea’s
illegal weapons of mass destruction programme, but
also truly biting and robust ones that Pyongyang would
find very painful.

for the existence of the International Day against
Nuclear Tests.

Just five days ago, we celebrated the International
Day against Nuclear Tests in an informal meeting of
the General Assembly. A number of Member States
gathered together to commemorate that special day and
engaged in a very serious discussion. Virtually all the
representatives of the participating Member States who
took the floor during the meeting strongly condemned
North Korea — the only country that has conducted
nuclear tests in the twenty-first century — and called
on the country to immediately halt further nuclear tests.
But just a couple of days later, North Korea conducted
yet another nuclear test. A voluntary moratorium on
nuclear tests has become today a de facto international
norm. Regrettably, however, the world has yet to be
free from nuclear tests owing to a single country that
continues to stubbornly pursue a retrogressive and
destabilizing path. North Korea’s delusional aspiration
of becoming a nuclear-weapon State is the sole reason

The President: The representative of the United
States of America has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.

We must end that immediately, and I call upon all
Member States, including the members of the Council,
to take firm and decisive actions to that end. I also
call on North Korea to stop pursuing the path of selfdestruction and make a strategic decision without further
delay to choose the path of denuclearization — the only
option and right way to insure its survival. Whether to
stick to its current path of self-destruction or redirect
itself towards the path of survival is entirely the choice
of North Korea.

Mrs. Haley (United States of America): Due to the
urgency of the situation concerning the nuclear test,
as well as the announcement by North Korea that it is
planning another intercontinental ballistic missile test,
we urge the Security Council to move very quickly on
this. I think that North Korea basically has slapped
everyone in the face in the international community
that has asked it to stop. The United States delegation
therefore will circulate a draft resolution that it would
like to negotiate this week and vote on on Monday. I just
wanted to let the members of the Council know. I know
that some are going on mission to Addis Ababa, but we
wanted to make sure that we will do that on Monday
when we will be able to finalize those negotiations.
The meeting rose at 11.30 a.m.

17-2748115/15
