S/2016/1085

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
23 December 2016
Original: English

United States of America: draft resolution
The Security Council,
Determining that the situation in South Sudan continues to constitute a threat
to international peace and security in the region,
Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,
Arms Embargo
1.
Decides that, for a period of one year from the date of adoption of this
resolution, all Member States shall immediately take the necessary measures to
prevent the direct or indirect supply, sale or transfer to the territory of South Sudan,
including to the Government of South Sudan or the SPLA -IO, from or through
member state’s territories or by their nationals, or using their flag vessels or aircraft,
of arms and related materiel of all types, including weapons and ammunition,
military vehicles and equipment, paramilitary equipment, and spare parts for the
aforementioned, and technical assistance, training, financial or other assistance,
related to military activities or the provision, maintenance or use of any arms and
related materiel, including the provision of armed mercenary personnel whether or
not originating in their territories;
2.
Decides that the measure imposed in paragraph 1 of this resolution shall
not apply to the supply, sale or transfer of:
(a) Arms and related materiel, as well as training and assistance, intended
solely for support of or use by UN personnel, including United Nations Mission in
the Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS) and the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei (UNISFA);
(b) Non-lethal military equipment intended solely for humanitarian or
protective use, and related technical assistance or training, as notified in advance to
the Committee;
(c) Protective clothing, including flak jackets and military helmets,
temporarily exported to South Sudan by United Nations personnel, representatives
of the media and humanitarian and development workers and associated personnel,
for their personal use only;
(d) Arms and related materiel temporarily exported to South Sudan by the
forces of a State which is taking action, in accordance with international law, solely

16-22898 (E)

231216

*1622898*

S/2016/1085

and directly to facilitate the protection or evacuation of its nationals and those for
whom it has consular responsibility in South Sudan, as notified to the Committee;
(e) Arms and related materiel, as well as technical training and assistance, to
or in support of the African Union Regional Task Force intended solely for regional
counter-LRA operations, as notified in advance to the Committee;
(f) Arms and related materiel, as well as technical training and assistance,
solely in support of the implementation of the terms of the peace agreement, as
approved in advance by the Committee;
(g) Other sales or supply of arms and related materiel, or provision of
assistance or personnel, as approved in advance by the Committee;
3.
Stresses the importance that notifications or requests for exemptions
pursuant to paragraph 2 above contain all relevant information, including the
purpose of the use, the end user, the technical specifications and quantity of the
equipment to be shipped and, when applicable, the supplier, the proposed date of
delivery, mode of transportation and itinerary of shipments;
Inspections
4.
Underscores that arms shipments in violation of this resolution risk
fuelling conflict and contributing to further instability, and strongly urges all
Member States to take urgent action to identify and prevent such shipments within
their territory;
5.
Calls upon all Member States, in particular States neighbouring South
Sudan, to inspect, in accordance with their national authorities and legislation and
consistent with international law, in particular the law of the sea and relevant
international civil aviation agreements, all cargo to South Sudan, in their territory,
including seaports and airports, if the State concerned has information that provides
reasonable grounds to believe the cargo contains items the supply, sale, or transfer
of which is prohibited by paragraph 1 of this resolution for the purpose of ensuring
strict implementation of these provisions;
6.
Decides to authorize all Member States to, and that all Member States
shall, upon discovery of items the supply, sale, or transfer of which is prohibited by
paragraph 1 of this resolution, seize and dispose (such as through destruction,
rendering inoperable, storage or transferring to a State other than the originating or
destination States for disposal) of such items and decides further that all Member
States shall cooperate in such efforts;
7.
Requires any Member State when it undertakes an inspection pursuant to
paragraph 5 of this resolution, to submit promptly an initial written report to the
Committee containing, in particular, explanation of the grounds for the inspections,
the results of such inspections, and whether or not cooperation was provided, and, if
prohibited items for supply, sale, or transfer are found, further requires such
Member States to submit to the Committee within 30 days a subsequent written
report containing relevant details of the inspection, seizure, and disposal, and
relevant details of the transfer, including a description of the items, their origin and
intended destination, if this information is not in the initial report;

2/5

16-22898

S/2016/1085

Panel of Experts and Sanctions Committee
8.
Decides that the tasks of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2206 (2015) shall also include examining and taking appropriate action
on information regarding alleged violations or non-compliance with the measures
imposed by paragraph 1 of this resolution;
9.
Decides further that the tasks of the Panel of Experts established
pursuant to resolution 2206 shall also include gathering, examining and analysing
information regarding the implementation of the measure in paragraph 1 of this
resolution, and reporting to the Committee;
Designations
10. Decides that the measures specified in paragraphs 9 and 12 of resolution
2206 (2015), as renewed by paragraph 7 of resolution 2290 (2015), shall apply to
the individuals identified in Annex 1 to this resolution;
11.

16-22898

Decides to remain seized of the matter.

3/5

S/2016/1085

Annex 1
SSi.XXX Name: 1. MICHAEL 2. MAKUEI 3. LUETH 4. na
Name (original script): na
Title: na
Designation: (a) Minister of Information and Broadcasting (b) Minister of
Information, Broadcasting, Telecommunications and Postal Services (c) Government
Spokesperson
DOB: 1947
POB: (a) Bor, South Sudan (b) Bor, Sudan
Good Quality a.k.a.: (a) Michael Makuei (b) Michael Makwei Lueth (c) Michael
Makuei Lueth Makuei
Low quality a.k.a.: na
Nationality: South Sudan (b) Sudan (c) Kenya
Passport no.: na
National identification no.: na
Address: (a) Juba, South Sudan
Listed on: [DATE]
Other Information: Makuei was involved in planning and coordinating an April 17,
2014 attack on the UN compound in the Jonglei State capital of Bor, which killed
three UN guards and 140 civilians, mostly women and children, and injured as many
as 270. Makuei has repeatedly and consistently worked to obstruct and undermine the
implementation of peace deals in South Sudan, specifically the August 2015
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan (ARCSS). On April 23,
2016, Makuei ordered the closure of Juba International Airport, apparently to delay
and obstruct the formation of the Transitional Government of National Unity. In
September 2016, a day after the South Sudanese Government consented to the
deployment of a new Regional Protection Force to Juba, Makuei stated that
the Government would treat RPF forces as invaders if they deployed without the
Government’s approval regarding their numbers, nationalities, and equipment.
SSi.XXX Name: 1: Paul 2: Malong 3: Awan 4: na
Name (original script): na
Title: General
Designation: (a) Chief of Staff of the Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA)
(b) Sudan People’s Liberation Movement Chairman, Northern Bahr el -Ghazal State
DOB: 2 January 1962
Alt DOB: (a) 4 Dec 1960 (b) 12 Apr 1960
POB: Malualkon, South Sudan
Alt POB: (a) Malualkon, Sudan; Warawar, South Sudan; Warawar, Sudan
Good quality a.k.a.: (a) Paul Malong Awan Anei (b) Paul Malong (c) Bol Malong
(d) Paul Malong Awan
Low quality a.k.a.: na
Nationality: (a) South Sudan (b) Uganda
Passport no.: (a) South Sudan S00004370 (b) South Sudan D00001369 (c) Sudan
003606 (d) Sudan 00606 (e) Sudan B002606
National identification no.: na

4/5

16-22898

S/2016/1085

Address: (a) Juba, South Sudan (b) Aweil, Northern Bahr El Ghazal, South Sudan
(c) Kampala Uganda (d) Addis Ababa, Ethiopia (e) P.O. Box 73699, Nairobi 00200,
Kenya
Listed on: [Date]
Other information: He has served as Chief of General Staff of the SPLA since
April 23, 2014. In his position as the Chief of General Staff, he has expanded o r
extended the conflict in South Sudan through breaches of the Cessation of
Hostilities Agreement and breaches of the 2015 Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in South Sudan (ARCSS). As of early August 2016, Malong was
responsible for efforts to kill opposition leader Riek Machar. Malong, knowingly
countermanding President Salva Kiir’s orders, ordered the July 10 tank, helicopter
gunship, and infantry assaults on Machar’s residence and the Sudan Peoples’
Liberation Movement in Opposition (SPLM-IO)’s “Jebel” base. Malong personally
oversaw efforts from SPLA headquarters to intercept Machar. As of early August,
Malong wanted the SPLA to attack Machar’s suspected position immediately and
informed SPLA commanders that Machar was not to be taken alive.
SSi.XXX Name: 1. RIEK 2. MACHAR 3. TENY 4. DHURGON
Name (original script): na
Title: na
Designation: (a) Leader of the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/Army In
Opposition
DOB: 27 July 1952
Alt DOB: (a) 1953 (b) 1944 (c) 1945 (d) 1946
POB: (a) Leer, Unity State, South Sudan
Alt POB: (a) Leer, Unity State, Sudan; (b) Jonglei State, South Sudan; (c) Jonglei
State, Sudan
Good Quality a.k.a.: (a) Riek Teny Dhuorgon (b) Riek Machar Teny (c) Riek
Machar (d) Riak Machar
Low quality a.k.a.: na
Nationality: South Sudan (b) Sudan
Passport no.: (a) D00001002 (South Sudan), issued 12 March 2012, expired 1 March
2016 (b) ED0002513 (Ethiopia), issued 20 May 2014, expires 19 May 2019
National identification no.: na
Address: (a) South Africa
Listed on: [DATE]
Other Information: Machar is the leader of the SPLA-in-Opposition. In late
November 2015, Machar organized and appointed regional commanders for
Equatorian militia groups. In late 2015 and early 2016, Machar was involved in
resupply efforts for Equatorian rebel groups that were attacking Government forces.
He was the First Vice President in the Transitional Government of National Unity
from April 2016 until July 2016, when he fled after fierce fighting broke out in
Juba. In September 2016, Machar’s opposition faction declared war on the South
Sudanese Government and called for armed resistance. He stated that he intended to
“wage a popular armed resistance against the authoritarian and fascist regime of
President Salva Kiir in order to bring peace, freedom, democracy and the rule of law
in the country.” Machar has entered into alliances with Equatorian rebel groups to
work to overthrow the South Sudanese Government. Forces allied with Machar have
raided villages and abducted civilians and aid workers.

16-22898

5/5
