S/2015/17

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
9 January 2015
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
operation in Cyprus
I. Introduction
1.
The present report on the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus
(UNFICYP) covers developments from 21 June to 15 December 2014 and brings up
to date, since the issuance of my report dated 9 July 2014 (S/2014/461), the record
of activities carried out by UNFICYP pursuant to Security Council resolution 186
(1964) and subsequent Council resolutions, most recently resolution 2168 (2014).
2.
As at 15 December 2014, the strength of the military component stood at 860
for all ranks and the strength of the police component stood at 66 (see annex).

II. Good offices mission
3.
On 22 August 2014, I appointed Espen Barth Eide of Norway as my new
Special Adviser on Cyprus. Since his appointment, Mr. Eide has been conducting
regular visits to Cyprus to carry out the good offices mandate of the United Nations.
I intend to issue a separate report on the state of play in the negotiations in the
coming months.

III. Activities of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force
in Cyprus
4.
UNFICYP is intended first and foremost to prevent a recurrence of fighting
and to contribute to the maintenance of law and order and a return to normal
conditions. Its mandate requires reconciling security considerations and the
maintenance of the military status quo with allowing Cypriots who live and work in
the buffer zone to pursue civilian activities and enjoy full and productive lives. Such
an approach, when successful, builds confidence between communities and
contributes to the overall effort by the United Nations in support of the peace process.

14-68046 (E)

130115

*1468046*

S/2015/17

A.

Prevention of a recurrence of fighting and maintenance of the
military status quo
5.
Since taking up her assignment in August, the new Force Commander has
established good relations with the opposing forces, encouraging regular and
transparent dialogue. During the reporting period, UNFICYP continued to maintain
the integrity and stability of the buffer zone. Notwithstanding minor military
violations committed by both forces, which resulted in occasional altercations with
UNFICYP, relations between the latter and the opposing forces remained good.
Thanks to regular patrolling and the mission’s observation, reporting and liaison
infrastructure, UNFICYP managed to avert attempts by both forces to effect lowlevel changes to the military status quo across the buffer zone. The non-recognition
by the opposing forces, however, of the aide-memoire of 1989 and incidents that
challenge the authority of UNFICYP in the buffer zone continue to be of concern.
On a number of occasions, the opposing forces continued to question the United
Nations delineation of the ceasefire lines and, consequently, the extent of the buffer
zone in certain areas.
6.
During the previous reporting period, the Turkish forces had deployed
28 closed-circuit television cameras along the ceasefire line in central Nicosia
without an attendant reduction in personnel, thus conferring a military advantage.
Following consultations with UNFICYP, the Turkish forces removed approximately
30 soldiers from eight of those positions during the reporting period, negating the
military advantage in those particular areas along the Green Line. The 20 remaining
cameras without a corresponding reduction, however, continue to constitute a breach
of the status quo.
7.
For the seventh year running, neither of the opposing forces conducted their
annual military exercises, with both Nikiforos in the south and Toros in the north
being cancelled. In old town Nicosia, where the ceasefire lines are in close
proximity to each other, instances of ill discipline at the lowest tactical level
continued to pose occasional challenges. Furthermore, previously reported military
positions established by both forces inside the buffer zone that violate the status quo
remain in place, as is the case in Strovilia, where the Turkish forces have prevented
UNFICYP from performing routine patrols since June 2014. Discussions to resolve
this issue are ongoing. The United Nations continues to hold the Government of
Turkey responsible for the status quo in Varosha.

B.

Demining activity
8.
During the reporting period, demining was the subject of discussion between
the two sides as part of the broader negotiations. Despite this engagement, the two
sides continued to prevent access for demining to the four known mined areas in the
buffer zone, of which three are under the control of the National Guard and one
under that of the Turkish forces. The provision of information regarding
28 minefields, including 1,006 anti-personnel mines laid by the National Guard in
the north between Nicosia and the Kyrenia mountain range before and during 1974,
is also pending, despite both the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Hervé Ladsous, and my Special Representative and Chief of Mission,
Lisa M. Buttenheim, having raised the importance of providing detailed information
of minefields for humanitarian reasons. Efforts are ongoing at all levels to

2/11

14-68046

S/2015/17

encourage both sides to advance demining inside and outside the buffer zone,
including through the exchange of information on the whereabouts of minefields.

C.

Restoration of normal conditions and humanitarian functions
9.
As part of mandated tasks to contribute to the maintenance of law and order,
UNFICYP police assisted and facilitated investigations conducted by the police
services of both sides into criminal matters occurring within the buffer zone. This
was the case in particular in the mixed village of Pyla, where UNFICYP is
responsible for the conduct of law enforcement by the two sides. Cooperation
between UNFICYP police and the local authorities is improving and efforts to
address increasing criminal activities in the village are ongoing.
10. In parallel to this liaison on the ground, UNFICYP police facilitated meetings
of the Technical Committee on Crime and Criminal Matters, and the Joint
Communications Room continued to work actively, providing the police services of
both sides with a forum for enhanced cooperation. The appointment for the first
time of serving police officers as Greek Cypriot representatives to the Technical
Committee signalled a significant step forward in cooperation. Over and above the
exchange of information on criminal matters that have intercommunal elements, the
Joint Communications Room focused on the investigation of crimes that took place
within and across the buffer zone, the handover of persons of interest through the
UNFICYP police and humanitarian cases.
11. At times, UNFICYP personnel faced challenges to their authority in the buffer
zone and aggressive behaviour from individuals carrying out unauthorized activities,
including Greek Cypriot armed hunters. UNFICYP urged the Greek Cypriot
authorities to take prompt action in such instances, including through judicial
proceedings. The conclusion of one such case is pending. UNFICYP also urged the
lifting of restrictions on UNFICYP staff members seeking to undertake their duties
in the north.
12. In line with its mandate to contribute to a return to normal conditions,
UNFICYP continued to urge the authorities, local community leaders and civilians
to provide relevant information on civilian projects in the buffer zone in accordance
with established procedures. Regrettably, the university in Pyla, the construction of
which remains unauthorized, continues to operate with next to no Turkish Cypriot
involvement. UNFICYP continued to manage farming and other civilian activities in
the buffer zone, issuing more than 700 permits for civilian activities and approving
20 of 22 civilian construction projects. In support of these civilian activities,
UNFICYP facilitated the maintenance of essential infrastructure for public utilities
and services to both communities, including through regularizing payment for all
services.
13. Beyond the buffer zone, UNFICYP continued to provide humanitarian support
to 345 Greek Cypriots and 116 Maronites residing in the north, including through
the weekly delivery of humanitarian assistance and support to the Greek Cypriot
schools in the Karpas Peninsula. Some appointments of teachers and the use of some
textbooks for Greek Cypriot schools were denied by the Turkish Cypriot authorities.
Although requests for Greek-speaking doctors to attend to the health needs of
elderly Greek Cypriots and Maronites in the north are yet to be addressed, some
Greek-language medical services have been provided during the reporting period.

14-68046

3/11

S/2015/17

UNFICYP also facilitated the post-mortem transfer of six Greek Cypriots for burial
in the north. For Turkish Cypriots residing in the south, UNFICYP remained in
contact with local authorities to ensure access to health, welfare and educational
support. There were again no developments regarding the establishment of a
Turkish-language school in Limassol. UNFICYP also assisted in addressing the
legal and humanitarian issues surrounding the imprisonment and temporary
detention of Turkish Cypriots in the south through regular visits to the detention
facilities where they were held. To enhance confidence in judicial proceedings,
UNFICYP attended seven court hearings involving Turkish Cypriots in the south.
14. UNFICYP and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
continued to engage with a wide range of stakeholders to promote enhanced
cooperation in old town Nicosia, where the buffer zone is at its most narrow.
UNFICYP facilitated six meetings between the Nicosia municipalities to develop
joint projects on environmental, social and health issues of common concern.
Cooperation continues with the Greek Cypriots to identify buildings along the Green
Line that pose a threat to UNFICYP patrols and are in need of stabilization.
15. UNDP worked closely with the Technical Committee on Cultural Heritage on
the protection of cultural sites on both sides of the island, with significant progress
made in the restoration of Othello Tower in Famagusta and the Apostolos Andreas
monastery. The renovation of 16 other cultural heritage sites on both sides of the
island is either near completion, under design or about to begin.
16. In cooperation with international and local partners, UNFICYP supported 77
civil society events in which approximately 2,870 individuals from both
communities engaged in sporting, cultural, educational or other activities. Of note,
on 19 September 2014, six Turkish Cypriot racing vehicles participated in the
international Cyprus Car Rally which, for the first time, engaged both sides and
included a crossing of the buffer zone, outside the walls of old town Nicosia. The
event was broadcast on the Eurosport television network and was enthusiastically
received throughout the island. For the first time, and after the Cyprus Turkish
Football Association lifted restrictions in February against affiliated clubs from
recruiting Greek Cypriots, the Turkish Cypriot Football Club, Değirmenlik, recruited
Greek Cypriot football players and technical staff. UNFICYP also supported regular
meetings of Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot political party representatives under
the auspices of the Embassy of Slovakia, which maintained open channels of
communication. Separately, and in support of a political settlement, UNDP
continued to promote a dialogue forum involving 45 organizations representing civil
society, political parties, trade unions and business organizations and associations.
17. Dialogue in support of the peace process among the leaders of the religious
communities continued to provide a model for constructive cooperation. On 25 and
26 September 2014, the Grand Mufti of Cyprus and the Archbishop of the Greek
Orthodox Church of Cyprus, at the latter’s invitation, made a joint visit to Paphos
and nearby villages. Thanks to the personal intervention of the Grand Mufti, Greek
Cypriots were able to worship on 2 November at the church of Saint George in
Vadili for the first time since 1974. Seventeen Christian places of worship in the
north were cleaned with the support of the Archbishop and, for the first time, of the
Association of Mosques and of the Synodal Committee on Monuments of the
Church of Cyprus. On 4 and 5 December, the Special Rapporteur on freedom of
religion or belief undertook his second follow-up visit to Cyprus since 2012.

4/11

14-68046

S/2015/17

18. Building on this positive trend, as previously reported, the Turkish Cypriot
authorities approved 52 of 87 requests by Greek Cypriots and Maronites for services
in the north between 1 January and 15 December 2014, compared to 31 approvals of
40 requests in 2013. Some requests to worship were denied, including the lastminute cancellation of a service at the church of Panayia Pergaminiotissa in
Akanthou. Nonetheless, the absolute number of pilgrims being able to worship has
risen sharply, including in 11 locations that had been inaccessible in the north since
1974. For its part, UNFICYP facilitated 65 religious services and commemorative
events in 2014, involving more than 23,000 individuals, which were held in the
buffer zone or required crossing of the buffer zone to the north. UNFICYP also
facilitated the crossing of almost 1,000 pilgrims to the Hala Sultan Tekke mosque in
Larnaca in July for Eid al-Fitr and the same number to mark the month of
Muharram, during November. A similar pilgrimage planned for 5 and 6 October did
not take place owing to the lack of an agreement on the crossing point to be used for
the purpose.
19. In support of the political process, the Cyprus Chamber of Commerce and
Industry and the Turkish Cypriot Chamber of Commerce continued to promote
economic cooperation and confidence-building between the two communities. On
14 September in Istanbul, at the second meeting of the Nicosia Economic Forum,
together with the Union of Chambers and Commodity Exchanges of Turkey and the
Union of Hellenic Chambers of Commerce and Industry of Greece, the Chambers
issued a joint statement reiterating their determination to support the ongoing
political process. The forum proposed a number of projects to transform the buffer
zone into a zone of unity, including initiatives to support young entrepreneurs.
20. From June to November 2014, approximately 800,000 official crossings of the
buffer zone were recorded. No agreement was reached on the opening of further
crossing points. UNFICYP police continued to provide escorts for convoys with
civilians and humanitarian supplies in accordance with the agreement reached by the
leaders in October 2010 on the opening of the Limnitis/Yeşilırmak crossing point.
Tension increased as the sides disagreed on the interpretation of that agreement, and
the exact number of crossings permitted per week. Four requests were denied during
the reporting period by the Greek Cypriot side. Following one such denial, on
27 November, the Turkish Cypriot authorities closed the crossing point for six
hours, citing a computer malfunction. To ensure the smooth operation of the
crossing, UNFICYP intervened and reminded both sides of their obligations
stemming from the agreement.

IV. Committee on Missing Persons
21. During the reporting period, the Committee on Missing Persons continued with
the exhumation, identification and return of the remains of missing persons. On
24 July, the two leaders visited the Committee's laboratory, lending support to its
work. As at 18 December 2014, the Committee’s bicommunal teams of
archaeologists had exhumed the remains of 948 missing persons on both sides of the
island. To date, the remains of 564 individuals have been returned to their respective
families, including 135 during the reporting period. The total number of missing
persons identified in 2014 now stands at 157, the highest in any given year.
Following a decision of the Committee, the figures in this paragraph only include
cases of persons on the official list of missing persons. Further to a request made on

14-68046

5/11

S/2015/17

9 May 2014 to the Turkish forces to allow the excavation of a fenced military area
in the north, authorization was received in late September. However, as the area had
been declared a mine field by Turkish Cypriot authorities, a survey was conducted
by the Mine Action Service in October 2014, during which no mines were found.
Excavations are ongoing.

V. Financial and administrative aspects
22. As indicated in my previous report, the General Assembly, by its resolution
68/286, appropriated the amount of $58 million for the maintenance of UNFICYP
for the period from 1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015, inclusive of the voluntary
contribution of one third of the net cost of the Force, equivalent of $19.95 million,
from the Government of Cyprus and the voluntary contribution of $6.5 million from
the Government of Greece. I invite other countries and organizations to make
voluntary contributions, with a view to reducing the portion of the cost of UNFICYP
covered by assessed contributions.
23. My proposed budget for the maintenance of UNFICYP for the period
from 1 July 2015 to 30 June 2016, which amounts to some $55.4 million gross
($53.2 million net), has been submitted to the Controller.
24. As at 17 December 2014, the total outstanding assessed contributions to the
special account for UNFICYP for the period from 16 June 1993 to 17 December
2014 amounted to $12.5 million. The total outstanding assessed contributions for all
peacekeeping operations as at the same date amounted to $1,731.5 million.
25. As at 17 December 2014, amounts owed to contributors for troop and
contingent-owned equipment costs totalled $2 million and $353,000, respectively, in
accordance with the quarterly schedule.

VI. Observations
26. On 6 October 2014, the Greek Cypriot side announced its decision to suspend
its participation in the talks, following the announcement by Turkey of the conduct
of a seismic survey in the exclusive economic zone of Cyprus. Following the
suspension of the talks, I have underscored the need for a prompt resumption of the
negotiations and appeal to the two sides to find a way to accomplish this without
delay. I have noted that both communities can ill afford to perpetuate the status quo,
in particular in the light of the wider regional context. I reiterate my call to both
sides to refrain from the “blame game” and from negative rhetoric about each other.
I call upon all interested parties to help create an environment conducive to
resuming structured negotiations in a results-oriented manner, as agreed to by their
leaders in their joint declaration of 11 February 2014.
27. I have repeatedly stressed that it is important to ensure that any new-found
wealth, and in particular any natural resources found around Cyprus, benefits both
communities. I remain of the view that the existence of common natural resources
constitutes a strong incentive for all parties to find a durable solution to the Cyprus
problem and should engender deeper cooperation for the benefit of all stakeholders
in the region.

6/11

14-68046

S/2015/17

28. As UNFICYP concluded the fiftieth year of its continued presence in Cyprus,
the situation along the ceasefire lines remained calm and stable. At the same time,
minor incidents and challenges, which passed largely unnoticed by the wider public,
remained a regular occurrence. Frequent unauthorized civilian activity in the buffer
zone, resulting in part from a perception of greater security, further complicated the
overall security situation in the buffer zone. In that context, the Force’s regular
patrolling and liaison with the opposing forces and the respective authorities
continued to play an important role in preventing an escalation of tensions.
29. I call upon the opposing forces to respond positively to the Force
Commander’s efforts to strengthen relations and to engage actively with UNFICYP
on military confidence-building measures as a sign of their commitment to a common
future. In this regard, I welcome the decision of the Turkish forces to reduce by
30 soldiers their presence within the Green Line. At the same time, I call for the
removal of personnel from other locations where closed-circuit television cameras
remain. Such a move could trigger a wider reduction on both sides, encouraging a
normalization in old town Nicosia. Another necessary step should include formal
acceptance by both sides of the aide-memoire of 1989, bringing an end to the
contestation of the United Nations delineation of the ceasefire lines. I urge a speedy
resolution in Strovilia to enable UNFICYP to carry out its duties in the area.
30. I acknowledge with appreciation the cooperation of the Turkish forces with the
Committee on Missing Persons in relation to a suspected mined area in the north.
Another step could be for both sides to facilitate, without delay, access to all
remaining mined areas in and outside the buffer zone, in line with Security Council
resolution 2135 (2014). It should be recalled that States parties to the Convention on
the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel
Mines and on Their Destruction are obliged to report the location of all mined areas
that contain, or are suspected to contain, anti-personnel mines under its jurisdiction
or control. In this light, I call upon both sides to share any information on the
location of minefields across the island, including the 28 laid in the past by the
National Guard in the north. Demining is a humanitarian issue and should be
addressed immediately on its own merits. The United Nations stands ready to assist
the parties further in their aspiration to achieve a mine-free Cyprus.
31. It is also incumbent on both sides to ensure that tensions remain low. The
operation of the crossing point at Limnitis/Yeşilırmak and ongoing criminal activity
in Pyla are two sources of such tension that require attention. Regrettably, restrictions
continue on the freedom of movement of locally employed United Nations
personnel to the north. Freedom of movement for all United Nations personnel is a
matter of principle for the Organization and an operational requirement for
UNFICYP. I call upon the Turkish Cypriot authorities to respect that principle.
32. UNFICYP continued to promote civilian use of the buffer zone, provided that
it did not affect security and stability. Such activities, undertaken in accordance with
UNFICYP procedures, promote trust between the communities, particularly projects
that are jointly agreed. In this light, I call upon all stakeholders to take meaningful
steps to ensure that the university in Pyla evolves into a bicommunal education
facility, especially given its location in the only bicommunal village in the buffer
zone. I once again call upon the respective authorities to act decisively towards all
who engage in unauthorized activities, thus showing respect for the Force’s
authority in the buffer zone and supporting it in the implementation of its mandate.

14-68046

7/11

S/2015/17

33. The security and environmental challenges in old town Nicosia, and in
particular in the militarized area within the Venetian walls, where the buffer zone is
at its most narrow, need to be addressed. I reiterate my call, and that of the UnderSecretary General during his visit to Cyprus in June, that both sides, including their
respective civilian and military leaderships, the mayors and municipalities of
Nicosia and the people in charge of the Nicosia Master Plan, in cooperation with
UNFICYP and UNDP, adopt a holistic approach to the urban infrastructure of the
old town through joint projects that could attract investment and thereby transform
the wider area. Such an approach could contribute to a return to normal conditions
by enhancing security along the Green Line and promoting public confidence
between the communities.
34. The progress made on access to religious sites is commendable, with some
23,000 persons able to visit multiple and diverse sites in the north and 2,000 the
Hala Sultan Tekke mosque in the south, in 2014. I strongly encourage both sides to
enable further access to many of the over 500 churches and other places of worship
in the north and the 100 mosques in the south.
35. Civil society has a critical role to play in contributing to peace in Cyprus. I
commend the religious leaders for their continuing dialogue, which has delivered
tangible results for Cypriots, including the opening of some locations of worship for
the first time in decades. I also commend business leaders for their vision, and I
encourage enhanced support by all concerned for their efforts to promote private
sector initiatives that could have a positive effect on the continued regrettably low
level of trade and persons crossing the buffer zone. I encourage once again the
respective football associations to put into practice their earlier agreement on
greater cooperation.
36. An active civil society and the continued development of economic, social,
cultural, sporting or similar ties and contacts can provide critical support to political
leaders and help them to make the necessary compromises at the negotiating table.
Similarly, the removal of restrictions and barriers that impede the economic
development of the Turkish Cypriot community will promote trust. Such a
development will help to address the isolation concerns of the Turkish Cypriots, as
well as their inability to participate meaningfully in an interconnected world,
thereby preparing Cyprus for a comprehensive settlement. In my view, encouraging
trade can only have a positive effect on the objective of reunification. I once again
call upon both community leaders to exert efforts to create a climate conducive to
achieving greater economic and social parity between the two sides, including
through joint projects and increased trade, which will make an eventual
reunification easier and more likely. In the context of an internationally sanctioned
peace process, efforts in the opposite direction can only be counterproductive.
37. The United Nations remains committed to supporting the critical humanitarian
work being done on behalf of the families of victims through the Committee on
Missing Persons. While I welcome the results achieved by the Committee during the
reporting period, I also note that, 50 years after their disappearance, half of all
missing persons have yet to be located and more than 70 per cent have yet to be
identified. It is critical that the work of the Committee suffer no further delays. The
aforementioned statistics and the advancing age of relatives of missing persons
highlight the need to expedite the process, including through an accelerated granting

8/11

14-68046

S/2015/17

of access to military areas by the Turkish forces. In this regard, I once again
reiterate the need for increased cooperation with the Committee.
38. UNFICYP continues to play an important role on the island by exercising
authority in the buffer zone and contributing to keeping the peace and resolving
various issues that affect the daily lives of individuals in both communities.
However, its ability to play this role depends by and large on the commitment of the
two sides to refrain from challenging its authority and legitimacy in the buffer zone.
In calling upon both sides to continue to cooperate with UNFICYP in good faith, I
recommend that the mandate of the mission be extended for a period of six months,
until 31 July 2015.
39. UNFICYP continues to maintain close collaboration with my mission of good
offices and other United Nations actors on the island. In line with the relevant
Security Council resolutions, most recently resolution 2168 (2014), the mission
remains engaged in contingency planning in relation to the settlement. The planning
will continue to be guided by developments in the negotiations and the views of the
parties on the possible role of the United Nations in this respect.
40. At the same time, I will continually keep the operations of UNFICYP under
close review, taking into account developments on the ground and the views of the
parties, and report to the Security Council with recommendations, as appropriate,
for further adjustments to the UNFICYP mandate, force levels and concept of
operations as soon as warranted.
41. In view of the recent fiftieth anniversary of UNFICYP, I once again express
my gratitude to the 34 countries that have now contributed since 1964 either troops
or police or both to the mission, and I pay tribute to the 185 peacekeepers who lost
their lives over that period in support of peace in Cyprus. It is incumbent upon all
parties to work in a determined manner towards a comprehensive settlement, to
which all Cypriots aspire and which would obviate the continuing need for a
peacekeeping presence.
42. I would like to express my appreciation to my Special Representative and
Head of UNFICYP, Ms. Buttenheim, including for her commitment and dedication
during the five months she served as Acting Special Adviser. Following the
appointment of Mr. Eide as Special Adviser, Ms. Buttenheim continues to act as my
Deputy Special Adviser. I should also like to express my gratitude to Major General
Chao Liu of China who served the United Nations as the UNFICYP Force
Commander from February 2011 to August 2014. I would also like to acknowledge
the appointment of Major General Kristin Lund of Norway, who joined UNFICYP
in August as the first woman to command a United Nations peacekeeping force.
Increasing the numbers of female personnel in peacekeeping is a priority for the
United Nations, and I am pleased to see UNFICYP leading the way across the
military, police and civilian components. Finally, I extend my thanks to all the men
and women serving in UNFICYP for the efficiency and commitment with which
they have discharged the responsibilities entrusted to them by the Security Council.

14-68046

9/11

S/2015/17

Annex
Countries providing military and police personnel to the
United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus (as at
30 November 2014)
Country

Military personnel

Argentina a

295

Austria

4

Canada

1

Norway

2
b

84

Slovakia c

199

United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland

275

Hungary

Total

Country

860

United Nations police

Australia

15

Bosnia and Herzegovina

8

India

8

Ireland

12

Italy

4

Lithuania

2

Montenegro

4

Romania

2

Serbia

2

Slovakia

2

Ukraine

7

Total

66

a

The Argentine contingent includes soldiers from Chile (14), Paraguay (12) and Brazil (1).
The Hungarian contingent includes soldiers from Serbia (7).
c
The Slovakian contingent includes soldiers from Serbia (39) and Ukraine (2).

b

10/11

14-68046

S/2015/17

14-68046

11/11
