A/59/PV.76

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-ninth session

76th plenary meeting
Thursday, 23 December 2004, 4 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The meeting was called to order at 5.10 p.m.
Agenda item 38 (continued)
New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress
in implementation and international support
(a) New Partnership for Africa’s Development:
progress in implementation and international
support
Draft resolution (A/59/L.33/Rev.1)
(b) Causes of conflict and the promotion of peace
and sustainable development in Africa
Draft resolution (A/59/L.50/Rev.1)
The President (spoke in French): Members will
recall that the General Assembly held its debate on
agenda item 38 and sub-items (a) and (b), jointly with
agenda item 46, at the 33rd to 36th plenary meetings,
held on 18 and 19 October 2004.
I call on the representative of the Secretariat.
Ms. Kelley: I have been asked to make some
corrections to the English text of draft resolution
A/59/L.33/Rev.1, which have been necessitated due to
editing errors.
In the third preambular paragraph, the word
“and” should replace the second appearance of the
words “bearing in mind”.

(Gabon)

In paragraph 4, the words “process of its” should
be deleted, and the words “of NEPAD” should be
added to the end of the paragraph.
In paragraph 6, the word “deepen” should replace
“strengthen”.
In paragraph 13, “and” should be added before
the phrase “in this regard”, and the word “the”
preceding the word “progress” should be deleted.
In paragraph 14, a comma should be inserted
after “including”, followed by the words “inter alia”
and a comma.
In paragraph 27, the words “the entities of”
should be deleted.
In paragraph 29, the phrase “to further
strengthen” should read “to strengthen further”.
Finally, in operative paragraph 35, the word
“including” after “New Partnership” should be
replaced by the words “such as”.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on
the representative of Qatar to introduce draft resolution
A/59/L.33/Rev.1, as orally corrected, and draft
resolution A/59/L.50/Rev.1.
Mr. Al-Mahmoud (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): On
behalf of the Group of 77 and China, I have the honour
to introduce to the General Assembly draft resolution
A/59/L.33/Rev.1, entitled “New Partnership for
Africa’s Development: progress in implementation and
international support”, as orally corrected. The draft

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

04-66346 (E)

*0466346*

A/59/PV.76

resolution was arrived at through a consensus process
and has the sponsorship of numerous countries.
Africa faces serious challenges. Meeting them
requires collective action by both African countries and
the international community. The adoption of the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD) by the
African Union in 2001 as an initiative owned and led
by the continent and the General Assembly’s
subsequent endorsement of it as the framework for
international support to Africa illustrate the resolve
that exists to address the daunting challenges facing
Africa. NEPAD offers great hope, which — if matched
with the requisite political will and commitment —
will enable Africa to claim the twenty-first century as
its own.
The main purpose of draft resolution
A/59/L.33/Rev.1 is to keep the spotlight on the efforts
of African countries and to underscore the ongoing
need for international support to complement those
endeavours. In the past year, African countries have
taken concrete steps to implement NEPAD through the
development of sectoral policy frameworks, the design
of specific projects and the establishment of
expenditure targets in NEPAD priority areas. Those
efforts require enabling national and international
environments conducive to growth and development,
with the participation of numerous stakeholders.
Furthermore, it is important to keep Africa’s particular
circumstances in mind as the countdown to the 2005
major event begins. Accordingly, the draft resolution
highlights areas of progress and need.
I take this opportunity to extend my thanks to all
delegations for their cooperation and support during
the informal consultations on the draft resolution. I
should like in particular to thank Mr. Abdellah
Benmellouk of Morocco for his tireless efforts as
facilitator of the draft resolution. Without his support,
it would have been impossible to reach consensus on
the draft resolution. In that regard, I should like to
inform delegations — other than those of the Group of
77 and China — that may still wish to sponsor the draft
resolution that they can do so from the floor before its
adoption.
On behalf of the Group of 77 and China and the
other sponsors, I am pleased to introduce draft
resolution A/59/L.33/Rev.1, as orally corrected, for
adoption as a consensus text. Finally, I wish to
announce that Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Germany,

2

Ireland, Japan, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Portugal,
Slovenia, Turkey, Ukraine and the United States have
joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
On behalf of the Group of 77 and China, I wish
also to introduce draft resolution A/59/L.50/Rev.1,
entitled “Implementation of the recommendations
contained in the report of the Secretary-General on the
causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace
and sustainable development in Africa”.
The draft resolution was formulated in a
consensus process. It takes note of the significant
progress made in the prevention, mediation and
resolution of conflicts, while recognizing that much
remains to be done, especially with regard to emerging
trends that could undermine the gains achieved in the
consolidation of peace and sustainable development.
The draft resolution welcomes the establishment by the
African Union of its Peace and Security Council and
looks forward to the establishment of other elements. It
also welcomes the contributions of the United Nations
system, development partners and other relevant
stakeholders in conflict prevention, management and
resolution in Africa.
The consensus achieved is due in part to the skills
of the facilitator, Felipe Costa, who gave his very best
during the informal negotiations. Moreover, the
flexibility and cooperation demonstrated by all
delegations resulted in consensus after the second
reading of the original draft text. We sincerely hope
that that same spirit will prevail in 2005. I therefore
thank all colleagues who participated in the informal
consultations for their cooperation and support.
Having
introduced
draft
resolution
A/59/L.50/Rev.1 on behalf of the Group of 77 and
China, I hope that the General Assembly will adopt it
by consensus. I wish also to announce that Germany,
Italy, the Netherlands, Portugal, Slovenia and Turkey
have joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
consult the Assembly with a view to proceeding
immediately to consider the revised draft resolution
contained in document A/59/L.33/Rev.1, as orally
corrected.
In that connection, since the revised draft
resolution has been circulated only today, it would be
necessary to waive the relevant provision of rule 78 of
the rules of procedure, which reads as follows:

A/59/PV.76

“As a general rule, no proposal shall be
discussed or put to the vote at any meeting of the
General Assembly unless copies of it have been
circulated to all delegations not later than the day
preceding the meeting.”
Unless I hear any objections, I shall take it that
the Assembly agrees to that proposal.
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in French): The General
Assembly will now proceed to consider draft
resolutions A/59/L.33/Rev.1, as orally corrected, and
A/59/L.50/Rev.1.
The Assembly will turn first to draft resolution
A/59/L.33/Rev.1, as orally corrected, entitled “New
Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress in
implementation and international support”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/59/L.33/Rev.1?
Draft resolution A/59/L.33/Rev.1, as orally
corrected, was adopted (resolution 59/254).
The President (spoke in French): The Assembly
will now take a decision on draft resolution
A/59/L.50/Rev.1, entitled “Implementation of the
recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General on the causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/59/L.50/Rev.1?
Draft resolution A/59/L.50/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 59/255).
The President (spoke in French): May I take it
that the General Assembly wishes to conclude its
consideration of sub-items (a) and (b) of agenda item
38 and of agenda item 38 as a whole?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 41 (continued)
The role of the United Nations in promoting a new
global human order
The President (spoke in French): Members will
recall that the Assembly held its debate on this agenda
item, jointly with agenda item 12, at its 41st plenary
meeting, held on 26 October 2004.

It is my understanding that it would be desirable
to defer consideration of this item to the sixty-first
session of the General Assembly. May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to defer
consideration of this item and to include it in the
provisional agenda of the sixty-first session?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in French): We have thus
concluded our consideration of agenda item 41.
Agenda item 46 (continued)
2001-2010: Decade to Roll Back Malaria in
Developing Countries, Particularly in Africa
Draft resolution (A/59/L.56)
The President (spoke in French): Members will
recall that the General Assembly held the debate on
agenda item 46, jointly with sub-items (a) and (b) of
agenda item 38, at its 33rd to 36th plenary meetings on
18 and 19 October 2004.
I call on the representative of the United Republic
of Tanzania to introduce draft resolution A/59/L.56 on
behalf of the African Union.
Mrs. Kafanabo (United Republic of Tanzania):
On behalf of the African Union and all sponsors, the
United Republic of Tanzania has the honour to
introduce, under agenda item 46, the draft resolution
entitled “2001-2010: Decade to Roll Back Malaria in
Developing Countries, Particularly in Africa”, as
contained in document A/59/L.56.
In addition to the sponsors listed in the document, the
following have joined the list of sponsors: Algeria,
Azerbaijan, Burkina Faso, Cape Verde, China, Cuba,
Djibouti, Dominica, Finland, France, Gabon, Germany,
Guatemala, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kenya, Luxembourg,
Mauritius, Mozambique, Namibia, the Netherlands,
Portugal, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Timor-Leste, Tunisia, Turkey, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United
States of America and Zimbabwe.
Africa bears an overwhelming proportion of the
malaria burden. Statistics from the World Health
Organization show that malaria is Africa’s leading cause of
under-five mortality and an important cause of anaemia and
other malarial complications in pregnant women,
constitutes 10 per cent of the continent’s overall disease
burden, and accounts for 40 per cent of public health
expenditure.

3

A/59/PV.76

Malaria is, however, a disease that is preventable,
treatable and curable. It is thus in the effort to combat
malaria, as well as to implement Millennium Development
Goal Six, that the African Union is introducing the draft
resolution entitled “2001-2010: Decade to Roll Back
Malaria in Developing Countries, Particularly in Africa”.
In its preambular part, the draft resolution takes note
of the declarations and decisions on malaria adopted by the
Organization of African Unity, in particular the declaration
and plan of action on the “Roll Back Malaria” initiative
adopted at the Extraordinary Summit of Heads of State and
Government of the Organization of African Unity, held in
Abuja on 24 and 25 April 2000, and the Maputo
Declaration on Malaria, HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis and Other
Related Infectious Diseases, adopted by the Assembly of
the African Union at its second ordinary session, held in
Maputo from 10 to 12 July 2003. In addition, the draft
resolution recognizes the efforts being made to reach the
targets set in the Abuja Summit as necessary and important
for the attainment of the “Roll Back Malaria” goal and the
targets of the United Nations Millennium Declaration.
In the operative part, the draft resolution takes note of
the Secretary-General’s report contained in document
A/59/261 and calls for support of the recommendations
contained therein. It also calls upon the international
community to continue to support the “Roll Back Malaria”
partner organizations and appeals to them to ensure
increased support for bilateral and multilateral assistance to
combat malaria, including support for the Global Fund to
fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria. The draft resolution
expresses concern about the resistant strains of malaria and
urges the adoption of measures to combat that resistance.
My delegation wishes to thank all member States that
participated in the discussion of the draft resolution. Their
contributions have resulted in this important draft
resolution, the implementation of which will facilitate the
eradication of that deadly disease.
My delegation, introducing the draft resolution on
2001-2010: Decade to Roll Back Malaria in Developing
Countries, Particularly in Africa, hopes that, as in previous
years, it will be adopted by consensus.
The President (spoke in French): We shall now
proceed to consider draft resolution A/59/L.56.
I wish to indicate that, since the submission of the
draft resolution, the following countries have been added to
the list of sponsors: Bolivia, Cameroon, Madagascar and
Mali.
May I take it that the General Assembly decides to
adopt draft resolution A/59/L.56?

4

Draft resolution A/59/L.56 was adopted (resolution
59/256).
The President (spoke in French): May I take it that it
is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 46?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 56 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and other organizations:
(d) Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Black Sea Economic Cooperation
Organization
Draft resolution (A/59/L.57)
(k) Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Latin American Economic System
Draft resolution (A/59/L.55)
(o) Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization of American States
Draft resolution (A/59/L.41/Rev.1)
The President (spoke in French): Members will
recall that the Assembly held its debate on agenda item 56
and its sub-items (a) to (t) at its 38th to 40th plenary
meetings on 21 and 22 October 2004.
I call on the representative of Panama to introduce
draft resolutions A/59/L.41/Rev.1 and A/59/L.55.
Mr. Tejeira (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): It is an
honour for the delegation of Panama to introduce, on behalf
of the sponsors, the draft resolutions contained in
documents A/59/L.41/Rev.1 and A/59/L.55, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization of American States” and “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Latin American
Economic System”, respectively. Panama is introducing
draft resolution A/59/L.41/Rev.1 in its capacity as
Chairman of the Permanent Council of the Organization of
American States. The draft resolution underscores and
acknowledges the important role played by both
organizations in seeking to promote social progress,
improve standards of living of peoples, particularly in
developing countries, and promote the protection of human
rights and fundamental freedoms.

A/59/PV.76

In addition to the countries listed in document
A/59/L.41/Rev.1, the delegations of the Bahamas,
Dominica and Spain have joined the list of sponsors.
Panama, in its capacity as December’s Chairman of
the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States, wishes
now to introduce draft resolution A/59/L.55, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the Latin
American Economic System”.
I wish at the outset to note two revisions to the draft
resolution. In paragraph 1, the word “Welcomes” should be
replaced with the words “Takes note of”. And in paragraph
4, the words “including the Millennium Goals” are to be
replaced with the words “including those contained in the
Millennium Declaration”.
The draft resolution bears in mind the Agreement
between the United Nations and the Latin American
Economic System, in which the parties agree to strengthen
and expand their cooperation in matters that are of common
concern in the fields of their respective competence
pursuant to their constitutional instruments.
On behalf of the sponsors of draft resolutions
A/59/L.41/Rev.1 and A/59/L.55, we hope that, as has been
the case with similar texts in previous years, the General
Assembly will adopt both draft resolutions by consensus.
The President (spoke in French): The General
Assembly will now proceed to consider draft resolutions
A/59/L.41/Rev.1, A/59/L.55, as orally revised, and
A/59/L.57.
We will first take a decision on draft resolution
A/59/L.41/Rev.1, entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Organization of American States”. Before
the Assembly takes a decision on the draft resolution, I
wish to indicate that since the introduction of draft
resolution A/59/L.41/Rev.1 Grenada has joined the list of
sponsors.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft
resolution A/59/L.41/Rev.1?
Draft resolution A/59/L.41/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 59/257).
The President (spoke in French): We turn next to
draft resolution A/59/L.55, entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the Latin American Economic
System”, as orally revised.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/59/L.55, as orally revised?

Draft resolution A/59/L.55, as orally revised, was
adopted (resolution 59/258).
The President (spoke in French): Draft resolution
A/59/L.57 is entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Black Sea Economic Cooperation
Organization”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/59/L.57?
Draft resolution A/59/L.57 was adopted (resolution
59/259).
The President (spoke in French): May I take it
that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude
its consideration of sub-items (d), (k) and (o) of agenda
item 56?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in French): The Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 56.
Reports of the First Committee, Special
Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth
Committee), Third Committee, Fifth Committee
and Sixth Committee
The President (spoke in French): The General
Assembly will now take up the reports of five Main
Committees as follows: the report of the First
Committee on agenda item 109; the report of the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) on agenda item 109; the reports of
the Third Committee on agenda items 98, 101, subitems (a) and (c) of agenda item 105 and 109, the
report of the Sixth Committee on agenda item 150, as
well as the reports of the Fifth Committee on agenda
items 106, 111 to 119, 121, 122, 109, 108 and 107.
If there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules
of procedure, I shall take it that the Assembly decides
not to discuss the reports of the First Committee, the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee), the Third Committee, the Fifth
Committee and the Sixth Committee which are before
the Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in French): Statements will
therefore be limited to explanations of vote or position.
The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendations of those five Main Committees have

5

A/59/PV.76

been made clear in the Committees and are reflected in
the relevant official records. May I remind members
that under paragraph 7 of decision 34/401, the General
Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is
considered in a Main Committee and in plenary
meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible,
explain its vote only once, i.e., either in the
Committee or in plenary meeting unless that
delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is different
from its vote in the Committee.”
May I further remind delegations that, also in
accordance with General Assembly decision 34/401,
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.

Agenda item 109 (continued)
Programme planning
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth
Committee) (A/59/621)
The President (spoke in French): May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to take note of the report of
the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee)?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in French): The Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 109.

Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the First
Committee, the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee), the Third Committee,
the Fifth Committee and the Sixth Committee, I should
like to advise representatives that we are going to
proceed to take decisions in the same manner as was
done in the Committees unless the Secretariat is
notified otherwise in advance.

The General Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of all the reports of the Special Political
and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee).

This means that where a recorded or separate vote
was taken, we will do the same. I would also hope that
we may proceed to adopt without a vote those
recommendations that were adopted without a vote in
the respective Committees.

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/59/641)

Agenda item 109 (continued)
Programme planning
Report of the First Committee (A/59/618)
The President (spoke in French): May I take it
that the General Assembly wishes to take note of the
report of the First Committee?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in French): The Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 109.
The General Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of all the reports of the First Committee.

6

Agenda item 98 (continued)
Advancement of women
Report of the Third Committee (A/59/496)

The President (spoke in French): The Assembly
will take action on draft resolution III recommended by
the Third Committee in paragraph 27 of its report.
The report of the Fifth Committee on the
programme budget implications of draft resolution III
is contained in document A/59/641. Draft resolution III
is entitled “Future operation of the “International
Research and Training Institute for the Advancement
of Women”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde,
Central African Republic, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba,
Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,

A/59/PV.76

Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Fiji, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Italy, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Qatar,
Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and
Montenegro, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uganda,
United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Canada, Denmark, Finland, Japan,
Latvia, New Zealand, Sweden, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia,
Czech Republic, Estonia, France, Georgia,
Germany, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, San Marino, Slovenia, Switzerland,
Turkey, Ukraine, Uzbekistan
Draft resolution III was adopted by 125 votes to
10, with 30 abstentions (resolution 59/260).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Greece advised
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]

The President (spoke in French): May I take it
that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude
its consideration of agenda item 98?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 101 (continued)
Promotion and protection of the rights of children
Report of the Third Committee (A/59/499)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/59/642)
The President (spoke in French): The Assembly
will take action on draft resolution II recommended by
the Third Committee in paragraph 35 of its report.
The report of the Fifth Committee on the
programme budget implications of draft resolution II is
contained in document A/59/642.
I call on the representative of the United States,
who wishes to speak on explanation of vote before the
voting.
Mr. Kennedy (United States of America): The
United States would like to bring to the attention of the
General Assembly the amendments submitted by our
delegation to draft resolution II, on the rights of the
child, during its consideration by the Third Committee
(see A/59/499, para. 16). We are not going to resubmit
those amendments in plenary meeting, but we would
like to state that our position has not changed. The
United States wishes to underscore our concerns with
regard to the phrasing in this draft resolution of
references to the International Criminal Court, the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and the juvenile
death penalty, among other provisions.
The President (spoke in French):
resolution II is entitled: “Rights of the child”.

Draft

Separate votes have been requested on operative
paragraph 9, operative paragraph 23 (b) and on the
words “corporal punishment” in operative paragraph
38 (b) of draft resolution II.
In the absence of objection, I will first put to the
vote operative paragraph 9 of draft resolution II, on
which a separate vote has been requested.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

7

A/59/PV.76

In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Belgium, Belize,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic,
Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Denmark, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Hungary, Iceland,
Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Latvia, Lesotho, Liberia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico,
Monaco, Mongolia, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino,
Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against:
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Comoros, Djibouti, Egypt,
Ghana, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Japan,
Kuwait, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Morocco, Niger, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia,
Singapore, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab
Republic, Turkmenistan, United Arab Emirates,
United States of America, Viet Nam, Yemen
Abstaining:
Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Barbados,
Belarus, Brunei Darussalam, Jordan, Malaysia,
Myanmar, Nigeria, Pakistan, Sierra Leone,
Uganda
Operative paragraph 9 of draft resolution II was
retained by 110 votes to 26, with 12 abstentions.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now put
to the vote operative paragraph 23 (b) of draft
resolution II, on which a separate vote has been
requested.

8

A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Belgium,
Belize, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic,
Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia,
Morocco,
Namibia,
Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino,
Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Tonga, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Malaysia, Singapore, United Republic
Tanzania, United States of America

of

Abstaining:
Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh,
Barbados,
Bhutan,
Brunei
Darussalam, Comoros, Djibouti, Dominica,
Guyana, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Israel,
Kuwait, Myanmar, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Saint Lucia,
Saudi Arabia, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkmenistan,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, Yemen
Operative paragraph 23 (b) of draft resolution II
was retained by 116 votes to 4, with 33
abstentions.

A/59/PV.76

The President (spoke in French): I shall next put
to the vote the words “corporal punishment” in
operative paragraph 38 (b) of draft resolution II, on
which a separate vote has been requested.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belgium, Belize,
Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic,
Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritius,
Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino,
Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Malaysia,
Tanzania

Singapore,

United

Republic

of

Abstaining:
Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Bhutan, Brunei
Darussalam,
Comoros,
Congo,
Djibouti,
Dominica, Guyana, India, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Myanmar, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Papua New
Guinea, Qatar, Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia, Sierra
Leone, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,

Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, Yemen
The words “corporal punishment” in operative
paragraph 38 (b) of draft resolution II were
retained by 115 votes to 3, with 34 abstentions.
The President (spoke in French): I now put to
the vote draft resolution II, as a whole.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape
Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, San
Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and
Montenegro, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad

9

A/59/PV.76

and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan,
Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Marshall Islands, United States of America
Abstaining:
India
Draft resolution II as a whole was adopted by
166 votes to 2, with 1 abstention (resolution
59/261).
The President (spoke in French): May I take it
that it is the wish of the Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 101?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 105 (continued)
Human rights questions
(a) Implementation of human rights instruments
Report of the Third Committee
(A/59/503/Add.1)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/59/639)
The President (spoke in French): The General
Assembly will take action on draft resolution I,
recommended by the Third Committee in paragraph 20
of its report.
The report of the Fifth Committee on the
programme budget implications of draft resolution I is
contained in document A/59/639.
The Third Committee adopted draft resolution I,
entitled “International Convention on the Protection of
the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of
Their Families”, without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution
59/262).
The President (spoke in French): May I take it
that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude
its consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 105?
It was so decided.

10

(c) Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives
Report of the Third Committee
(A/59/503/Add.3)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/59/640)
The President (spoke in French): The General
Assembly will now take action on draft resolution I,
recommended by the Third Committee in paragraph 60
of its report.
The report of the Fifth Committee on the
programme budget implications of draft resolution I is
contained in document A/59/640.
The Third Committee adopted draft resolution I,
entitled “Situation of human rights in Myanmar”,
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution
59/263).
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the representative of Myanmar, who wishes to speak
in explanation of position on the resolution just
adopted.
Mr. Tun (Myanmar): For reasons that my
delegation explained extensively in the Third
Committee, my delegation dissociates itself from
resolution 59/263.
The President (spoke in French): May I take it
that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude
its consideration of sub-item (c) of agenda item 105?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 109
Programme planning (continued)
Report of the Third Committee (A/59/609)
The President (spoke in French): May I take it
that the General Assembly wishes to take note of the
report of the Third Committee?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in French): The General
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 109.

A/59/PV.76

The General Assembly has thus concluded this stage
of its consideration of all the reports of the Third
Committee.
Agenda item 150
International convention against the reproductive
cloning of human beings
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/59/516)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/59/638)
The President (spoke in French): The Assembly has
before it a draft decision recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 11 of its report.
The report of the Fifth Committee on the programme
budget implications of the draft decision is contained in
document A/59/638.
We will now take action on the draft decision,
entitled “Working Group to finalize the text of a United
Nations declaration on human cloning”.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft decision
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President (spoke in French): The Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 150.
The General Assembly has also thus concluded its
consideration of all the reports of the Sixth Committee.
Reports of the Fifth Committee
The President (spoke in French): The General
Assembly will consider the reports of the Fifth Committee
on agenda items 106, 111 to 119, 121, 122, 109, 108 and
107.
I request the Rapporteur of the Fifth Committee,
Mrs. Denisa Hutănová of Slovakia, to introduce in one
intervention the reports of the Fifth Committee.
Mrs. Hutănová (Slovakia), Rapporteur of the Fifth
Committee: Today I have the honour to present to the
General Assembly the reports of the Fifth Committee
containing recommendations on issues that require action
during the main part of the fifty-ninth regular session of the
General Assembly.

The Fifth Committee met on 30 September and from
4 October to 22 December 2004, and it held 33 plenary
meetings and more than 100 rounds of informal
consultations — and innumerable “informal informal”
consultations held outside Conference Room 5.
In paragraph 7 of its report on agenda item 106,
“Financial reports and audited financial statements, and
reports of the Board of Auditors”, contained in document
A/59/588, the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly the adoption of a draft resolution, which the
Committee adopted without a vote.
In paragraph 6 of its report on agenda item 111,
“Administrative and budgetary coordination of the United
Nations with the specialized agencies and the International
Atomic Energy Agency”, contained in document A/59/605,
the Committee recommends to the General Assembly the
adoption of a draft decision, which it adopted without a
vote.
In paragraph 6 of its report on agenda item 112,
“Pattern of conferences”, contained in document A/59/644,
the Committee recommends to the General Assembly the
adoption of a draft resolution, which it adopted without a
vote.
In paragraph 6 of its report on agenda item 113,
“Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations”, contained in document
A/59/421/Add.1, the Committee recommends to the
General Assembly the adoption of a draft resolution, which
it adopted without a vote.
In paragraph 7 of its report on agenda item 114,
“Human resources management”, contained in document
A/59/650, the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly the adoption of a draft resolution, which it
adopted without a vote.
In paragraph 8 of its report on agenda item 115,
“Joint Inspection Unit”, contained in document A/59/646,
the Committee recommends to the General Assembly the
adoption of a draft resolution, which it adopted without a
vote.
In paragraph 9 of its report on agenda item 116,
“United Nations common system”, contained in document
A/59/647, the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly the adoption of a draft resolution, which it
adopted without a vote. I should like to announce a
correction to the draft resolution: in paragraph 5 of section
A, the words “strategy on pilot projects” should read
“strategy or pilot project”.

11

A/59/PV.76

In paragraph 8 of its report on agenda item 117,
“United Nations pension system”, contained in document
A/59/606, the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly the adoption of a draft resolution, which it
adopted without a vote.
In paragraph 7 of its report on agenda item 118,
“Report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the
Office of Internal Oversight Services”, contained in
document A/59/648, the Committee recommends to the
General Assembly the adoption of two draft resolutions,
which it adopted without a vote.
In paragraph 5 of its report on agenda item 119,
“Review of the implementation of General Assembly
resolutions 48/218 B and 54/244”, contained in document
A/59/649, the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly the adoption of a draft resolution, which it
adopted without a vote.
The reports of the Fifth Committee on agenda item
121, “Financing of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and
Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian
Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan
Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such
Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring
States between 1 January and 31 December 1994”, and on
agenda item 122, “Financing of the International Tribunal
for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed
in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia”, are contained in
documents A/59/603 and A/59/604 respectively. In
paragraph 6 of each of those reports, the Committee
recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of a
draft resolution, which it adopted without a vote.
In paragraph 9 of its report on agenda item 109,
“Programme planning”, contained in A/59/651, the
Committee recommends to the General Assembly the
adoption of a draft resolution, which it adopted without a
vote.
In paragraphs 41 and 44 of its report on agenda item
108, Programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005,
contained in document A/59/448/Add.2, the Fifth
Committee recommends to the General Assembly the
adoption of two draft resolutions and two draft decisions.
Draft resolution I relates to questions relating to the
programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005, and draft
resolution II relates to revised budget appropriations for the
biennium 2004-2005, revised income estimates for the
biennium 2004-2005 and financing of the appropriations
for the year 2005. Draft decision I deals with programme
budget implications of recommendations contained in the

12

report of the Committee for Programme and Coordination,
and draft decision II relates to revised estimates and
programme budget implications: effects of changes in rates
of exchange and inflation. All those draft proposals were
adopted by the Committee without a vote. Also under
agenda item 108, the Committee considered six statements
on programme budget implications. The reports of the Fifth
Committee on each of those statements are contained in
documents A/59/638 to A/59/642.
In paragraph 9 of its report on agenda item 107,
“Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations”, contained in
document A/59/652, the Committee recommends to the
General Assembly the adoption of a draft resolution on the
proposed programme budget outline for the biennium 20062007, by which the Assembly would invite the SecretaryGeneral to prepare his proposed programme budget for the
biennium 2006-2007 on the basis of a preliminary estimate
of $3,621,900,000 at revised 2004-2005 rates. It would also
decide that the contingency fund shall be set at the level of
0.75 per cent of the preliminary estimate, namely, at $27.2
million. Also, in paragraph 10 of the same report, the
Committee recommends to the General Assembly the
adoption of a draft decision relating to questions deferred
for future consideration. Both draft proposals were adopted
by the Committee without a vote.
I wish to thank delegations for their cooperation and
to assure them that the changes made during the Fifth
Committee’s 33rd formal meeting, held yesterday
afternoon, have been duly taken into account and are
reflected in the reports which are before the Assembly this
afternoon.
Before I conclude, allow me on a brief personal note
to thank the Chairman of the Fifth Committee, Ambassador
Don MacKay, for the noble way in which he guided us
through our difficult work. My thanks go also to my fellow
Bureau members. Working with them is always a truly
enjoyable experience. On behalf of all of us, I would like to
record our profound thanks to the representatives of the
Secretariat for their tireless patience and support, and
especially to the secretariat of the Fifth Committee,
Mr. Moses Abelian and Mrs. Nora Benary and their staff.
And last but not least, many thanks go to Mr. Vladimir
Kuznetsov, Chairman of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions. I would like to
thank all those I have had the privilege and honour to be
seated next to on the podium of Conference Room 3 for
their pleasant company. I wish everyone wonderful
holidays.

A/59/PV.76

The President (spoke in French): If there is no
proposal under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall
take it that the General Assembly decides not to discuss
the reports of the Fifth Committee that are before it
today.
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in French): Statements will
therefore be limited to explanations of vote or position.
The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendations of the Committee have been made in
the Committee and are reflected in the relevant official
records. May I remind members that under paragraph 7
of decision 34/401 the Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is
considered in a Main Committee and in plenary
meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible,
explain its vote only once, i.e., either in the
Committee or in plenary meeting unless that
delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is different
from its vote in the Committee.”
May I also remind delegations that, also in
accordance with General Assembly decision 34/401,
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Fifth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same
manner as was done in the Committee.
Agenda item 106
Financial reports and audited financial statements,
and reports of the Board of Auditors
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/59/588)
The President (spoke in French): The Assembly
has before it a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. The Fifth
Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
59/264).
The President (spoke in French): The Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 106.

Agenda item 111
Administrative and budgetary coordination of the
United Nations with the specialized agencies and the
International Atomic Energy Agency
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/59/605)
The President (spoke in French): The Assembly has
before it a draft decision recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. We will now take
action on the draft decision, entitled “Budgetary and
financial situation of the organizations of the United
Nations system”. The Fifth Committee adopted the draft
decision without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President (spoke in French): The General
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its consideration
of agenda item 111.
Agenda item 112
Pattern of conferences
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/59/644)
The President (spoke in French): The Assembly has
before it a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. The Fifth
Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote. May
I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 59/265).
The President (spoke in French): The Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 112.
Agenda item 113 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/59/421/Add.1)
The President (spoke in French): The Assembly has
before it a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. The Fifth
Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote. May
I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
59/266).

13

A/59/PV.76

The President (spoke in French): The Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 113.
Agenda item 114
Human resources management
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/59/650)
The President (spoke in French): The Assembly
has before it a draft resolution recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. The Fifth
Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
59/267).
The President (spoke in French): The Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 114.
Agenda item 115
Joint Inspection Unit
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/59/646)
The President (spoke in French): The Assembly
has before it a draft resolution recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 8 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution entitled “Reports of the Joint Inspection
Unit”. The Fifth Committee adopted the draft
resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
59/268).
The President (spoke in French): The General
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 115.
Agenda item 116
United Nations common system
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/59/647)
The President (spoke in French): The Assembly
has before it a draft resolution recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 9 of its report. We will
now take a decision on the draft resolution entitled

14

“United Nations common system: report of the
International Civil Service Commission”, as orally
corrected. The Fifth Committee adopted the draft
resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly too wishes to adopt the draft resolution, as
orally corrected?
The draft resolution, as orally corrected, was
adopted (resolution 59/269).
The President (spoke in French): The General
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 116.
Agenda item 117
United Nations pension system
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/59/606)
The President (spoke in French): The Assembly
has before it a draft resolution recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. The Fifth
Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
59/270).
The President (spoke in French): The General
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 117.
Agenda item 118
Report of the Secretary-General on the activities of
the Office of Internal Oversight Services
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/59/648)
The President (spoke in French): The Assembly
has before it two draft resolutions recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 7 of its report.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Reports of the
Secretary-General on the activities of the Office of
Internal Oversight Services”. The Fifth Committee
adopted draft resolution I without a vote. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution
59/271).
The President (spoke in French): Draft
resolution II is entitled “Report of the SecretaryGeneral on the activities of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services”.

A/59/PV.76

The Fifth Committee adopted draft resolution II
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
59/272).
The President (spoke in French): The Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 118.
Agenda item 119
Review of the implementation of General Assembly
resolutions 48/218 B and 54/244
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/59/649)
The President (spoke in French): The Assembly
has before it a draft resolution recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 5 of its report. The Fifth
Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
59/273).
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representatives wishing to speak in
explanation of position on the decisions just taken.
Ms. Goicochea Estenoz (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation wishes to explain its position
on the draft resolutions adopted under agenda items
118 and 119.
First, the delegation of Cuba attaches great
importance to the work of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services, a United Nations structure
responsible for monitoring, audit, investigation,
evaluation and inspection services. In that connection,
we reiterate that the work of the Office must be fully in
accordance with its mandate under resolutions
48/218 B and 54/244.
Secondly, the delegation of Cuba reaffirms the
General Assembly’s prerogative to consider and take
action on all reports submitted to it, including the relevant
reports of the Office of Internal Oversight Services. We
do not believe that this restricts the role of the Office, but
rather reinforces its authority, because such consideration
gives Member States an opportunity to voice their
opinions on the recommendations of the Office. Similarly,
when formulating its recommendations, the Office must
fully respect the prerogatives of the General Assembly

with regard to the adoption, modification and abolition of
mandates.
Our delegation wishes to reaffirm that we have
participated in the process of negotiating and adopting
these resolutions, reflecting our serious-mindedness,
commitment and respect for the negotiating process
and for other delegations. It is not our practice to
employ double standards in our work. We have too
much self-respect for that. We similarly respect our
colleagues. We therefore firmly reject statements
levelled at us during formal meetings of the Fifth
Committee, seeking to accuse my delegation of a lack
of transparency in the negotiating process on these
resolutions.
Our Fifth Committee colleagues are very well
aware of the Cuban delegation’s transparency,
responsibility and earnestness. They also know our
commitment to the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter, including respect for
sovereignty. In that connection, I would note that, as it
participates in these processes, my delegation reaffirms
its sovereign right to defend its positions, while acting
with the flexibility needed to make it possible to adopt
draft resolutions.
Here, my delegation wishes to reaffirm its thanks
to and its support for the Bureau of the Fifth
Committee, and the coordinator on these items; it was
through their collective work that we were able to
adopt these resolutions.
Mr. Zellenrath (Netherlands): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union. Switzerland
aligns itself with this statement.
Yesterday, during the 33rd formal meeting of the
Fifth Committee, the European Union expressed its
disappointment at the background of the adoption of
draft resolution I, under agenda item 118, contained in
document A/59/648. We reiterate that the European
Union does not accept that recommendations of the
Office of Internal Oversight Services should be
endorsed by the General Assembly.
The European Union does not see resolution
59/271 as changing in any way the current practice
with regard to implementing recommendations of the
Office.
Mr. Kennedy (United States of America): My
delegation strongly associates itself with the statement
made by the representative of the Netherlands on
behalf of the European Union and Switzerland.

15

A/59/PV.76

The President (spoke in French): The Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 119.
Agenda item 121
Financing of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide
and Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in
the Territory of Neighbouring States between
1 January and 31 December 1994
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/59/603)
The President (spoke in French): The General
Assembly has before it a draft resolution recommended
by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
59/274).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
121.
Agenda item 122
Financing of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/59/604)
The President (spoke in French): The Assembly
has before it a draft resolution recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. The Fifth
Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
59/275).
The President (spoke in French): The General
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 122.

16

Agenda item 109 (continued)
Programme planning
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/59/651)
The President (spoke in French): The General
Assembly has before it a draft resolution recommended
by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 9 of its report.
I give the floor to the representative of Cuba, who
wishes to speak in explanation of position before a
decision is taken on the draft resolution.
Mr. Cumberbach Miguén (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): Before the General Assembly takes action on
the draft resolution before it, my delegation wishes to
state its position on the document that is to be adopted
as programme 19 of the strategic framework for the
biennium 2006-2007.
First of all, Cuba is astonished that a serious
debate on this issue was prevented in the context of the
work of the Commission on Human Rights, and that
there were intentional delays in negotiations both in the
Committee for Programme and Coordination and in the
General Assembly. It is inexplicable that a group of
delegations refused to alter even a comma in the
Secretariat text, despite the first version’s obvious
violations of the guidelines for the drafting of such
documents.
The biennial programmes do not give rise to
legislative mandates. They should be formulated solely
on the basis of the set of resolutions adopted by the
various competent bodies of the United Nations
system. Moreover, they should address the work of the
Secretariat, not the work of Member States.
It is therefore alarming that, in the medium-term
plan for the period 2002-2005, the authors of the
original document completely ignored the language
agreed upon on an intergovernmental basis. With
regard to section A of subprogramme 1, the idea of
using the strategic framework in order to change
legislative mandates is cause for particular concern. We
would like to place on record our reservations in that
regard, and to say that we will continue to closely
follow the implementation of that subprogramme. The
promotion and protection of human rights should not
be used as a tool to interfere in the internal affairs of
the States Members of the Organization. Nor should
attempts be made to rewrite the original mandate set
out for the funds and programmes of the United
Nations, either through a biased interpretation of the

A/59/PV.76

implementation of the whole host of human rights or
by linking them to the activities undertaken by the
various bodies of the Organization.
Such a distortion of the debates on issues
pertaining to human rights only confirms the current
trend whereby developed countries are hijacking many
aspects of the work of the Organization in this area in
an attempt to serve their own political interests,
thereby obliterating any semblance of non-selectivity,
impartiality and objectivity in the workings of the
United Nations human rights machinery. That only
serves to produce further confrontation between
developing and developed countries and to minimize
progress towards true protection and promotion of
human rights for all at all levels. In so doing, the
United Nations would be going along with the role of
judge in matters pertaining to human rights issues that
some Member States have bestowed upon themselves
while fully ignoring their own particular problems or
those of their allies. None of that contributes to
restoring the prestige being lost by United Nations
bodies working in the field of human rights, starting
with the Commission on Human Rights itself.
Our delegation will work to ensure that the next
United Nations goal-setting cycle in the area of human
rights is as open and democratic as called for by the
subject. We will also firmly oppose any recurrence of
the situation we encountered this year.
The President (spoke in French): The Assembly
will now take a decision on the draft resolution
recommended by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 9
of its report. The Fifth Committee adopted the draft
resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
59/276).
The President (spoke in French): The General
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 109.
Agenda item 108 (continued)
Programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/59/448/Add.2)
The President (spoke in French): The Assembly
has before it two draft resolutions recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 41 of its report, and two
draft decisions recommended by the Committee in

paragraph 42 of the same report. The Assembly will
now take a decision on draft resolutions I and II and on
draft decisions I and II. We turn first to draft resolution
I, entitled “Questions relating to the programme budget
for the biennium 2004-2005”. The Fifth Committee
adopted draft resolution I without a vote. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution
59/277).
The President (spoke in French): We turn next to
draft resolution II, entitled “Programme budget for the
biennium 2004-2005”. The Fifth Committee adopted
draft resolution II without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
59/278).
The President (spoke in French): We turn next to
draft decision I, entitled “Programme budget
implications of recommendations contained in the
report of the Committee for Programme and
Coordination”. The Fifth Committee adopted draft
decision I without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft decision I was adopted.
The President (spoke in French): Draft decision
II is entitled “Revised estimates and programme budget
implications: effects of changes in rates of exchange
and inflation”. The Fifth Committee adopted draft
decision II without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft decision II was adopted.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on
the representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
position on the decisions just taken.
Ms. Goicochea Estenoz (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation would like to comment on
resolution 59/277, as it pertains to special political
missions. My delegation attaches the utmost
importance to that resolution. We would especially like
to emphasize the importance we attach to the
paragraphs regarding the need to ensure that the
Security Council takes full account of the prerogatives
of the General Assembly when it takes decisions on
special political missions. The delegation of Cuba
believes it essential that the Security Council refrain
from in any way interfering in matters falling under the
purview of the General Assembly when it comes to
approving special political missions. My delegation

17

A/59/PV.76

also believes that that will undoubtedly facilitate the
decision-taking process in the General Assembly.
We therefore eagerly await the draft budget for
special political missions to be presented by the
Secretary-General at the sixtieth session of the General
Assembly. In particular, we look forward to a review
and revision of the structure of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, which my delegation
believes should be streamlined and rationalized in line
with the nature of the Directorate’s work.
Mr. Elji (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I would just like to note that the Arabic
version of the draft resolutions just adopted did not
take into account the oral revisions made in the Fifth
Committee. I request that those revisions be included
in the final documents.
The President (spoke in French): We have taken
note of the comments made by the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic. The necessary corrections will
be made.
The General Assembly has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of agenda item 108.
Agenda item 107
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/59/652)
The President (spoke in French): The Assembly
has before it a draft resolution recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 9 of its report, and a
draft decision recommended by the Committee in
paragraph 10 of the same report.
We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution and on the draft decision.
The draft resolution is entitled “Proposed
programme budget outline for the biennium 20062007”. The Fifth Committee adopted the draft
resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
59/279).
The President (spoke in French): The draft
decision is entitled “Questions deferred for future
consideration”. The Fifth Committee adopted the draft
decision without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?

18

The draft decision was adopted.
The President (spoke in French): The Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 107.
I give the floor to those representatives who wish
to make statements after the Assembly’s consideration
of the reports of the Fifth Committee.
Mr. Al-Ansari (Qatar): I have the honour to
speak today on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
The Group of 77 and China attaches the greatest
importance to all the issues considered by the Fifth
Committee, recommendations on which have been
approved today by the General Assembly. In particular,
the Group would like to highlight some of those issues.
It should be understood that addressing only some of
our decisions does not imply that others not
highlighted are of any lesser importance.
The Group of 77 and China stresses that the
Secretary-General should present the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2006-2007, in a
form fully reflecting the priorities just approved by the
General Assembly. Particular attention should be given
to programmes and activities related to social and
economic development. In this context, the Group of
77 and China emphasize the crucial importance of the
implementation of the right to development and
reaffirm the validity of the Declaration on the Right to
Development.
The
Group
hopes
that
the
implementation of any efficiency measure will not
impact negatively on mandated programmes and
activities.
The Group looks forward to the full
implementation of resolution 59/267, on human
resources management, in particular the results and
findings of the recommendations of the Board of
Auditors on the audit on the implementation of
application of the principle of geographical
representation at all levels. Furthermore, we reiterate
the necessity of ensuring that women from developing
countries are accorded equal opportunity in the
recruitment process, and we look forward to the full
implementation of the relevant paragraphs in that
context.
On the question of programme budget
implications, the Group regrets that the General
Assembly did not approve at this stage either a
subvention or a payment for the rental and maintenance
costs of the United Nations Institute for Training and
Research. The Group will address this issue

A/59/PV.76

comprehensively during the sixtieth session of the
General Assembly in the context of the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2006-2007.
Concerning the Office of Internal Oversight
Services, the Group reiterates its full support to the
role of that Office. The Group of 77 and China
recognize the primary role of the General Assembly in
the consideration of and action on the reports
submitted to it, as reflected in paragraph 4 of
resolution 59/273.
Finally, the Group of 77 and China would like to
state that, in general, although they have small
delegations, they endeavoured to participate actively at
all levels of the negotiation process, whether at
“informal informals” or in informal consultations.
This session was exceptional with regard to its
workload. The Group of 77 and China delegations
negotiated under the pressure of time and in very
stressful situations, and often showed maximum
flexibility to take on board the concerns of other
delegations. The Group wishes to emphasize that all
the negotiations were held in a very open, transparent
and friendly atmosphere and in good faith.
Furthermore, the Group emphasizes the need for
building further confidence among all negotiating
partners and ensuring respect for each other’s position;
we look forward to continuing this partnership in our
future interactions.
Ms. Udo (Nigeria): The Nigerian delegation, as
coordinator for one of the agenda items the Chairman
of the Group of 77 and China has just addressed —
agenda item 118, on the Office of Internal Oversight
Services — feels obliged to make this statement to
address some issues that were raised during the Fifth
Committee’s meeting yesterday, 22 December 2004.
Nigeria views with absolute seriousness,
dedication and integrity any assignment conferred upon
it. It was in that same spirit that we approached the
responsibility of coordinating the Committee’s work on
agenda item 118, “Report of the Secretary-General on
the activities of the Office of Internal Oversight
Services”. As the coordinator, Nigeria, to the best of its
ability, remained totally neutral all through the
discussions and the ensuing negotiations on the item.
Furthermore, we truthfully and seriously reflected
the wishes of the Fifth Committee, as expressed by all
who participated in the negotiations. The draft text on
this item, dated 6 December, contained in its paragraph
10 the words “endorses the applicable recommendation

of OIOS”. The Fifth Committee amended “applicable”
to “relevant”. The final text of the resolution, dated
10 December 2004, reflected this in its paragraph 7,
which begins with the words as amended: “Endorses
the relevant recommendation of the Office”. It was
therefore with utmost shock and disappointment that
we heard some comments to the effect that some
delegations — which, as the coordinator on this item,
we can confirm never missed a meeting on this item —
did not know how some words had “crept into” the text
of the draft resolution.
As we stated yesterday, Nigeria presented to the
General Assembly for adoption the draft text that the
Fifth Committee, acting on behalf of the General
Assembly, had approved and adopted. We deeply regret
the fact that our work on this agenda item, which was
conducted in a most cordial atmosphere, was
concluded in a most unfortunate manner, with
unguarded, unfair and unwarranted statements by some
delegations.
Nigeria wishes to seize this opportunity to once
more express our appreciation to the Chairman of the
Fifth Committee and to those delegations that spoke to
commend us on the way we conducted the
negotiations — as well as to those who spoke to reject
the unhealthy development that the Fifth Committee
witnessed yesterday.
It is our sincere hope that we will not witness
such an incident again, as incidents of that kind do not
in any way augur well for the work of this
Organization.
Mr. Kennedy (United States of America): As this
session of the Fifth Committee ends, my delegation
would like to take this opportunity to thank the Chair
of the Fifth Committee, the Permanent Representative
of New Zealand, for his efforts. I would also like to
express our appreciation for the excellent work of the
Committee staff. Lastly, we appreciate the continuing
exemplary support that the Committee has received
from the Controller’s office. Since we have now
learned that this will be the last Fifth Committee effort
for Jean-Pierre Halbwachs, his years of distinguished
service to the United Nations must also be
acknowledged.
The President (spoke in French): The General
Assembly has thus concluded its consideration of all
the reports of the Fifth Committee before it.

19

A/59/PV.76

Programme of work
The President (spoke in French): Apart from
organizational matters and items that may have to be
considered by operation of the rules of procedure of the
General Assembly, and bearing in mind the
consideration and action already taken by the
Assembly on items, I should like to propose that the
following agenda items remain for consideration
during the fifty-ninth session of the General Assembly:
3 (b), 4 to 6, 10 to 12, 15 (c), 17 (h), (i) and (j), 19, 20,
24, 26, 27, 36, 37, 40, 43, 45, 48, 52 to 55, 56 (g),
56 (n), 75, 77, 84, 85 (b), 105 (b), 106 to 137, 146,
148, 150, 153 to 156, 158 and 163.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly that those agenda items should remain for
consideration during the fifty-ninth session of the
Assembly?
It was so decided.
Statement by the President
The President (spoke in French): We have come
to the end of the first phase of our work, a very busy
but a productive period, when the General Assembly
considered many agenda items. In particular, 279
resolutions were adopted, 208 of them by consensus.
Before suspending the proceedings at this stage, let me
just make a few brief observations on the progress
achieved and on our work ahead.
Among all the items that we took up, three major
items characterize this first phase: continuing the
process of the revitalization of the work of the General
Assembly; publication of the report of the High-level
Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change (A/59/565);
and preparations for the high-level plenary meeting of
the General Assembly, to be held in September 2005.
On 17 December, by consensus, we adopted resolution
59/145, on the organizational modalities for that event.
Those three items exemplify our general thinking on
reform, indeed, our thinking on the Organization’s
capacity to adapt to the challenges of our time.
During the general debate, our leaders reaffirmed,
inter alia, the need to reform the United Nations
system. That augurs well, because the present reform
process, if it is to succeed, must be supported by
genuine political will. In fact, as the report of the Highlevel Panel has emphasized, and I concur, our
institutions “will still only be as strong as the energy,
resources and attention devoted to them by Member

20

States and their leaders” (A/59/565, report, part four,
synopsis).
With respect to the revitalization of the work of
the General Assembly, I welcome the progress that has
been made. In addition to what we did during the fiftyeighth session, we have also made some tremendous
efforts, in terms both of content and of the
rationalization of our programme of work.
We have undertaken implementation of
resolutions 58/126 and 58/316, concerning the
revitalization of the work of the General Assembly.
The role of the General Committee grew during the
first part of the fifty-ninth session. There were informal
meetings to consider working methods, the
revitalization of the Assembly and the preparation of
the high-level plenary meeting to be held in 2005.
Other informal meetings were held on the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development, on children and
armed conflict and on humanitarian assistance.
In conformity with those two resolutions, the
Main Commissions got down to rationalizing their
programmes of work and their agendas. How could we
fail to appreciate all the progress made towards
restoring the authority and the central role of the
General Assembly as a universal institution? Contrary
to the common, but false, image of an impotent
General Assembly, the work of women and men on a
daily basis shows that the General Assembly is a
dynamic institution indeed. Its decisions, while less
spectacular, have for more than half a century
fashioned the international order and will continue to
transform our respective nations.
A major element of the success of the
revitalization process is the shared conviction of all
Member States of the indispensable nature of the
General Assembly. The Assembly remains the sole
legitimate framework where all the nations of the
world can express their aspirations. It makes a strong
contribution to remoulding the face of the United
Nations, giving it a little more radiance and
credibility — even though it is true that much remains
to be done for us to live up to all our noble
responsibilities under the Charter. In order to pursue
the revitalization of the Assembly, I am counting on
the support and assistance of all. As members know, I
have appointed five facilitators who will be
coordinating our collective efforts: the Permanent
Representatives of Costa Rica, the Czech Republic,
Kenya, Singapore and Sweden. I have no doubt that

A/59/PV.76

they will be up to the task, and I urge members to
support them.
The report of the High-level Panel on Threats,
Challenges and Change is also a major contribution
towards the objective of adapting the United Nations to
the realities of the twenty-first century. Once again, I
must congratulate the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi
Annan, who took the welcome initiative to write a
report
containing
courageous
proposals.
Our
consultations on the report, to be held in January,
should enable us to provide appropriate responses to
the great concerns of the day. We will also have to
explore the recommendations of the Millennium
Project report, under the guidance of Mr. Jeffrey Sachs,
whose publication is scheduled for 17 January 2005.
As I indicated in the road map that I submitted to
members yesterday, Wednesday, 22 December 2004,
the release of the Secretary-General’s comprehensive
report, which is expected in March 2005, will be the
starting point for substantive consultations with an eye
to the high-level plenary meeting in September 2005.
If we want to ensure genuine collective security;
if we want to eradicate poverty; if we want to put an
end to deadly pandemics, particularly HIV/AIDS and
malaria; if we want to eradicate war, transnational
crime, famine and environmental degradation — in
short, if we truly want to build a model society for
future generations, we must go beyond statements of
principle and do our utmost to live up to our
commitments, particularly in the social and economic
fields. When we return in January 2005, we must

therefore redouble our fervour to work to find concrete
and appropriate solutions to the problems facing the
United Nations.
We must advance the ongoing reform process in
this crucial period in the Organization’s history. In that
regard, we must also make every effort to follow the
road map so that we can prepare for the high-level
plenary meeting to the best of our ability. By working
together to prepare well for that very important
September 2005 meeting, we will greatly help to bring
about the changes so much needed by the Organization.
We will thus provide the means to better meet the
legitimate expectations of the world’s peoples for more
peace, justice, freedom and solidarity.
Before concluding, I should like once again to
take this opportunity to congratulate all delegations on
their valuable contributions to the formulation and
adoption by consensus of resolution 59/145, which
enables us to plan now for the events of 2005 with a
greater sense of calm. I should also like once again to
sincerely thank the members of the Secretariat,
particularly Mr. Jian Chen, Under-Secretary-General
for General Assembly and Conference Management,
and his Department for the inestimable support that
they have consistently given me since I took office.
Finally, I wish everyone all the best and a
pleasant vacation.
The meeting rose at 7.15 p.m.

21
