S/PV.9035

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9035th meeting

Wednesday, 18 May 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield/Mr. Mills. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. De Rivière
Ms. Bongo
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Moran
Mrs. Toroitich
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Dame Barbara Woodward

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the
Sahel (S/2022/382)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-35360 (E)
*2235360*

S/PV.9035

Peace and security in Africa

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Expression of sympathy on the passing of His
Highness Sheikh Khalifa Bin Zayed Al Nahyan,
President of the United Arab Emirates
The President: At the outset of the meeting, on
behalf of the Security Council, I would like to express
our heartfelt condolences on the passing of His Highness
⁠Sheikh Khalifa Bin Zayed Al Nahyan, a leader and
a key figure in the history of his country, the United
Arab Emirates. On this occasion, I want to express the
Council’s deepest sympathy to the Government and the
people of the United Arab Emirates.
On behalf of the Council, I ask that all here stand
and observe a minute of silence in memory of His
Highness.
The members of the Security Council observed a
minute of silence.
The President: I now call on the representative of
the United Arab Emirates.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I thank
you, Madam President, for allowing me to say a few words
at a time of deep mourning in my country. And I would
like to thank all Council members for their heartfelt
condolences and solidarity with the Government and
the people of the United Arab Emirates on the passing
of our late President His Highness Sheikh Khalifa Bin
Zayed Al Nahyan last Friday. I would also like to thank
the United States for holding this moment of silence
under its presidency to honour his life and work.
The United Arab Emirates has lost a distinguished
leader and a visionary man. Sheikh Khalifa devoted his
life to his people and country and inspired his nation
with his dedication, wisdom and humility. He was a man
of action who leaves behind an extraordinary legacy in
his country, the wider region and around the world. He
was a strong advocate for diplomacy, multilateralism
and mediation, and he made brave decisions that
opened up opportunities for peace in a region that has
witnessed great turmoil. Sheikh Khalifa was also a
true champion of the most vulnerable, ensuring that
humanitarian aid and support were always extended to
those most in need, regardless of their race, colour or
creed. Under his guidance, the United Arab Emirates
further promoted its values of tolerance, empathy and
compassion globally.
2/19

18/05/2022

At home, Sheikh Khalifa was a true force for
change. During his tenure as President, a young
country on its development journey sent its first
astronaut to the International Space Station and an
orbiter to the atmosphere of Mars and began exploring
the possibilities of space. We hosted the first-ever visit
by the Pope to the Arabian peninsula, welcomed more
than 24 million visitors from around the world to Expo
2020 and won the bid to host the 2008 Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change. Our domestic development journey
has continued to make enormous strides, with leaps in
the area of artificial intelligence and innovation across
fields as diverse as climate change, the peaceful uses
of nuclear energy and the empowerment of youth and
women. Most significantly, and as part of his political
empowerment programme, the Federal National
Council — our Parliament — held its first elections in
2005, and today 50 per cent of its representatives are
women.
But perhaps more important than any of those
achievements as a great statesman is the fact that he
was a truly kind man who cared deeply about other
people. That has been evident in the outpouring of grief
from the people of the United Arab Emirates, but also
in the tributes we have heard from both colleagues in
New York and the stream of dignitaries who have come
to pay their respects in Abu Dhabi. We are sincerely
grateful for the kindness that others have shown to us
as we mourn.
Sheikh Khalifa followed in the path of the United
Arab Emirates’ founding father, the late Sheikh Zayed
bin Sultan Al Nahyan, who once said that a leader must
bear in mind that he has to perform his duties, shoulder
his responsibilities and make use of a country’s Godgiven wealth for its people’s welfare, happiness, security
and stability. Those words will remain an inspiration
for the Government of the United Arab Emirates and for
the next generation of our people, under the leadership
of the elected President of the United Arab Emirates,
His Highness Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed Al Nahyan.
I thank you once again for your expression of
support and your condolences, Madam President.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
22-35360

18/05/2022

Peace and security in Africa

Peace and security in Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on the Joint
Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(S/2022/382)
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Ms. Martha Ama Akyaa Pobee, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Africa in the Departments of Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs and Peace Operations; Mr. Eric
Tiaré, Executive Secretary of the Group of Five for the
Sahel; and Ms. Solange Bandiaky-Badji, Coordinator
and President of the Rights and Resources Initiative/
Group.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2022/382, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the Joint Force of the Group of
Five for the Sahel.
I now give the floor to Ms. Pobee.
Ms. Pobee (spoke in French): I thank members for
giving me the opportunity to address the Council.
Since the last meeting of the Security Council on
the Sahel (see S/PV.8903), the security situation in
the region has deteriorated. Terrorism and insecurity
continue to spread, devastating the lives of millions
of people. The main victims of these acts of terrorism
are often civilians, and the suffering and losses that
they have endured at the hands of terrorist groups are
indescribable. However, future generations are also
paying a price. Food insecurity, school closures and
the disintegration of entire communities are all direct
consequences of this protracted instability and have
a lasting impact, especially on young people, who are
finding themselves without opportunities or prospects.
(spoke in English)
Against that backdrop, the Malian transition
authorities’ decision on 15 May to withdraw from the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) and its Joint
Force is both unfortunate and regrettable. The Joint
Force was created in 2017 by the Heads of State of
the G-5 Sahel, born of a shared vision and their desire
to take their fate into their own hands and combat
terrorism in the Sahel head-on. However, and as the
Secretary-General notes in his report (S/2022/382), the

S/PV.9035

current challenging political and security dynamics in
the Sahel in general, and the uncertain outcomes of the
transitions in Mali and Burkina Faso in particular, had
already affected the operationalization of the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force, which has significantly slowed.
The G-5 Sahel has not convened a high-level
political meeting since November 2021. Its Defence and
Security Committee, the body that provides immediate
strategic guidance to the Joint Force leadership, has
also not met in more than six months. Considering that,
we commend the efforts by the Joint Force Commander,
General Bikimo, to continue planning and conducting
Joint Force operations, particularly in the central sector,
which encompasses the Liptako-Gourma countries
and is most affected by the spread of terrorism. Since
the Security Council last met to discuss this issue, in
November 2021, the Joint Force has been able to carry
out operations in all three of its sectors, thanks to its
commander’s commitment and leadership. However,
it has been without the participation of the Malian
battalions. It remains to be seen how Mali’s decision
to leave the G-5 Sahel and its Joint Force will further
affect the organization and dynamics in the region. It is
certainly a step backward for the Sahel.
The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) has
provided support to the Joint Force and will continue
that as long as it is mandated to do so by the Council.
The Mission has been working with contractors to
deliver life-support consumables to the Joint Force
contingents and will honour support requests received
by the other four contingents outside Mali. I would
also like to express gratitude for the European Union’s
continued financial support, which has made the work
of MINUSMA possible.
Against the backdrop of the protracted political
and security crises in the region, protecting the most
vulnerable has become ever more important. However,
and as the Secretary-General notes in his report, we
are deeply concerned about the deteriorating human
rights situation in the region and the reports of serious
violations committed against civilians, both by terrorist
armed groups and also reportedly by armed and security
forces in the region. Now more than ever, the countries
in the region need to step up their efforts to uphold
and protect human rights. Uprooting terrorist groups
that are often deeply enmeshed or embedded within
communities is uniquely challenging in the Sahel and
has made it immensely difficult to carry out counter-

22-353603/19

S/PV.9035

Peace and security in Africa

terrorism operations. But if civilians fall victim to such
operations, those very efforts will be pointless. Not
only can they cause immeasurable human suffering,
they also seriously undermine trust in the State and fuel
the vicious cycle of further radicalization.
All of this goes to show that security efforts
alone are not sufficient to address the crisis in the
Sahel. A holistic approach is required — one that
honours the primacy of politics, addresses the root
causes of poverty and exclusion and seeks to provide
opportunities and fulfilling lives for the many young
people in the region. For that to happen, the State must
be closer to the people and at one with them, while
providing security and basic services to communities
on the periphery as well. In the coming months, it will
be crucial for stakeholders in the region to come to a
consensus on how best to bring the transitions in Mali
and Burkina Faso to a swift conclusion and in a manner
that addresses the grievances of the populations of both
countries. At the same time, the countries of the region
will have to come together, bridge their differences and
maintain dialogue to pursue their common security
objectives. We remain deeply committed to supporting
the region and the G-5 Sahel in that endeavour.
Beyond our continued support to the existing
efforts to stabilize the Sahel, it is perhaps time to
rethink our approaches and change the way we do our
work. We need innovative approaches in the face of the
constantly evolving tactics of terrorist groups, whose
influence keeps expanding. For the past five years, the
international community, donors and partners have
struggled to reach a consensus on the most effective
support mechanism for a collective security response in
the Sahel. That has proved to be a significant obstacle
to the operationalization of the Joint Force. And the
lack of consensus persists, despite the recognition by
all that the terrorist onslaught in the Sahel constitutes
a slow-burning mortal threat to international peace and
security.
In the light of the growing complexity of the crisis
facing the Sahel, it is now more urgent than ever to act.
That is why the Secretary-General and the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission have committed
the African Union Commission and the United
Nations Secretariat to jointly carrying out a strategic
assessment of security and governance initiatives in the
Sahel, with the objective of strengthening support to
the G-5 Sahel, its Joint Force and other security and
governance initiatives in the region. That assessment
4/19

18/05/2022

will be conducted in close collaboration with the
Economic Community of West African States and the
G-5 Sahel and will also focus on innovative ways to
mobilize sustainable resourcing for those regional
initiatives. An independent high-level panel on
security and development in the Sahel, to be chaired
by a former President of the Niger, His Excellency
Mr. Mahamadou Issoufou, will oversee the independent
strategic assessment. We look forward to the outcomes
of that independent assessment and remain convinced
that working together is crucial to overcoming the
challenges facing the Sahel.
The President: I thank Ms. Pobee for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Tiaré.
Mr. Tiaré (spoke in French): At the outset, I join
the members of the Security Council in expressing
our sincere condolences to the United Arab Emirates
following the passing of its President.
It is a pleasure to take the floor to brief the members
of the Council on the latest developments in the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) countries.
In a communiqué dated 15 May, the Government
of Mali made known to the international community its
decision to withdraw from all of the bodies of the G-5
Sahel. That decision was a great surprise because Mali
had noted that it would suspend its participation in the
bodies of the G-5 Sahel, including the Joint Force, if
there were no progress on the issue of Mali’s presidency
of the G-5 Sahel.
We are deeply saddened by this regrettable
decision to fully withdraw rather than suspend its
participation, because the G-5 Sahel is a family of five
countries — Burkina Faso, Mali, Mauritania, the Niger
and Chad — that has been working together since the
signing of the 19 December 2014 convention. I note that
the G-5 Sahel is an institutional regional coordination
and monitoring framework — with the voluntary
participation of each of its member States — that
pursues two main objectives: combating terrorism
and ensuring socioeconomic development in the G-5
Sahel space.
This original idea is based on the understanding
that no country alone could combat terrorism and
promote development unless it pooled its human,
financial and material resources with others. In the
area of development, the relevant main G-5 Sahel
implementation programmes and projects include the
22-35360

18/05/2022

Peace and security in Africa

security and development strategy and the Priority
Investment Programme, the first phase of which covers
the period 2019 to 2022.
To complement that — given the deterioration
in the security situation in the G-5 Sahel space — an
integrated priority action framework was adopted in
February 2020 to provide greater efficiency, with the
aim of carrying out swift, realistic, measurable and
flexible efforts on security and development aspects
in priority areas, including in the humanitarian,
governance and reconciliation areas. However, despite
the goodwill of our partners and their support, growing
insecurity and the coronavirus disease pandemic have
hampered our ability to carry out such activities.
In the area of combating terrorism, G-5 Sahel
Joint Force was established in 2017 — as noted by
Ms. Pobee — under the Malian presidency, with general
headquarters in Bamako. According to its concept of
operations, it conducts joint operations in the central,
western and eastern areas and consists of approximately
55,000 troops grouped into seven battalions. In the
past, it had been supported in the centre region by an
eighth battalion, the Chadian battalion, based in Téra,
in the Niger, which withdrew at the beginning of April.
Given the way it operates and the new context in the
G-5 Sahel space with the ongoing deterioration in the
security situation, a review of the concept of operations
has been considered; however, the military body has
not yet been able to meet.
We thank the Secretary-General for the support
that he has always provided to the G-5 Sahel and the
Joint Force within the Security Council, in which he
has always underscored the need to provide material
and financial support in order to strengthen the G-5
Sahel. The Heads of State of the G-5 Sahel have always
appealed to the United Nations to support the Joint
Force because our countries are fighting not only in our
own interests, but also in the interest of international
peace and security.
Within the Security Council itself, the three African
countries that are non-permanent members have always
advocated for a positive stance towards the Joint Force
that would allow it to meet the challenges, as the support
provided by the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali remains below
our expectations. In 2021, the Council even visited the
Niger and worked with Major General Bikimo, who
recalled the challenges facing the Joint Force. The most
recent visit by the Secretary-General to West Africa,

S/PV.9035

at the beginning of May, notably to the Niger again,
made it possible to come to grips with the realities
of the Sahel and served as the occasion to appoint
the former President of the Niger, Mr. Mahamadou
Issoufou, to lead the independent high-level group in
charge of the joint strategic assessment. The G-5 Sahel
will participate in that assessment and hopes that its
main components will enable it to better define a better
security, governance and cooperation architecture in
order to ensure the optimal use of resources.
Despite challenges and limitations, the Joint Force
has been able to carry out numerous operations in the
centre, east and west areas since the end of 2019. The
new campaign plan currently being approved provides
for a total of eight major operations in the three areas.
In total, 26 operations have been carried out since the
end of 2019.
In the context of progress in its implementation,
permanent operational procedures for internal
investigations have been established. And a compliance
framework has been put in place to guide the Joint
Force so as to ensure respect for human rights and
international humanitarian law.
The G-5 Sahel countries are waging a fight on two
fronts — security and development. On the political
level, the unconstitutional changes that have taken
place in three of the five G-5 Sahel countries, as well
as the sanctions imposed on some of those countries,
have in no way contributed to harmony within the G-5
Sahel family. Tensions have even arisen with certain
partners. One of the consequences of that internal crisis
within the G-5 Sahel is the difficulty in convening the
organization’s bodies, in particular the eighth summit,
in February, during which Mali should have assumed
the rotating presidency.
We are now facing an unprecedented and
unexpected situation with regard to the decision of the
Malian Government to withdraw, and the leaders of the
other member States will certainly take initiatives in
the coming days in order to address that diligently.
Nevertheless, we still believe that anything is
possible, in the good sense of the phrase, and we are
therefore appealing to the United Nations to become
even more involved in supporting the G-5 Sahel in
its fight against terrorism and for development, for
the risks of the security crisis spreading to the Gulf
countries are very great — and they are already visible.
The President: I thank Mr. Tiaré for his briefing.

22-353605/19

S/PV.9035

Peace and security in Africa

I now give the floor to Ms. Bandiaky-Badji.
Ms. Bandiaky-Badji: Today I would like to talk
about the links between climate change and the conflict
in the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) countries.
In that connection, I have three main questions.
First, what impacts is climate change having on
the G-5 Sahel countries? Secondly, how is climate
change linked to conflict and how is it exacerbating
conflict in the Sahel? And thirdly, why is it important
to take climate change into account in developing
peacebuilding strategies in the Sahel? I would like to
end by issuing a call to action for climate justice and for
sustainable peace in the G-5 Sahel countries.
Research has shown that the G-5 Sahel countries are
among the 20 per cent most vulnerable to climate-change
risks. Some of the impacts felt across the region include
extreme weather events, such as droughts, floods,
erratic rainfall and rising temperatures, the depletion of
natural resources, food and water insecurity, increasing
disease outbreaks, displacement and migration.
For example, torrential rains affected more than
half a million people in the Niger in 2020, and up to
10 million people are facing starvation owing to drought.
Climate shocks and chronic food crises in the
Sahel region also continue to weaken women’s coping
mechanisms and their economic resiliency capacities as
they limit access to income and assets.
While it is understood that conflict is driven by the
wider historical, socioeconomic and political context,
including internal factors related to demographic,
economic, social, governance and environmental
factors, trying to understand the conflict dynamics
in vulnerable countries in the Sahel without
considering the impact of climate change could result
in an incomplete and flawed analysis. Climate change
affects the availability, distribution and quality of
natural resources, which can escalate conflicts over
those resources.
Land tenure dynamics need to be a central frame
of analysis on conflict in the Sahel. The importance
of understanding and implementing rural land tenure
and rules for the management of natural resources in
relation to localized conflict in the Sahel is critical
because pressure for land has its greatest impact in
areas held under customary tenure. While there have
been legislative shifts in some countries, challenges
remain in legal weaknesses, conflicts of customary law
6/19

18/05/2022

and statutory law, and poor implementation of legal
reform. For instance, the incomplete institutionalization
of the commonly accepted rules on rural land tenure
and the management of natural resources have allowed
many conflicts over natural resources to continue.
In the Niger, Burkina Faso and Mali, increasing land
pressure and insecure land tenure are compromising
agropastoral production systems as they seek to adapt
to climatic variability.
A recent United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel study, carried out in 2018, on pastoralism
and security found that growing competition between
herders and farmers over access to water and pasture
is a primary driver of an increase in violent conflicts
involving pastoralists in parts of West Africa and the
Sahel in recent years.
Another key dimension is gender. Gender is a
particularly important factor in relation to climate
change; in the Sahel, women are among the most
vulnerable to its impacts. For example, drought and
erratic rainfall increase the workload of women and
girls on family farms. Women are also heavily impacted
by outbreaks of conflict on all scales.
Another key dimension to keep in mind while
talking about the conflict in the Sahel is youth, and, as
we all know, on the African continent and in the Sahel
young people represent 60 per cent of the population.
Scarcity of resources and food insecurity due to climate
change and unemployment are leading young people
to be recruited by terrorist groups and to migrate to
Europe. All the migration of young people to Europe
that we are hearing about is because they do not have
access to land, employment or resources, and all of
that is due to the climate change that is taking place in
the Sahel.
Weaknesses in climate-change response also
include inadequate climate financing, poor coordination
and slow responses on climate-related interventions, as
well as an overfocus on conflict and terrorism at the
expense of climate issues.
Here I would like to finish by making a few
recommendations as a call to action.
First, stability will be achieved only if foreign
and national Governments can move beyond counterterrorism and divert a greater share of resources towards
reconciliation, dialogue and tangibly improving
vulnerable people’s livelihoods.
22-35360

18/05/2022

Peace and security in Africa

Secondly, it is key to strengthen dialogue and
cooperation with the G-5 on climate change and facilitate
increased resource mobilization. That should be done
with the collaboration of grass-roots communities and
should be understood as a way to reduce conflict since,
as mentioned earlier, competition over resources and
environmental degradation are some of the drivers
of conflict.
Thirdly, recognizing and recording local land
rights, strengthening the capacity for developing
effective land-management systems, interventions that
improve women’s land rights, including legislative
reform, enabling herders to access grazing resources
through locally negotiated resource-management
agreements — all of those are necessary.
Lastly, it is imperative that stabilization efforts
take into account intersecting issues related to
environmental degradation, demographic factors,
changes in livelihoods and weak governance; otherwise,
they may aggravate and amplify conflict rather than
create pathways to resolution.
The President: I thank Ms. Bandiaky-Badji for
her briefing.
I would like to draw the attention of speakers
to paragraph 22 of note 507 (S/2017/507), which
encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in
line with the Council’s commitment to making more
effective use of open meetings.
I now give the floor to those Council members
wishing to make statements.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Akyaa Pobee, Mr. Tiaré and Ms. Bandiaky-Badji
for their briefings.
The situation in the Sahel remains very alarming.
Millions of people are suffering from food insecurity.
Terrorist groups exact a heavy toll from civilian
populations and local forces. Those groups extend their
threat as far as eastern Senegal and the northern parts
of the Gulf of Guinea countries, such as Togo, which
fell victim to a terrorist attack last week. Given that
situation, resolute action on the part of the international
community is indispensable.
France commends the efforts of the Group of Five
for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) to promote development
and security in recent years. We can only deplore the
decision of Mali’s transitional authorities to leave the

S/PV.9035

G-5, in which Mali has played a dynamic role since
2014. That withdrawal weakens the regional security
architecture. However, we should not reach hasty
conclusions about the future of the G-5 Sahel. It is up to
the members of that body to decide on that.
Despite those difficulties, the Joint Force of the
G-5 Sahel conducted operations during the past six
months. In the face of a cross-border terrorist threat,
regional cooperation is indispensable, and support for
States so that they can continue to conduct cross-border
operations is vital. We commend the support provided
by partners, particularly the European Union.
The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) is providing
support to the battalions of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force
through the tripartite mechanism financed by the
European Union. Clearly, Mali’s withdrawal from the
G-5 Sahel will lead to the suspension of support for
Malian battalions, since they no longer participate in
the Force’s operations.
We regret that the Security Council did not reach
an agreement on the creation of a support office for
the Joint Force financed by mandatory contributions.
This would have avoided the difficulties we are seeing
today. We remain convinced that increased support
from the Council and Member States for robust African
operations is vital. Without it, we risk seeing more
African countries turn to harmful solutions, such as the
use of mercenaries.
In this regard, I reiterate France’s deep concern about
the serious allegations of human rights violations by
Malian armed forces and Wagner Group mercenaries. It
is essential that national and international investigations
be conducted — without hindrance and in complete
independence — to establish the facts. MINUSMA must
be allowed to conduct its own investigations and report
the results without further delay. We are surprised that
the latest quarterly report from MINUSMA’s human
rights division has not yet been published. We call on
the United Nations to do so as soon as possible.
The Barkhane force continues its withdrawal from
Mali. But France intends to continue to support those
Sahelian countries that so wish it and to strengthen
its support for those in the Gulf of Guinea in the face
of the expansion of terrorism from the Sahel. Several
consultations have taken place with these countries,
which have already expressed specific needs. We
are discussing how to respond with our partners,

22-353607/19

S/PV.9035

Peace and security in Africa

particularly those in Europe. This could include
assistance in training and education, the supply of
equipment, or even support for operations against
terrorism. The G-5 Sahel and the Accra Initiative could
be part of our frames of reference if our partners in the
region so wish.
We will put civilians and prevention more at the
heart of our strategy. The Sahel Alliance, whose
financial commitments amount to €26 billion, is an
essential tool, and its activities must continue. The
United Nations, through its integrated strategy for the
Sahel, must play its full part in this effort.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): Let me begin by thanking
Assistant Secretary-General Pobee, Executive Secretary
Tiaré and Ms. Bandiaky-Badji for their updates on the
latest developments in the Sahel.
At the outset, we note with regret the withdrawal
of Mali from the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5
Sahel), especially when this decision comes at a time
when there is continued need for regional cooperation
and multilateral approaches, as no country can resolve
the problems alone. We think that it is important to
have dialogue among the States of the G-5 Sahel in
order for Mali to return to the Group, considering the
security gap that Mali’s withdrawal creates, not only
for countries of the Sahel, but for the entire region. At
the same time, it is up to its members to decide how
they wish to proceed.
The Sahel continues to experience one of the world’s
most severe humanitarian and security crises. Albania
is extremely concerned about the growing extremist and
terrorist threat, particularly the expansion of jihadist
groups. In this context, it is important to address the root
causes of instability, such as underdevelopment, weak
governance and climate change in the Sahel, including
through the United Nations integrated strategy for the
Sahel. We regret that the annual summit of the Heads of
State was postponed indefinitely and that the Defence
and Security Committee has not met. We call on the
Committee members to show the political will and
commitment needed to address the challenges facing
the Sahel.
The volatile political situation in the Sahel,
particularly in Mali and Burkina Faso, has negatively
affected the effectiveness and capacity of the Joint
Force of the G-5 Sahel. We call on Burkina Faso
and Mali to establish new transition timetables and
restore the constitutional order. We welcome the role
8/19

18/05/2022

of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) in this process.
The reports of human rights violations and abuses
in the Sahel are deeply troubling. We acknowledge that
the Joint Force operates in an extremely challenging
environment. However, all military operations must
adhere to human rights and international humanitarian
law. In this regard, the deployment of Wagner Group
forces in Mali presents a great risk to civilians, and
mounting evidence is emerging of exactions during
operations. We urge all allegations to be independently
and impartially investigated, and violators must be held
to account.
We are also deeply concerned at reports of sexual
and gender-based violence by Joint Force personnel.
We encourage better monitoring of such cases and call
on all Member States to hold perpetrators to account
and exclude them from further deployment. We
urge the Joint Force to comply with its human rights
compliance framework and continue to implement
its recommendations.
Albania welcomes the efforts taken by the
African Union, ECOWAS and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali to support the Joint Force. We welcome the joint
assessment of security in the Sahel that the United
Nations, the African Union, ECOWAS and the G-5
Sahel have planned, and the recent announcement by
Secretary-General Guterres while visiting the region
that the former President of the Niger would lead the
joint assessment team. In this regard, I would like to
ask how Mali’s withdrawal from the G-5 Sahel affects
the planned assessment.
In conclusion, the Joint Force remains critical for
a collective security response to the crisis facing the
Sahel. The international community should continue
to assist the Joint Force to strengthen its operational
capacity. We call on all members to step up their
engagement and cooperation and unify the G-5 Sahel’s
common objectives of fighting terrorism and creating a
more peaceful future for all Sahelians.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I would also like to
thank Assistant Secretary-General Pobee and Executive
Secretary Tiaré for their informative briefings. We
listened carefully to Ms. Bandiaky-Badji.
Recent developments in the Sahel region, as
highlighted in the report of the Secretary-General
on the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
22-35360

18/05/2022

Peace and security in Africa

(S/2022/382), showcase how lack of progress in the
political sphere can hamper efforts to combat violence,
which, in turn, makes political solutions to conflict
even more elusive.
In order to be perfectly clear, the frustratingly long
political transition in Mali has contributed to the lack
of political understanding in the Group of Five for the
Sahel (G-5 Sahel) as a whole and hampered the activities
of its Joint Force. This has become even more obvious
since the announcement of the decision by the Malian
authorities to withdraw from all structures and bodies
of the G-5 Sahel, including the Joint Force. We believe
that the G-5 Sahel constitutes an important forum
capable of bringing forward, as is so often said, African
solutions for African problems, such as the Joint Force.
While we are still waiting for the other members
of the G-5 Sahel to react to Bamako’s announcement,
Brazil encourages all countries in the region to
maintain political engagement, including by means
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS). There is almost no alternative to regional
cooperation in the fight against terrorism and the other
challenges that the region faces.
Political uncertainty in the Sahel region means
that support from the United Nations, as well as from
regional organizations, is of utmost importance. In the
light of this, we welcome the efforts by the SecretaryGeneral, in contact with the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission and in collaboration with ECOWAS,
to address the situation. We take note of the creation
of the independent high-level panel on security and
development in the Sahel and look forward to its results.
While the situation in the region calls for action, it
seems that conditions on the ground are not favourable
for the creation of a new United Nations Office.
We welcome the fact that, in spite of all these
difficulties, the G-5 Sahel has been able to perform
operations, even though they remain short of what is
necessary to stave off the threat posed by illegal armed
groups and terrorist organizations.
We also welcome the support that the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) has been able to provide to the
Joint Force, in line with the mandate established by the
Council. It is noteworthy that MINUSMA itself faces
challenging circumstances at this particular moment.
The humanitarian situation in the Sahel region is
of great concern. In that context, we wish to highlight

S/PV.9035

the importance of the international humanitarian law
and human rights compliance framework endorsed and
implemented by the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. We urge the
Joint Force to pay particular attention to the elements
of child protection, in compliance with the framework.
There must be a clear procedure for the treatment and
transfer of children associated, or allegedly associated,
with armed groups to civilian child-protection actors,
as well as specialized training for Joint Force personnel.
Brazil shares the Secretary-General’s concern
over the security situation in the Sahel, in particular
in the light of the reports of violence against civilians.
The improvement of those conditions depends, as we
pointed out, on progress in the political sphere.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Pobee and Executive
Secretary Tiaré for their briefings. I listened carefully
to Ms. Bandiaky-Badji’s statement.
The current situation in the Sahel region is complex
and severe, beset with numerous security and economic
challenges, among others. There were once again
terrorist attacks in the Niger, Burkina Faso and Mali
recently, causing a large number of casualties, which
is distressing. Recently, Secretary-General Guterres
made a special trip to West Africa and the Sahel, which
highlighted the fact that the Sahel issue remains one of
the main concerns and priorities of the United Nations.
The international community should respond to the
Secretary-General’s appeal and increase its attention
and support to the region.
First, with regard to strengthening unity and
cooperation, the Sahel region faces multiple challenges,
such as food security, poverty reduction, development
and climate change, and is more severely affected by
the coronavirus disease pandemic and geopolitical
conflicts. No country can tackle such challenges
alone. Countries of the region should strengthen
solidarity and cooperation, with the support of the
international community, and find joint responses.
At present, cooperation in the Sahel region faces new
difficulties, and the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5
Sahel) cooperation mechanism is affected. That is not
in the interests of Member States or in the common
interests of the region. The most urgent task is to adopt
a forward-looking approach and take rational and
pragmatic measures, based on fully taking into account
each other’s situation and balancing the concerns of all
parties. It is essential to remove obstacles to regional
cooperation, restore long-term momentum for regional

22-353609/19

S/PV.9035

Peace and security in Africa

cooperation and inject new impetus into addressing
common challenges with solidarity. We hope that
Mali, Burkina Faso and the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) will continue their
consultations and reach an agreement on transitional
arrangements as soon as possible. The international
community should respect the sovereignty and
ownership of regional countries and create a favourable
external environment for regional cooperation.
Secondly, on scaling up counter-terrorism efforts,
terrorist forces are rampant in the Sahel region, with
frequent cross-border activities and the continued
expansion and spread to the coastal areas of the Gulf
of Guinea. Counter-terrorism is a holistic battle. Only
by strengthening every link in the counter-terrorism
line of defence can we definitively achieve success.
During the reporting period, the Joint Force of the G-5
Sahel continued to carry out operations and achieved
some results. It remained an important force in regional
counter-terrorism efforts.
Regarding the logistical and financial difficulties
faced by the Joint Force, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali should continue to improve relevant logistical
support. Major funders, such as the European Union,
should continue to increase financial assistance. The
United Nations should also explore more solutions.
When countries outside the region adjust their military
deployments, they must take the initiative to strengthen
communication and coordination with countries of the
region to avoid creating a security vacuum. The United
Nations is planning a joint strategic assessment with the
African Union, ECOWAS and the G-5 Sahel. We hope
that the United Nations will strengthen communication
with all stakeholders in that process, with a view
to strengthening solidarity and cooperation with
countries of the region. Based on the existing regional
cooperation mechanisms, the assessment should focus
on the challenges faced by countries of the region with
regard to logistics, funding and capacity-building and
put forward realistic solutions.
Thirdly, on adhering to the priority of development,
Africa faces arduous tasks in achieving development.
The current global food, energy and financial crises
have exacerbated the situation in Africa. The situation
in the Sahel region is even more severe. At present,
more than 10 million people face severe famine, and
millions are displaced. That highlights the importance
and urgency of tackling the issue of development. The
10/19

18/05/2022

international community must maintain its attention to,
and investment in, the Sahel region.
All United Nations agencies should perform their
respective functions and, in line with the actual situation
on the ground, vigorously promote the implementation
of the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel.
It is necessary to scale up investment in food security,
poverty eradication, infrastructure, education, health
care, vocational skills training and other fields,
genuinely devote resources and efforts to areas where
the urgent needs of regional countries lie and focus on
addressing the root causes.
China will continue to stand with the countries of
the Sahel region and speed up implementation of the
outcomes of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation
and the Global Development Initiative. We will
continue to support the region in its economic recovery
and sustainable development with practical actions and
in achieving sustainable peace in the region.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): Let me begin by thanking
Assistant Secretary-General Martha Pobee, Executive
Secretary of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel)
Eric Tiaré and the civil society briefer, Ms. BandiakyBadji, for their respective briefings.
As evident from the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2022/382), terrorist forces are taking advantage of
the unstable political and security situation in Sahel
region, particularly in Mali and Burkina Faso. The
consolidation and expanding footprints of terrorist
groups in the Sahel affiliated with Al-Qaida and the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and their growing
nexus with organized criminal networks have enabled
their easy access to arms, equipment, technology
and financial resources and have contributed to the
expansion of their influence towards the coastal region
of the Gulf of Guinea.
We strongly condemn last week’s barbaric and
cowardly terrorist attack on a military outpost in
Togo — a country that has so far remained free of
terrorist violence — wherein eight brave soldiers
were martyred. That incident is another reminder to
the international community that terrorism’s contours
are not just regional but also global. Defeating it
requires a decisive, zero-tolerance approach across all
levels — national, regional and international — and
jointly by all the stakeholders involved.
Addressing the threat of terrorism is a prerequisite
for achieving any meaningful peace in the Sahel region.
22-35360

18/05/2022

Peace and security in Africa

At the same time, the regional security initiatives such
as the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel have an important
role to play. In recent months, the G-5 Sahel security
mechanism has been seriously affected by a lack of
political direction and coordination on the ground.
Mali’s decision to withdraw from all G-5 Sahel organs
and entities changes the dynamics of the regional
efforts in play. Coupled with the political uncertainty
over transition timelines in Mali and Burkina Faso, this
development will have an adverse impact the operations
of the Joint Force. Operations in the Liptako-Gourma
tri-border area shared by Burkina Faso, Mali and the
Niger, which has been the hotspot for terrorism in the
region, have already seen a halt in recent months.
Effective collaboration and trust-building among the
G-5 Sahel countries is needed to enable the Joint Force
to undertake counter-terrorism operations. We believe
it is important for Mali and the Economic Community
of West African States to reach an agreement on the
political transition and elections. The key to peace in
Mali lies in a Mali-owned and Mali-led process and
one that is seen as inclusive and representative by the
people of Mali. Peace in Mali is a prerequisite for peace
in the Sahel.
As the Secretary-General notes in his report, a
lack of consensus among partners and donors on the
support mechanism for the G-5 Joint Force has proved
to be a significant obstacle to its effective functioning.
The Force is suffering from capacity constraints such
as a lack of training, equipment, air assets, logistical
support and so forth. It is important that traditional
peacekeeping be complemented by regional operations
in order to neutralize terrorist groups and entities.
We therefore reiterate our call for sustainable and
predictable support to be provided to the Joint Force
by its international partners, as well as through United
Nations-assessed contributions. The Secretary-General
proposed various support options in his previous
reports. The Council should overcome its indecisiveness
and examine those options seriously.
India has a long history of helping to meet to
the defence and security needs of African countries,
including in the Sahel region. We remain committed to
supporting them by exchanging expertise and providing
counter-insurgency and counter-terrorism training to
African defence and security forces. The prosperity
and well-being of the peoples of the G-5 Sahel are
very important to us, and in that pursuit, India remains
steadfast in its commitment.

S/PV.9035

Mr. De La Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Assistant Secretary-General Martha
Pobee and Executive Secretary Eric Tiaré for their
briefings and Ms. Solange Bandiaky-Badji for her
comments on the extremely important topic of conflict
and climate change.
The briefings we have just heard demonstrate once
again that the problems facing the countries of the
Sahel are transnational ones. In a situation marked by
increasing violence and expanded activity by extremist
groups from central Sahel to the Gulf of Guinea, it
is essential for the countries of the region to act in
a coordinated manner and on the basis of a shared
strategy. Even with its operational limitations, the Joint
Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) has
been a vital component in the regional architecture for
combating terrorism, and it is still a useful platform for
containing violence. We therefore regret Mali’s decision
to withdraw from it, which will restrict the Joint Force’s
scope of action in some of the areas with the highest
concentrations of terrorist activity, particularly along
the tri-border area. In that context, I would like to bring
up three issues that Mexico considers important.
First, we welcome the strategic assessment on
security in the Sahel announced by the SecretaryGeneral during his recent visit to the Niger. We hope that
this exercise will make it possible to identify courses of
action that respond to the interests of all participants
and take advantage of existing institutions such as the
G-5 Sahel. The assessment should take into account the
evaluations that the Secretariat has made of the Joint
Force in the past few years, as well as the views of the
members of the Security Council. Mexico believes that
without a clear, solid political agreement among the
Governments of the region regarding the strategy to be
followed, it will be difficult for the Council to make
progress in its discussions on how the United Nations
can increase its support for combating terrorism in the
Sahel, including the financing of the Joint Force.
Secondly, the arrival of new actors in the Sahel,
the redeployment of international forces such as
Operation Barkhane and Task Force Takuba and
the growing tensions within and outside the region
have led to a situation in which actors with differing
strategies and objectives are multiplying. The United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel and the Special
Coordinator for the Development of the Sahel must

22-3536011/19

S/PV.9035

Peace and security in Africa

use their good offices to lend consistency to regional
cooperation in its various aspects, paying particular
attention to the socioeconomic causes underlying the
conflicts, respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law. Based on that logic, we believe that
the role of MINUSMA in the changing regional context
is fundamental. We therefore reiterate our support
for the upcoming renewal of its mandate. It will be
particularly important to maintain the support that the
Mission provides to the G-5 Sahel Joint Force.
Thirdly, Mexico notes with concern that the
deterioration in the regional security situation has
occurred alongside the breakdown of constitutional
order in three of the G-5 Sahel member countries,
and that does not appear to be mere coincidence.
We therefore urge the transitional Governments of
Mali, Chad and Burkina Faso to restore legal order in
cooperation with regional organizations. Only sound
governance, legitimately elected leadership and the
inclusion of all sectors of society, especially women
and young people, can ultimately create the political
conditions needed for a stable and prosperous Sahel.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank Assistant Secretary-General
Martha Pobee for her briefing on the evolving situation
in the region.
We are also grateful to the representatives of the
Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5
Sahel) and civil society.
Unfortunately, the situation in the Sahel is
not improving, and in that regard we are in full
agreement with the briefers. The terrorist activity in
the region continues, along with acute inter-ethnic and
intercommunal conflicts, and with a very negative
impact on the security situation. Dozens of soldiers
and hundreds of civilians are dying at the hands of
militants. A new and very worrisome destabilizing
element is the growth of tensions among the countries
of the regions themselves, tensions that are largely a
result of external interference.
The members of the Council are well aware that
since the initiative behind the Joint Force of the G-5
Sahel was first put forward by the countries of the region
themselves — which is an important fact — Russia has
consistently supported its formation and deployment.
The fact is that the fight against terrorism knows no
borders or nationalities and is a shared priority for all.
We also advocated expanding United Nations assistance
12/19

18/05/2022

to the Joint Force, which would help to strengthen
regional solidarity. We have to point out with regret
that due to Western pressure, primarily from France,
the G-5 Sahel has found itself dealing with challenges
that are far removed from the much more urgent issue
of combating terrorism. On far-fetched pretexts, Mali
was denied presidency of the Group, and a Joint Force
summit planned for February, where Bamako was
supposed to take lead of the Force, was never held.
In that regard, the decision of the Malian authorities
to withdraw from the G-5 Sahel, provoked by the
confrontational behaviour of its neighbours, appears
entirely logical.
Besides that, we should not forget that harsh
Western economic sanctions, and restrictions from the
Economic Community of West African States, have
been imposed on Mali, and the withdrawal from Malian
territory of France’s Operation Barkhane and the Task
Force Takuba is continuing. All of that is going on at
a time when it is extremely difficult for Mali to deal
with major challenges, and first and foremost the threat
of terrorism. It seems clear that it was assumed that
Mali’s army would not be able to achieve its military
objectives, but as we know, that did not happen. Thanks
to its own efforts and those of more effective partners,
there have been visible successes whereby a number
of settlements have been unblocked and the country’s
northern and eastern regions are being steadily
liberated. Rather than creating obstacles, in the current
situation what should be done is to provide the Malian
authorities with effective assistance while encouraging
them to pursue a balanced course in resolving the crisis
in the country, including where restoring constitutional
order is concerned. In that regard, we call on the
members of the G-5 Sahel to adopt a constructive
approach and take the necessary measures to put
themselves on an independent path to unity without
dictates from outside. We hope that by following the
principle of African solutions to African problems, the
States of the Sahel, including Mali, will be able to agree
on the future activities of their Joint Force, and that the
ongoing difficulties will not diminish their efforts to
combat terrorism.
Russia will continue its constructive participation,
including as a permanent member of the Security
Council, in the collective efforts to achieve peace and
stability in the Sahara-Sahel region, while providing
support to African countries on a bilateral basis in
order to increase the operational effectiveness of their
armed forces by training military and law-enforcement
22-35360

18/05/2022

Peace and security in Africa

personnel and providing humanitarian assistance,
including in education and health care. The highereducation institutions of Russia’s Ministry of Defence
are currently providing instruction to military personnel
from Mali, the Niger, Burkina Faso and Chad, and our
Ministry of Internal Affairs is training Malian police.
I would also like to underscore that our bilateral
military and technical assistance to Mali and other
African States is aimed at supporting national
authorities in their very complex task of combating
terrorism and strengthening national security, which is
essential if their citizens are to feel safe and secure and
able to engage in their countries’ development efforts.
Here in the Security Council, Western countries are
once again making claims about certain mercenaries. I
would like to point out, however, that mercenaries from
the West, including from countries represented on the
Council, have participated in numerous coups on the
African continent since the collapse of colonialism, as
well as in propping up apartheid and looting natural
resources, including with the aim of supporting the
interests of their big businesses.
Another telling statistic is the list of official
military interventions by the West in Africa — several
dozen, even according to the most conservative
estimates. And there are dozens more that have never
been acknowledged. Regrettably, neocolonialism
is now being leveraged to pit countries of the region
against one another in order to weaken them. That
should not be happening in the twenty-first century.
Africa is capable of determining its own future. We
call on Mali’s neighbours to once again reconsider
their own sovereign role in addressing the issues of
their continent versus those with a hidden agenda with
regard to Africa.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
would like to thank our briefers.
I would like to make three points. First, the
peoples of the Sahel can continue to count on the
United Kingdom’s steadfast support. The challenges
facing the region are complex, interlinked and require
holistic solutions. We are working with our partners in
the Sahel to foster long-term stability by addressing
the drivers of conflict, including climate change. We
are also working to protect the most vulnerable in the
Sahel from the impact of the global food crisis caused
by Russia’s illegal and unjustified aggression against
Ukraine. In addition to agreeing on unprecedented
World Bank financing to protect vulnerable countries

S/PV.9035

from the economic impact of Russia’s invasion, the
United Kingdom’s previous funding of $200 million,
plus our new humanitarian funding, will help more than
3 million people in the region with food assistance.
Secondly, I would like to emphasize the importance
of ensuring that all actors in the Sahel promote and
protect human rights and comply with international
human rights law and humanitarian law. In that respect,
we remain seriously concerned about the presence of
the Wagner Group in Mali. Allegations of human rights
violations and abuses have increased significantly since
the Wagner Group deployed to Mali in December 2021.
The Wagner Group also has a track record of exploiting
natural resources and spreading destabilizing
disinformation. We urge the Malian authorities to
end their relationship with the Wagner Group in
the interests of national and regional stability. They
should also allow the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
unfettered access to Moura to conduct a transparent
and independent investigation into allegations that
Malian troops, operating alongside Wagner Group
mercenaries, massacred civilians in March.
Thirdly, lasting peace and stability in the Sahel will
depend on good governance, built around the rule of
law, accountable and effective State institutions and the
development of sustainable livelihoods. We therefore
support the efforts of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) to encourage timely
transitions back to constitutional order in Mali and
Burkina Faso, and we encourage the transitional
authorities in both countries to continue to engage
constructively with ECOWAS on timetables for political
transition and practical steps to prepare for elections.
In conclusion, the United Kingdom is proud to
be supporting efforts to stabilize the Sahel, including
through our deployment in MINUSMA and our
humanitarian and development partnerships. We
remain committed to helping to address the Sahel’s
challenges through a holistic approach incorporating
security, governance and development.
Ms. Moran (Ireland): First, let me acknowledge our
briefers this morning. I would like to thank Assistant
Secretary-General Pobee and Mr. Tiaré for their
invaluable insights. I also want to thank Ms. BandiakyBadji for her excellent briefing on climate change as a
driver of conflict in the Sahel. Her call to action really
reminds us of the link between climate and security,
and I thank her for that.

22-3536013/19

S/PV.9035

Peace and security in Africa

When we last convened on the matter of the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) (see S/PV.8903), the
main thrust of our discussion was on support options
for the Joint Force itself. Now the people of the Sahel
are grappling with a situation that is deteriorating at a
rate that defies belief. We share the Secretary-General’s
concerns, following his visit to the region, about the
“multi-dimensional crisis of an extraordinary scale”
that is facing the region.
The scale is underscored by the facts — the region
accounted for 35 per cent of global terrorism deaths in
2021; food insecurity is on the rise; and human rights
continue to be violated and abused. Ireland offers
its sincere condolences to the Governments and the
peoples of the region on the tragic loss of life over
recent months
We regret the decision by the Malian transitional
authorities to withdraw from the G-5 Sahel, including
the Joint Force. The challenges facing the region are
so immense and transnational in nature that they
cannot be met by any country acting in isolation,
but only on the basis of meaningful joint action and
regional cooperation.
Long-term security and prosperity in the Sahel
can be achieved only through effective, accountable
and inclusive systems of democratic governance.
We continue to urge transitional authorities in the
region to work with the United Nations, the Economic
Community of West African States and the African
Union to ensure timely and peaceful transitions to
democratically elected Governments.
In November, Ireland acknowledged the progress
the Joint Force was making, particularly in terms of
integrating respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law within its structures and operations.
It is not possible — as the Assistant Secretary-General
said this morning — to effectively terrorism if these
fundamental principles are ignored. We agree with
the Secretary-General when he says that G-5-Sahel
authorities should unreservedly commit to efforts to
uphold and protect human rights. We simply cannot
compromise on basic accountability and standards.
We know that military solutions alone will not
suffice. No matter the level of political will, the
resources allocated and the supports the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force might receive, it is increasingly obvious that it
cannot defeat the scourge of violence when the drivers
of violence remain so prevalent and unchecked.
14/19

18/05/2022

While democratic values and institutions continue
to be threatened, while human rights violations are
dismissed, while displacement and food insecurity are
allowed to become routine, while sexual and genderbased violence and attacks on civil society remain
prevalent and lack of opportunity forms part of the
fabric of everyday life, the cycle of violence will remain
unbroken. This must be the lesson of the past number
of months — more sustainable, inclusive and holistic
solutions, such as preventive action to tackle root causes
of instability, including the impact of climate change,
are needed to address the challenges of the region.
We continue to believe that regionally led
initiatives devised by the countries of the region, and
supported by predictable and sustainable funding,
are key to addressing long-term peace and stability
in the Sahel. We firmly believe that no international
initiative will produce results in addressing insecurity
in the Sahel without the commitment, cooperation and
determination of the countries of the region. We are
pleased that former President Mahamadou Issoufou has
agreed to chair a joint strategic assessment of security
and development challenges in the Sahel. We look
forward to the outcomes of that independent assessment.
Let me conclude by underscoring Ireland’s
commitment to working closely and collaboratively on
the Council and across the United Nations to counter
the threat of terrorism in the Sahel and, importantly, to
address the factors that are fuelling that scourge.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I also wish to thank the briefers
for their very valuable insights.
As the Security Council saw during our trip to the
Sahel in October, the region still needs our support. We
were therefore encouraged by the Secretary-General’s
recent visit to West Africa. His visit highlighted
alarming situations in the political, humanitarian and
human rights spheres. In order to turn negative political
trends in more constructive directions, agreed timelines
and calendars for return to constitutional order will
be necessary.
We support the efforts of the African Union
(AU) and the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) to support Mali, Burkina Faso,
Guinea-Conakry and Chad’s returns to constitutional
order. Nevertheless, while governance crises
continue — hampering Governments from fulfilling
their responsibilities — we cannot delay our
humanitarian responses to people in need.
22-35360

18/05/2022

Peace and security in Africa

In many countries, food prices and the number
of food-insecure people are increasing drastically.
Such needs must be addressed urgently. In the light
of this deteriorated situation, Norway has allocated
approximately $25 million to humanitarian efforts in the
Sahel and the Lake Chad region in 2022. We continue
to support policies and development programmes to
ensure long-term access to food, water and sanitation,
health services, education and livelihoods. And, as
Ms. Solange Bandiaky-Badji explained, climate-smart
solutions will also increasingly be necessary.
Reports of increasing human rights violations and
abuses in Mali and other countries must be followed
by full access for independent investigations. We echo
the Secretary-General’s call for the authorities of the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) to uphold and
protect human rights. That is important for the success
of efforts to combat terrorism, improve security and
gain the trust of communities. Particular attention
must be given to the situation of children. Norway
also remains concerned about recent worrisome
reports, which include allegations of human rights
violations and abuses committed by the Wagner Group.
Accountability must be ensured.
Turning now to solutions, we welcome the news of
a joint strategic assessment for the Sahel. In the light
of the regrettable Malian decision to withdraw from all
the organs and bodies of the G-5 Sahel, this initiative
makes up a particularly timely attempt to find common
solutions on security, governance and development
issues for the region. We look forward to former
President Issoufou’s lead on that issue, in cooperation
with the United Nations, the AU, ECOWAS and the G-5
Sahel — building on the experience of its Joint Force.
New thinking around security for West Africa and
the Sahel should have a holistic approach and ensure
ownership by countries of the region.
The engagement of coastal States is also positive.
Discussions cannot shy away from tougher issues, like
financing and mandates for robust, regionally led,
operations. That must also be matched by human rights
due diligence and frameworks that are compliant with
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights. We underline that the assessment
must lead to conclusions that are bold enough to make
a real difference, while also remaining implementable.
In conclusion, this is what we believe should happen
now. First, we should consolidate and uphold the strong
mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional

S/PV.9035

Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali as a key
stabilizer for Mali and the wider region. In parallel,
we should use the upcoming joint strategic assessment
as an opportunity to have a serious discussion on
innovative future solutions. Norway stands ready to
support such discussions.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the three African members
of the Security Council (A3), namely, Kenya, Gabon
and my own country, Ghana.
We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2022/382) and thank Assistant Secretary-General
Martha Pobee and Executive Secretary Eric Tiaré
for their comprehensive briefings and insightful
perspectives on the situation in the Sahel. We also
welcome the participation in this meeting of Ms. Solange
Bandiaky-Badji, who spoke on behalf of the Rights and
Resources Initiative.
The G-5 Sahel Joint Force is indeed a critical
component of the regional-led initiatives in dealing with
the security situation in the Sahel. The A3 notes with
concern that despite its importance, the Force has not
been able to effectively deal with the volatile security
situation in the Sahel, which has been characterized by
increasing attacks by violent extremist groups. We note
that factors such as logistical and funding challenges
have negatively impacted the operational effectiveness
of the Force.
The A3 therefore regrets the announcement by
the Malian transitional authorities of the country’s
withdrawal from the G-5 Sahel Force. As we all already
know, Mali is at the centre of the crisis in the region
and a required partner in addressing that transnational
crisis. The complex nature of the security situation
in that country and in the region require regional and
multilateral efforts, as no one country can tackle it
alone. The decision by the Malian authorities to further
isolate themselves from the region and the international
community is therefore deeply regrettable.
We urge the member countries of the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force to quickly resolve the concerns over coordination
within the Joint Force by dealing with the political and
leadership crisis among the members. We also hope
that the delayed meeting of the Defence Ministers of
the G-5 Sahel Joint Force, which should have taken
place in November 2021, and the annual Heads of State
summit held in February of every year will take place
as soon as possible and without further undue delay

22-3536015/19

S/PV.9035

Peace and security in Africa

and in recognition of the new developments within the
contributing countries of the Joint Force.
Notwithstanding those challenges, the A3 welcomes
the recent visit by the Secretary-General to the region
to engage the relevant actors and assess the situation on
the ground. We further commend the overall efforts of
the international community in addressing the security
challenges in the Sahel, including support for the
Joint Force.
While
commending
the
United
Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) for its support to the G-5 Sahel Force,
we acknowledge that MINUSMA itself is constrained
in its mandate. We look forward to the renewal of the
MINUSMA mandate in June with elements that would
enhance its logistical capabilities and effectiveness in
dealing with the security challenges.
In the light of the complex political situation in the
Sahel, as well as the additional security risks posed
to the Force following the withdrawal of Mali, and
mindful of the need for urgent action in support of
strengthening the G-5 Sahel Joint Force, the A3 would
like to highlight the following.
As indicated a few moments ago, the security
situation in Mali cannot be addressed by the Malians
alone and will require support from the region and
international community. We therefore call on the
Malian authorities and the other States members of the
Force to re-engage in dialogue for a speedy resolution
of the challenges noted.
Secondly, addressing the political uncertainties in
the Sahel remains critical to a sustainable resolution
of the challenges. In that regard, getting the countries
in the region under military regimes, including Mali,
to adhere to the transitional timeline endorsed by
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) for the swift return to constitutional rule
remains the best way forward. We therefore continue
to encourage the ongoing dialogue between the host
authorities and ECOWAS.
The withdrawal of Mali from the Force, now more
than ever, requires the Council and other partners
to speak with one voice on the appropriate support
mechanisms for other regional-led initiatives to fill
the security gaps while also finding the much-needed
appropriate support mechanism to strengthen the
Force. Initiatives such as the Nouakchott process
on the enhancement of security cooperation and the
16/19

18/05/2022

operationalization of the African Peace and Security
Architecture in the Sahelo-Saharan region of 2013,
the Accra initiative of 2017 and the communiqué of
the Extraordinary Summit of the Heads of State and
Government of ECOWAS of 2019, which is aimed at
mobilizing an ECOWAS standby force in addressing
the threats in the region, need the required support.
We therefore welcome the United Nations-African
Union conference held in New York in December
2021, which decided to establish a joint strategic
assessment with a view to seeking ways to strengthen
support for the G-5 Sahel, its Joint Force and other
security, development and governance initiatives. The
appointment of Mr. Mahamadou Issoufou, former
President of the Niger, to chair the joint strategic
assessment is a welcome development. We call for the
speedy commencement of the work of joint strategic
assessment and express optimism that the joint
assessment will outline a practical approach in dealing
with the economic, governance and security challenges,
including the activities of terrorists and insurgents.
The A3 remains hopeful that the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force could yet prove to be a useful body for countering
the terrorist threats in the region. In that regard,
capacity-building support to address the challenges
of information flow, as well as continuous training
that gives them confidence to respond to the changing
situation and enhances their operational effectiveness,
is recommended. Additionally, support from the
international community in ensuring that the Force is
embedded with mentors and trainers that have counterterrorism experience is critical.
While welcoming bilateral support from partners
of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force, we also believe that the
Force would benefit from predictable funding from
United Nations assessed contributions, as proposed
by the Secretary-General to ensure efficiency. The
proposal for a United Nations support office for the
Force is therefore worth considering.
Indeed, the withdrawal and reconfiguration of the
French troops, including Operations Barkhane and
Takuba, which form part of its Sahel-wide counterterrorism force, as well as the withdrawal of Chadian
troops, requires of the Council a careful appraisal
of the present dynamics. Assessing the security gap
created and a recommitment of member States to
increasing troop contribution to the Force, together
with support from the international community, is
therefore necessary.
22-35360

18/05/2022

Peace and security in Africa

We condemn the attacks by the terrorist and violent
extremist groups, which have led to the loss of many
lives, including those of military personnel. The surge
in such terrorist attacks continues to exacerbate the
security situation in the region and requires urgent
attention. The potential spillover effect of the crisis in
Libya, including the return of foreign terrorist fighters,
and the influx of small arms from that country into the
Sahel region also require critical attention. We reiterate
the call by the African Union for the strengthening of
the capacity and cohesion of the G-5 Sahel Force and
the Multinational Joint Task Force in order to eliminate
foreign fighters, mercenaries and terrorist groups in the
Sahel region and prevent their possible spread to other
parts of the continent.
The deteriorating human rights situation in the
Sahel, including violations against civilians both by
terrorist armed groups and, reportedly, by armed
and security forces in the region is worrying. While
encouraging the swift investigation and prosecution of
perpetrators by the host authorities, we also welcome
support for the G-5 Sahel Joint Force in enhancing its
compliance and accountability vis-à-vis international
humanitarian law and international human rights law
as well as conduct and discipline standards.
The impact of climate change on security, as well
as the coronavirus disease pandemic, continue to
exacerbate the humanitarian situation, as evidenced in
the increasing flow of displaced persons and refugees
in the region. We therefore endorse the SecretaryGeneral’s call for donors to respond more generously to
the humanitarian appeal for the region.

S/PV.9035

General for Africa in the Departments of Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs and Peace Operations,
Ms. Martha Ama Akyaa Pobee, for her comprehensive
briefing and tireless efforts, and Ms. Solange BandiakyBadji for highlighting the serious security challenges
that the Sahel region is facing owing to climate change.
We also thank Mr. Eric Tiaré for his briefing in his
capacity as Executive Secretary of the Joint Force of
the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel).
The United Arab Emirates appreciates the efforts of
the Secretary-General in supporting peace and security
in West Africa and the Sahel, including his recent visit
to the region and his important message, when he said,
“Establishing peace, stability and prosperity
across the Sahel remains an absolute priority for
the United Nations”.
It is important that we all stress this issue, especially
considering the difficult and complex security, political
and humanitarian challenges that the region faces. In
this regard, we need to strengthen joint action and
improve coordination and cooperation at the regional
and international levels to face these challenges,
including through the collective efforts of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), the Group of Five for the
Sahel (G-5 Sahel), the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel, the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), and the African Union.

In conclusion, the A3 believes that continuous
support for regional-led and complementary initiatives
aimed at tackling the security situation, including
through bilateral and multilateral support for the G-5
Sahel Force, remains one of the most effective ways to
counter the security challenges facing the region.

In the light of the developments in the region, I
would like to emphasize three points. First, political
instability is undermining the capability of the region
to respond effectively to current challenges. These
challenges require comprehensive political dialogue at
the domestic and regional levels to achieve necessary
reforms and strengthen the capacities of political
institutions in the Sahel region, especially in Mali. The
international community must prioritize the needs,
aspirations and security of the people of the region,
while ensuring that these efforts include the voices of
local communities, especially women and youth, given
their vital role in building peaceful and prosperous
societies. We appreciate in this regard the important
function that MINUSMA plays in supporting the
achievement of these goals, and we look forward to
renewing its mandate soon so that it can continue this
important role in the region.

Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I thank the Assistant Secretary-

Secondly, the response to the deteriorating security
situation in the Sahel region requires constructive

Lastly, there is also a need to pay critical attention to
addressing the root causes of terrorism, particularly by
supporting programmes for strengthening governance
and development institutions.
Given the increasing peace and security challenges
in the Sahel, the A3 underscores that peacebuilding
efforts, now more than ever, need to be prioritized and
reinforced for the Sahelian countries.

22-3536017/19

S/PV.9035

Peace and security in Africa

participation from all stakeholders, foremost of which
is the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel and its partners.
This enables Governments to address cross-border
challenges, which can have an outsized impact on
initiatives and institutions that seek to maintain
regional peace and security. We must continue to
combat terrorism and transnational crime in the region
with a comprehensive approach that accounts for the
specific context in each country, including the increase
in terrorist activity well as various ongoing internal
crises. We express our deep concern about the multiple
terrorist attacks targeting civilians and United Nations
personnel. The perpetrators of these attacks must be
held accountable.
Thirdly, the complexity of crises in the Sahel
requires the international community to respond in a
coordinated, urgent and comprehensive manner. We
appreciate the initiative of the Secretary-General,
ECOWAS and the G-5 Sahel States to launch a joint
strategic assessment to enhance support for the Sahel.
The United Arab Emirates looks forward to seeing
the results of these efforts, as well as the results of
the independent high-level panel on security and
development in the Sahel. We must also continue to
support sustainable development efforts in the region
and enhance the resilience of its societies, including by
providing economic opportunities, empowering women
and providing basic services to the population.
Finally, and in the context of current geopolitical
crises and tensions that have created global food
insecurity and other spillover effects, we would like to
stress the need for the Security Council to prevent these
issues from undermining our ability to work together to
address other issues on our agenda, including the Sahel.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.
Like other Security Council members, the United
States is alarmed by rising violent extremism, terrorist
attacks, intercommunal violence, growing food
insecurity and democratic backsliding in the Sahel.
Let us not sugar-coat it: the challenges are acute.
Civilian deaths continue to mount, as do the numbers
of internally displaced persons and refugees.
As Ms. Bandiaky-Badji noted, there is no one
singular issue, but rather a mosaic of interrelated
challenges, including political and economic exclusion,
resource competition and long-standing grievances.
The impacts of climate change, population growth,
18/19

18/05/2022

displacement and food insecurity complicate the
region’s response. Further, three of the five Sahelian
Governments — Burkina Faso, Chad and Mali — are
currently neither democratically elected nor civilianled, and timelines to return to constitutional order via
free and fair elections remain at best unclear.
The United States supports the Secretary-General’s
call for the authorities in these countries to hand power
back to civilian rule as soon as possible. But as much
as we need to be clear-eyed about the challenges ahead,
we must not sink into cynicism. We must, as others
have said, stay engaged and work together to bring
stability and security to the people of the Sahel. That is
why the United States has continued its strong bilateral
partnership with the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5
Sahel) to address security threats. We have provided
more than $600 million since 2017 — in equipment,
training and advisory support for crucial capacity gaps,
and we have sent nearly $2 billion for development
projects and nearly $2.2 billion in humanitarian aid.
But, of course, the real work needs to come from the
Sahelian Governments. They hold the keys. They must
enact good governance and sustainable development
solutions to help turn the tide. That means improving
equitable service delivery, expanding widespread
access to justice, and holding free and fair elections.
That is how to rebuild people’s trust in government.
In Mali, we welcomed the strong action of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) in defence of democracy in January. We
call for the Malian transition authorities to make good
on their pledge to the country’s people and organize
elections according to a reasonable timeline, as it
committed to do following the August 2020 coup d’état.
We join others in expressing our regret that Mali
has withdrawn from the G-5 Sahel. This is a decision
that further isolates Mali from the important work
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali and from the region.
As for Burkina Faso, we also urge the transition
Government to come to an agreement with ECOWAS on
a timeline to return to democratically elected civilianled Government. The transition Government must abide
by its international commitments, and its obligations to
protect civil liberties, freedom of expression, freedom
of the press, freedom of peaceful assembly and access
to the Internet must be upheld.
22-35360

18/05/2022

Peace and security in Africa

In Chad, we support the Chadian people, the African
Union and our international partners in advocating a
timely transition to a democratically elected civilianled Government, and we encourage the Transitional
Military Council to hold an inclusive national dialogue
as soon as possible, followed by a constitutional
referendum and then free and fair elections.
And I would be remiss if I did not mention, as others
have, the newest variable in regional instability: the
Russia-backed Wagner Group. Across Africa, its forces
are actively undermining stability, rule of law, good
governance and respect for human rights. According
to numerous reports, the Wagner Group has committed
egregious human rights abuses, often targeting
marginalized groups and exploiting long-standing
grievances that fuel violent extremist recruitment.
Let us make no mistake: the Wagner Group
threatens the safety and the security of United Nations
peacekeepers in Mali and the Central African Republic,
and it prevents the Missions in those countries from
protecting civilians. Russia’s disinformation and
propaganda efforts continue to deploy false narratives
to help protect the Wagner Group from responsibility
for its actions, even as we all know and agree that any
attack on United Nations personnel may constitute
war crimes.
Finally, I want to make it clear that the region
cannot move forward until justice and accountability
are prioritized. The G-5 Sahel countries must pursue
legitimate efforts to prevent, investigate and pursue
accountability for allegations of human rights violations
and abuses. None of that work is easy, but all of it is
vital to the peace and security of the people of the
Sahel region. We must therefore keep at it, and we must
work together.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.

S/PV.9035

Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I thank you, Mr. President, for giving me the
floor. Regarding the statement of the representative
of the United States of America, I believe that I have
already provided a comprehensive response in my
main statement.
I now wish to comment on the statement of the
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom, who
said that the increase in food prices in Africa and the
possible negative impact on food security are an issue.
Prices are increasing, and there are many reasons for
that, which came about long before the Ukrainian
crisis. But, of course, at this stage the situation is made
particularly acute by the sanctions that were collectively
introduced by the West, primarily under pressure from
the United States. Western States are doing everything
possible to block shipments of food from Russia,
including shipments of grain and fertilizer, to disrupt
logistical and financial chains and prevent us from
supplying food to countries where hunger could arise.
I believe that saying that we are creating obstacles
for food shipments is complete and unprecedented
hypocrisy. First of all, millions of tons of grain are
being shipped out of Ukraine by land and through
ports in Romania. But where is that grain going? Will
it ultimately reach Africa and other regions that are
experiencing shortages? I have significant doubts as to
that, since we see how the situation is playing out — for
example, with regard to refugees — and how attention is
waning on the part of the international community — the
Western community — when it comes to conflicts in
Africa and other regions, because Europe and the West
and its problems are the top priority.
We hope that all these arguments will be taken
into account and that countries, including in Africa,
will not be misled regarding the selfless help being
provided to them, as we heard in the statements of some
of our colleagues. All that is not for free — and is not
at all selfless.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

22-3536019/19
