UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1997/484
20 June 1997
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 20 JUNE 1997 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

As you are aware, the security situation in Brazzaville, the capital of the
Republic of the Congo, has become extremely precarious, with serious
implications for peace and stability, not only for the Congo, but also for the
subregion. The violent fighting that erupted on 5 June 1997 between armed
elements controlled by President Lissouba and Mr. Sassou-Nguesso, the former
President, has already claimed the lives of hundreds of civilians in
Brazzaville. The humanitarian situation in the city and in some other areas of
the country has worsened significantly. As the violence engulfed most of the
city, the expatriate community, including United Nations staff, had to be
evacuated with the help of international forces.
In view of the gravity of the situation, heads of State and Government of
the subregion, under the chairmanship of President Bongo of Gabon, have
established an International Mediation Committee aimed at reaching agreement on
a ceasefire and settlement of the present crisis in the Congo. The efforts of
the Committee, which were actively assisted by the Special Representative of the
United Nations and the Organization of African Unity (OAU) in the region,
Ambassador Sahnoun, have resulted in a temporary ceasefire. At a meeting
convened at Libreville, on 16 June 1997, the International Mediation Committee
requested the United Nations Security Council to authorize the rapid deployment
to Brazzaville of an inter-African force.
This request was conveyed to me by President Bongo in a letter dated
16 June 1997. President Bongo, who has been mediating the talks between the
parties, has also conveyed a similar written request to you (S/1997/483, annex),
indicating that the Committee has obtained the agreement to the deployment of an
inter-African force of all Congolese parties concerned, as well as their
assurances that they would cooperate with such a force. It should be stressed
that the agreement of the parties to the deployment and their adherence to an
agreed cease-fire are indispensable conditions for the deployment of an
international force, as is the condition that the proposed force should control
the airport.
The proposed force would aim at assuring the implementation of the
ceasefire and contribute as much as possible to the establishment of an

97-16801 (E)

200697

/...

S/1997/484
English
Page 2

environment appropriate for the preparation and good conduct of the presidential
elections in the country. The Committee has also agreed to refer the request to
the Central Organ of OAU so that it can consider assisting the operation.
One option for the formation and deployment of such a force is that a group
of Member States would decide to establish and contribute to a multinational
force and to seek the authorization of the Security Council to do so. The
second option would be to deploy a United Nations peacekeeping force, composed
mainly of African contingents provided with adequate military capability and
with sufficient financial and logistical support to fulfil the challenging tasks
entrusted to it. Given the gravity of the crisis and the experience of the
international community in dealing with similar situations, it is estimated that
the initial size of the force should be not less than battalion group strength,
i.e., approximately 1,600 to 1,800 troops, with the necessary support units
(400 to 800 men), plus United Nations military observers. A force of that size
would have the capacity to secure the airport, it being understood that wider
deployment would require greater strength.
Experience has shown that a force of that size and configuration could be
fully deployed only with adequate preparation, which would require sufficient
time. However, delays in deployment could adversely affect the fragile
ceasefire arrangements mediated by the International Mediation Committee.
While the States of the region and other Member States concerned continue
to discuss the modalities, including the composition, structure, command and
control and other requirements for such a force, I believe it would be important
for the international community to take urgent steps in support of this regional
initiative.
In the circumstances, and in order to avoid the creation of a vacuum, I
intend, subject to the concurrence and authorization of the Security Council, as
well as agreement by the Congolese parties, to request countries with proven
military capability to dispatch to Brazzaville an advance military detachment to
be entrusted with the establishment of a secure environment for the deployment
of the eventual force. Such an advance detachment would operate under command
and control arrangements agreed between potential contributors and would also
include a limited number of United Nations military observers to provide liaison
with the warring parties and to verify the ceasefire. The advance military
detachment could consist of troops fielded by regional States as well as by
other Member States, especially those who could ensure rapid deployment and
adequate logistical support. In view of the positive role played by the French
troops in Brazzaville in recent weeks, their support would be highly desirable
during this transitional phase. The United Nations would also be ready to
provide, on a temporary basis, 40 to 50 military observers who could be drawn
from existing United Nations peacekeeping operations to be deployed to
Brazzaville on short notice.

(Signed)

-----

Kofi A. ANNAN
