37

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Noting the interest in this question as embodied in
numerous resolutions of the regional economic commissions,
1. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, the Executive Secretaries of the regional economic commissions and the Director of the United
Nations Economic and Social Office in Beirut to intensify their efforts to meet more satisfactorily the
requirements of Member States in development planning, plan implementation, public administration and
management, especially by organizing, wherever possible
and appropriate, continuing advisory services in these
fields, in particular with a view to action to facilitate
the achievement of the objectives of the Second United
Nations Development Decade;
2. Further requests the Secretary-General to examine at the earliest opportunity the various means of organizing and financing such services, which should begin to operate as soon as possible, and to this end to
secure the close co-operation of bodies likely to be
interested, including the United Nations Development
Programme and the specialized agencies;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General to report
to the Economic and Social Council at its forty-ninth
session on the progress made towards the implementation of the present resolution and on the plans drawn
up for the future.
1832nd plenary meeting,
13 December 1969.
2564 (XXIV). Special measures to be taken in
favour of the least developed among the
developing countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2402 (XXIII) of 13 December 1968, in which it took note of the report of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
on its second session,24
Recalling further paragraph 6 of the same resolution, in which it drew the attention of the States members of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development to the tasks that remained unfinished,
particularly those pertaining to the problems facing the
least developed among the developing countries,
Reaffirming its support for resolution 24 (II) of
26 March 1968,25 concerning the least developed
among the developing countries, which was adopted
unanimously by the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development at its second session,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution 1447 (XLVII) of 5 August 1969 concerning
the Second United Nations Development Decade, in
which the Council expressed its concern over the delay
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development in making its contribution to that Decade,
Taking fully into account resolution 63 (IX) of
22 September 1969,28 adopted by the Trade and Development Board at its ninth session, on the problems
of the least developed among the developing countries
and the need for urgent action by the United Nations
2 4 Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, Second Session, vol. 1 and Corr.! and 3
and Add.1 and 2, Report and Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.68.U.D.14).
25 Ibid., p. 54.
28 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentyfourth Session, Supplement No. 16 (A/7616), p. 268.

Conference on Trade and Development and the General Assembly,
1. Affirms the need to alleviate the problems of the
least developed among the developing countries with
a view to enabling them to draw full benefits from
the Second United Nations Development Decade;
2. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the heads of the specialized agencies and the
regional economic commissions, the Committee for
Development Planning, the group of experts appointed
under resolution 63 (IX) of the Trade and Development Board and any other appropriate consultants, to
carry out a comprehensive examination of the special
problems of the least developed among the developing
countries and to recommend special measures, within
the framework of the Second United Nations Development Decade, for dealing with those problems.
1832nd plenary meeting,
13 December 1969.
2565 (XXIV). International monetary reform

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2208 (XXI) of 17 December 1966 entitled "International monetary reform" in
which, inter alia, it recognized the need for a reform
of the international monetary system,
Recalling also its resolution 2461 (XXIII) of 20
December 1968, in which it called upon the Governments of the States members of the International
Monetary Fund to take the necessary steps for the
early ratification and activation of the special drawing
rights facility,
Noting with interest the recent decision of the Board
of Governors of the International Monetary Fund to
request the Executive Directors of the Fund to proceed
promptly with the consideration of the adjustment of
the quotas of members of the Fund and to submit an
appropriate proposal to the Board of Governors not
later than 31 December 1969,
Being aware that the International Monetary Fund
is studying at present the possibility of the improvement of the adjustment process of balance-of-payments
disequilibria, including the use of limited exchange rate
flexibility,
1. Welcomes the recent decision of the Board of
Governors of the International Monetary Fund to
allocate to participant members of the Fund $9,500
million in special drawing rights for a basic period of
three years starting 1 January 1970;
2. Invites the Governments of the States members
of the International Monetary Fund to consider at an
early date, after the activation of special drawing rights
the possibility of the establishment of a link betwee~
t~e allocati?~ of this new reserve ass~t and the provision o~ add1t1onal development financmg to developing
countnes;
3. Calls upon the aforementioned Governments as
they consider the adjustment of quotas, to take into
~ccount the fact that developing countries are exceptionally vulnerable to balance-of-pa~ents fluctuations
that they have only limited fleXIbility in adjusting
imports and that they do not generally have access to
alternative short-term credit facilities, and therefore to
approve an adjustment that would give these countries
a larger share in total quotas of the International
Monetary Fund;
