UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-NINTH

YEAR

2527th

MEETING:

JAN6 0 1993

2 APRIL

1984

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2527). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Letter dated 29 March 1984 from the Permanent Representative of Nicaragua
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16449). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

SJPV.2527

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2527th MEETING
Held in New York

on Monday,

President: Mr. Vladimir Alekseyevich KRAVETS
(Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic).

1. Adoption
2.

3. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Russian]:
The Security Council will now resume consideration of
the item on its agenda.

agenda (SIAgendti2527)

4. Mr.
LOUET
(France)
[interpretation
from
French]: First, I wish to congratulate you sincerely,
Sir, on your accession to the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of April. I assure you of the
friendly co-operation of the French delegation as you
discharge your functions. I would request you to transmit to your predecessor, the representative of Peru, our
thanks for the outstanding way in which he carried out
his responsibilities
last month.

of the agenda

Letter.dated
29 March 1984 from the Permanent
Representative of Nicaragua to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16449)
The meeting

1984, at 3.30 p.m.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Roa Kouri
(Cuba), Mr. KovacW (Czechoslovakia),
Mr. Marin
Bosch (Mexico) and Mr. El-Fattal
(Syrian Arab
Republic) took the places reserved for them at the side
of the Council chamber.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, Egypt. France, India, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Upper Volta, Zimbabwe.
Provisional

2 April

was called to order at 4.15 p.m.
Adoption

5. France has very deep feelings about the increasing
seriousness and escalation of the armed actions in Nicaragua. Indeed, as we heard at our last meeting on this
item, eight ships have been damaged-some
have even
been destroyed-by
mines in Nicaraguan ports.

of the agenda

The agenda &as adopted.
Letter dated 29 March 1984 from the Permanent Representative of Nicaragua to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/16449)

6. There are serious threats not only to the economic
life of the country, which could be slowly suffocated
and finally paralysed, but also to the very life of its
inhabitants. In fact, out of fear that such tragic accidents might reoccur, entire shiploads have been rerouted. They will be able to be delivered to their original
destination only with considerable delay and at great
cost, and only if the neighbouring countries’ transport
systems make this possible. Among these cargoes are
grains and other vital necessities, shipments for humanitarian assistance-coming
sometimes from Europe,
including France-medication
essential to protect the
health of a population that has already suffered so much
from malnutrition
and underdevelopment,
as well as
natural disasters.

1. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Russian]:
In accordance
with the decision taken at the
2525th meeting, I invite the representatives of Guyana
and Honduras to take the places reserved for them at
the side of the Council chamber.
At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Sinclair
(Guyana) and Mr. Flores Bermlidez (Honduras) took
the places reservedfor them at the side of the Council
chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from RussianJ:
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received letters from the representatives of
Cuba, Czechoslovakia,
Mexico and the Syrian Arab
Republic in which they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the Council’s
agenda. In accordance with the usual practice I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without
the right to vote, in conformity with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure.
r

7. Therefore, France strongly condemns this escalation of the violence, and this type of new action which,
by interfering with free access to the port facilities of a
sovereign country, is leading to a kind of blockade in
disguise, which is in fundamental opposition to the
great principles of international law.
8. In its resolution 530 (1983), the Security Council
reaffIrmed the right of Nicaragua arid of all the other
countries of the area to live in peace and security, free
1

from outside interference, also expressing its support
for the efforts of the Contadora Group. That position
was endorsed by the General Assembly.on 11 November 1983, when it adopted its resolution 38/10, whereby
all the countries of the international community undertook to encourage the search for a peaceful development of the situation in Central America.

1s. To your predecessor, Mr. President, we pay a
tribute for the admirable manner in which he conducted
the proceedings of the Council during the month of
March. The period of Mr. Arias Stella’s presidency
was indeed a difficult and delicate one, during which the
Council was confronted with several complex and
serious situations.
Nevertheless,
he guided our
proceedings with his customary diligence and competence. We are in debt to him for his patience and
‘.
wisdom.

9. But what has taken place recently? There has been
a stepped-up foreign military presence, a continued
arms race and an escalation of destabilizing activities.
My country is deeply concerned by this increase in
tensions, which heightens the threat of an irreversible
broadening of the region’s conflicts.

16. Nearly a year has elapsed since the Security
Council adopted resolution 530 (1983) on the subject
that is again before our consideration today. That resolution, inter alia, reaffirmed the right of Nicaragua and
of all the other countries of the area to live in peace and
security, free from outside interference; commended
the efforts of the Contadora Group and urged that they
be pursued; and appealed urgently to the interested
States to co-operate fully with the Contadora Group,
through a frank and constructive dialogue, so as to
resolve their differences. Regrettably, in spite of the
determined endeavours of the Contadora countries,
peace and stability in Central America remain but a
distant dream. Nicaragua, on the basis of whose plaint
the Council adopted resolution 530 (1983), feels compelled yet again to seek the Council’s protection.

IO. Moreover, it is well known that -Nicaragua has
recently made a number of positive gestures intended to
take account of the concerns of those who quite rightly
desire an overall settlement which would resolve the
various aspects of the Central American crisis.
11. France pays a tribute to the efforts made by
the four countries of the Contadora Group, who are
working to find a solution which would be satisfactory
to all the countries of the region, laying the foundations
for a lasting regional settlement based on the principles
of non-interference
and respect for the national sovereignty and territorial integrity of States.

17. In November last year the General Assembly took
what many of us deemed to be one of the most significant decisions of its thirty-eighth
session when it
adopted by consensus its resolution 38110 on “The
situation in Central America: threats ‘to international
security and peace initiatives”.
That resolution was the
product of many hours-indeed,
many days-of tortuous negotiations among the members of the Contadora Group and the countries .directly concerned.
That resolution, inter alia, unequivocally reaffirmed
the right of all the countries of the Central American
region to live in peace .and to decide their own future, free from all outside interference or intervention;
affirmed that respect for the sovereignty and independence of all States of the region was essential to ensure
the security and .peaceful coexistence of the Central
American States; and expressed support for the efforts
of the Contadora Group.
‘

12. The chain of violence in the countries of the area
-in Nicaragua, but in El Salvador as well-must
be
broken. The countries of Central America must be.permitted once again to solve their.problems
for themselves. They are entitled to demand respect for their
independence and peace and security for their peoples.
From that standpoint, the continuing Contadora process must now aim to transform those principles into
concrete measures. This would involve a halt in demonstrations of strength and an end to violence and to
interference by countries from outside the region in the
internal affairs of Central American States.
13. .Only military de-escalation will make it possible,
in a restored peace, to attain those priority goals of
democracy and development which the States of the
region, along with France and the rest of the international community,
so ardently desire.

18. It was our hope that .such an unequivocal pronouncement, made without a vote, by the General Assembly would be the harbinger of peaceful negotiated
solutions to the problems of the region. Even more
important, it was our expectation that resort to militarism and solutions based on force would come to
an end. The very fact that, on so vexed an issue as
this, it had been possible to persuade the. parties directly concerned to adopt a consensus greatly encouraged the international community to look forward to an
improvement
in the situation on the ground.

14. Mr. KRISHNAN
(India): I should like, Sir, to
begin by congratulating
you, the distinguished representative of a friendly Member State; on your assumption of the high office of President of the Council for the
month that hasjust begun. Your tenure as President has
commenced on a sombre note, as the Council is once
again seized of the troubled situation in Central America on the basis of a complaint by Nicaragua. Having
had the privilege of working with you on other occasions, I am confident that you will bring to bear your
considerable diplomatic skills and capabilities, as well
as your eminent personal qualities on the discharge of
your current responsibilities.

19. It is regrettable that this has not been the case and
that, on the whole, things have gone from bad to worse.
That Nicaragua has felt obliged to have recourse to the
2

Council yet again testifies to the fact that, far from being
alleviated, its concerns have remained unmet and have
even become more pressing and intense. Mr. Chamorro
Mora of Nicaragua, in his comprehensive exposition to
the Council last Friday [2525fh meeting], yet again
brought to it a series of allegations of acts of aggression,
subversion and other forms of provocation directed
against his country.

condemned the reported mining of Nicaraguan seaports which has caused the loss of human life and
heavy material damage and which endangers international navigation. It expressed its firm opposition
against any measure directed towards a blockade of
any State ‘of the region.

20. Nicaragua has also complained of a new kind of
,provocation, in recent times, in the form of mining of its
ports, coupled with attacks on ships visiting them. Such
acts, apart from causing disruption to the Nicaraguan
economy, cannot but pose grave dangers, to intemational navigation, which has indeed already been adversely affected. Nicaragua’s concerns are deep-rooted
and legitimate and strike a responsive chord in the
hearts of the Government and people of India, enjoying
as they do fraternal feelings for the Nicaraguan Govemment and people.

“The Co-ordinating
Bureau welcomed Nicaragua’s firm commitment
to peace expressed through
its latest initiatives and reiterated its solidarity with
the Govemment.of
National Reconstruction and the
people of Nicaragua in their struggle to defend their
sovereignty, territorial integrity and their right to
independence.”

6‘ . . .

22. Ever since the Central American region became
another focal point of international
tension, the Government of India, as indeed the vast majority of the
international
community,
has cautioned against recourse to military means in seeking solutions to regional problems. We have consistently advocated dialogue and negotiation as a peaceful means to reduce
tensions and to bring stability to the area. It is an
established lesson of history, particularly
the tragic
history of this troubled and hapless region, that peace
and progress can be constructed only upon the foundation of an acceptance of political and socio-economic
pluralism, scrupulous observance of the principles of
non-intervention
and non-interference
in the internal
affairs of States and an appreciation of the inherent and
deep-rooted problems typical to the region; they cannot
rest upon the exclusion of one State or another from the
mainstream of regional development on one pretext or
the other, nor can they be sustained on the strength of
pressures, threats or blandishments.

21. I have had more than one occasion in this Council
in the past to set out the position of the countries of the
Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries with respect to
the situation in Central America. I need not, therefore,
repeat what was said on the matter by the Seventh
Conference of Heads of State of Government of NonAligned Countries, held at New De1hi.a year ago. It is
pertinent for me, however, to draw the Council’s attention to the text of the latest communique’ adopted on the
subject by the Co-ordinating Bureau of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries, which met in urgent session
in New York on 15 March [S/26422, annex]. Permit me
to quote from it the following excerpts:
“Conscious of the urgent need to reduce tension in
the area in order to facilitate dialogue, the Co-ordinating Bureau commended once again the constructive efforts of the Contadora Group towards finding a
political solution to the problems of the region and
urged them to continue their peace efforts. In this
context, the Bureau noted with interest the advances
made with respect to elections in yarious countries of
the region, and highlighted the importance of making
use of democratic processes as a means of bringing
about domestic reconciliation
in the various countries and detente in the region. It noted with satisfaction that the countries of the region had agreed to take
measures which would guarantee effective popular
participation in decision-making,
taking into account
democratic principles, economic development and
social justice.
6‘ . . .

23. In this context the world has looked with much
hope and expectation to the efforts of the Contadora
countries to find a comprehensive
political solution
through dialogue with all the parties concerned. The
Contadora exercise has received the blessings and support of the United Nations and the Non-Aligned Movement. The successful adoption in September 1983 of the
Document of Objectives [S/16041, annex] marked a
significant milestone in that effort. Nicaragua has consistently demonstrated a positive attitude and has made
important proposals of its own with a view to bringing
about peace and reconciliation.
It is regrettable, however, that the endeavours of the Contadora Group have
of late been afflicted by a flagging of will and dragging of
feet on the part of some countries. External interference has also continued unabated and, from all available indications; even intensified. Such attitudes and
actions can only undermine the efforts of the Contadora
Group, rendering a political solution even more difficult
to achieve.

“The Bureau called for an immediate end to all
foreign military manoeuvres and activities on Central
American territories and coasts, the installations of
foreign military bases as well as all threats, attacks
and hostile acts against Nicaragua. . .

24. In concluding, let me reiterate our conviction that
it would be naive to believe that the problems of Central
America, so endemic and rooted in history, can be

“The Co-ordinating
Bureau expressed its deep
concern over the new escalation of these acts and
3

tackled through the use or threat of use of force or
intervention and interference in the internal affairs of
sovereign and independent States. Recourse to such
means, apart from trampling upon the rights of countries to their sovereignty and to choosing their own way
of life, can only exacerbate tensions, widen the conflict
and lead to a disastrous conflagration which none of us
would like to see. We deem it imperative that such
means be immediately abandoned and that dialogue be
given a real chance.

29. That analysis was unanimously supported by the
international community, with the exception of one of
its members, and not the least important: the United
States of America, whose viewpoint was expressed
recently by the President, according to The New York
Times of 20 March 1984, to the effect that the problem
of Central America was “a power play by Cuba and fhe
Soviet Union, pure and simple”.*
30. It is most disturbing to see at that high level so
subjective an analysis of a situation so dangerous for
international
peace and security. It was particularly
upsetting, in that it seemed to be the answer given to
President Francois Mitterand,
who, speaking courageously and objectively
of revolutions
in the third
world, said, according to The New York Times of
22 March:

25. Mr. BASSOLE
(Upper Volta) iinferpretation
from French]: Mr. President, your term of office has
just begun and already you are faced with the harsh
realities of the Security Council, which so often has
to work to defend and ‘safeguard international
peace
and security. On this solemn occasion I am happy to tell
you how pleased and confident my delegation feels at
seeing an eminent son of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic shouldering
the heavy responsibilities
of
President of the Council at so crucial a time. Your
ability and keen sense of objectivity and the businesslike manner in which you have always worked within
the Council ensure that these meetings and any others
that might take place during your presidency will be as
successful as the world expects them to be on matters
relating to peace and security.

“Their roots lie deep in the legacy of the past.
Thus, the peoples of Central America have a long history marked by military oppression, social inequality
and the confiscation of economic resources and
political power by a few. Today, each of them must
be allowed to find its own path toward greaterjustice,
greater democracy and greater independence and
must be allowed to do so without interference or
manipulation.“*
Such truths could spring from no better source than
such a frank and true ally of the United States.

26. I should also like to .express my delegation’s
appreciation to the representative of Peru for the admirably competent manner in which he presided over the
work of the Council during the month of March.

31. So it is clear that the real reasons for the problems
arising here and there in Central America are well
known to everybody, including the Reagan Administration, which, for unacknowledgeable
reasons also
known to all, wants to replace them with others so as to
justify its hatred of the Sandinist revolutionary regime.

27. The Council has listened with interest and concern to the statements made by,the representatives of
Nicaragua and the United States of America. I say “and
concern”, for the Council, in responding favourably to
Nicaragua’s request, might have seemed to be carrying
out a ritual. But in fact, if we look carefully at the
situation, that is not the case, ,and the fact that this
country, which is having such difftculty now, should
have chosen to come to the Council bears witness to the
growing scope of tensions in the region.

32. No, the changes in Central America cannot be the
result of an East-West ideological confrontation, as that
Administration
claims.
33. Of course it would be Utopian to consider the‘
critical situation in the region without taking account of
the unfavourable developments in the overall world
situation, characterized as it is by great-Power confrontation, But it would also be Utopian and naive to refuse
to recognize or understand that that crisis has been
aggravated by increasing imperialist interference in the
internal affairs of States in the region.

28. It is the underlying reasons for this tension that my
delegation wishes to address, because on them depends
whatever solution the Council might adopt to prevent
the worst from happening. Our analysis, in this regard,
accords fully with that made by the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned
Countries, held at New Delhi a year ago. In their analysis of the situation in Central America, the Caribbean
and the South Atlantic, the heads of State or Govemment observed that Central America was going through
a political, social and economic crisis mainly because of
the traditional
structures of repressive power and
national economic structures that encourage poverty,
inequality and suffering; which, in turn, have been
aggravated by intervention
and interference in the
activities of the countries of the region since the last
century.
..

34. In stepping up their subversive activities and
assorted acts of aggression in order to destabilize the
Sandinist revolutionary
regime and replace it with a
regime more to their taste and beholden to them, the
enemies of the Nicaraguan people are giving striking
proof that that popular, democratic
revolution
is
proving to be a thorn in their side. Rooted, as it is; deep
in the hearts of the people, the Sandinist regime has put i
a brutal end to the banquet of the predators.
* Quoted in English by the speaker.

4

r

lessly and mercilessly been struggling act otherwise, in
total disregard for the deeply felt aspirations of its people to freedom, national sovereignty and democracy?
The answer is obvious.

35. The stepped-up American military presence along
the borders of Nicaragua is indeed a matter of concern.
According to information submitted to the Council by
the representative of Nicaragua, the figures amount to
more than 2,800 men. This is all the more disturbing,
since in the 15 counter-revolutionary
camps there are
today more than 4,000 counter-revolutionaries
who
have sworn to overthrow the Managua regime.

41. To say that the regime does not live up to its
commitments
is surely just another way of misrepresenting the facts. The irrefutable fact is that today the
Sandinist National Liberation Front courageously and
determinedly
refuses to fill the shoes of the dictator
Somoza. But even though the United States seems to
recognize Somoza for what he was, it never fought for
the rights and principles that it claims to defend today in
Nicaragua.

36. It is said that it is an obsession to harp on the
United States Government’s hostility towards the Government of Nicaragua, but we believe in the power of
the word, and it is our deep conviction that the Council
must speak out, to the extent that the inspirational
strength of the word can indeed prevent an evil fate
from befalling Nicaragua and the region.

42. Nicaragua has always shown good will in its
search for political and negotiated solutions to the
problems of Central America. Its efforts to this end
have often been ridiculed by those who, deep down,
wanted things to go differently so as to justify the destabilizing activities carried out against the Sandinist
regime. The decision taken by the military junta in
power in Nicaragua to organize free and democratic
elections in November 1984 is, as far as we are concerned, irrefutable proof of the determination
of the
authorities of that country to respect scrupulously their
commitments.

37. During the seventh summit conference of Non-.
Aligned Countries, the heads of State or Government
also spoke out. They spoke in order to call on the
Governments of the United States and Honduras to
take a more constructive approach, to support peace
and dialogue, in accordance with the principles of international law. They also described in no uncertain terms
the attitude taken by Nicaragua as a positive one.
Hence it is astounding how blithely some people have
tried to accuse that State of destabilizing the Governments of neighbouring
States-for
example, El Salvador, Honduras and Costa Rica.

43. My delegation believes that the eminent Englishman John Stuart Mill was quite right when he said that
“a people’s search for freedom is an irresistible
movement that may be stifled once, twice, many times,
but never permanently.”
But it is seriously to be
doubted whether the freedom that Mill spoke about is
the same as that to which the representative of the
United States referred in her statement of 23 March
1983 [242&h meeting].

38. We are convinced that the Council will be able to
discern the truth or falsity of such allegations. As far as
we are concerned, they stem, purely and simply, from
the desire of those who make such accusations to “divide and rule”; for the Sandinist revolution-which
today enjoys popular and almost unanimous support
within Nicaragua and unequivocal support among peoples that cherish peace, freedom and justice, as well as
among peoples that are struggling against oppression,
wretchedness and colonial domination-is
the work of
Nicaraguan patriots, many of whom have already paid
with their lives for daring to defend human dignity.,
There is no people that can simply import a revolution
worthy of the name or have one imposed on it.

44. My delegation also believes that repression is not
a human or political right,nor is oppression, the practice of racism,- apartheid, or the policy of expansionism. Whatever the case, we are willing to work in close
co-operation with all those who share this belief in
order to ensure that such rights are not granted by the
Council or any Member of the United Nations to any
Government whatsoever. If we all act in concert in this
way, we shall be doing something worthwhile.

39. The Security Council must act firmly if it wishes to
prevent other freedom fighters from dying, if it wishes
to prevent other invasions like the one of which Grenada was a victim. More than ever before, the Contadora Group must intensify its efforts to find peace in
the region.

45. A hungry world that thirsts not only for water but
for freedom and justice does not need quarrels between
neighbours. The third world is suffering from many
serious evils, the solutions to which depend entirely
on the political will of those already in power-those
whose insatiable lust for domination makes them intellectually and politically shortsighted.

40. We say this because responses based on bitterness are always unpredictable
and indeed uncontrollable. I speak of the rancour gnawing at the heart of the
Reagan Administration
because Nicaragua is still surviving, its people happy and pleased with the political,
economic and social system that it has freely chosen for
itself. Of course, that system has nothing in common
with the one that some people would like and still
relentlessly seek to impose on it. But could the regime
against which the Reagan Administration
has so ruth-

46. Here I am reminded
of ‘what was said by
Mr. Clausen on 27 September 1983 to the Boards of
Governors of the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund:
“When they deal with questions of worid security,
Governments
of countries-developed
and devel5

oping-should
ask themselves whether every extra
million dollars of military expenditure assures over
the long term the same degree of security as would an
additional million dollars invested in the economic
development of the third world.”

51. Once again, in a matter of weeks, the Council’s
attention is being urgently drawn to the dangerously
deteriorating
Central American
situation,
which
threatens a real conflagration in that region. My delegation has already warned, on several occasions in the
Council, that unless this critical situation is checked
immediately it will have incalculable consequences for
regional stability and international peace and security.
.
52. We note with very serious concern that since the
Council was apprised of the Central American situation
by the representative of Nicaragua some three weeks
ago the situation has become progressively more critical and dangerous. The -activities of counter-revolutionaries against the civilian population and economic
infrastructure of Nicaragua have become more numerous, thus gravely undermining peace and stability
in that country. It is becoming increasingly clear that
the ultimate object of these bands, and of their external
masters who provide them with material, financial and
military support, is to bring down the legitimate Government of Nicaragua by military’means.
Thus, lately
they have not only intensified their assault against the
Sandinist Government, but have also adopted new and
more hideous methods, threatening Nicaragua’s territorial integrity, political independence and sovereignty. These new methods include the mining of that
country% territorial waters, the threat of naval blockade of its coast, and the organization of air raids against
both military and economic targets.

At this stage in the situations prevailing in the world
-notably
in Latin America, Central America, the
Caribbean, Asia, the Middle East and Africa-that
is a
question the Council must put to those major Powers
that have the very disturbing temptation to oversimplify problems and to boil them down to an ideological
struggle for influence.
47. If the whole Council recognized that every State
has the right freely to choose its own political, social
and economic system, the answer to such questions
would be easy to find. Unfortunately,
that is not so,
which is why we have to meet as often as we do;nmning
the danger of falling into a stale routine.
48. My delegation appeals to the Council to condemn
the ever more numerous acts of fresh aggression and
intimidation
suffered by Nicaragua and the attempt to
blockade it by mining its ports. We also appeal to all the
States concerned to ensure an end to the non-declared
war against Nicaragua and hasten the search for negotiated political solutions to the problems of the region.
49. Mr. MASHINGAIDZE
(Zimbabwe): As this is
the first time Zimbabwe has spoken in the Council since
the sad news of the untimely death of the President of
the Revolutionary
People’s Republic of Guinea, 1 wish
first to express my delegation’s deep sympathy to the
brotherly delegation of Guinea on the passing away of
their beloved and great leader. Both my President and
my Prime Minister, Mr. Banana and Mr. Mugabe, have
already expressed the,deep condolences of the Govemment and people of Zimbabwe to the Government and.
people of Guinea, Because the late President Ahmed
Sekou Toure was a true champion of African independence, freedom and unity, and also because he was an
uncompromising
advocate of non-alignment,
his untimely death is a great loss to the peoples of independent Africa and to the entire non-aligned movement.

53. We must observe with concern that some of the
recently introduced methods of aggression are not only
resulting in extremely high casualties among civilian
populations and causing even greater destabilization
of the economy of Nicaragua, but are also seriously
endangering international
navigation
in the whole
region. As members of the Council know, incidents
resulting in the disruption of maritime traffic have
already been reported, and some of them have resulted
in injury to innocent seamen, not only from Nicaragua,
but from other countries as well.
54. This Council, charged with the primary responsibility for international peace and security, must express
its grave concern at the deteriorating Central American
situation, now seriously threatening regional stability.
It must call upon those responsible for the violation of
international law to’desist from their injurious activities
and to observe strictly the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations requiring all the members of the
international community to refrain in their international
relations from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or ‘political independence of other
States. The Council must also demand the strictest
respect by those concerned of Nicaragua’s right to
espouse and develop its own chosen political system,
without any external threat or interference.

JO. Secondly, Mr. President, allow me to congratulate you very warmly on your assumption of the
stewardship of the Council for the month of April.
Unfortunately,
your presidency does not promise to be
a quiet one, and therefore under you the Council will be
extremely busy. Fortunately, however, your vast diplomatic experience and skill give us confidence that
under your guidance the Council will be able to discharge its difficult responsibilities.
I also wish to
express through you my delegation’s complete satisfaction with the most exemplary and dignified manner in
which the outgoing President, Mr. Arias Stella of Peru,
guided the Council’s work in March. He certainly gave
the Council the benefits of his wisdom and other excellent qualities of leadership and diplomacy.

55. Once again we commend the efforts of the Contadora Group in ‘seeking peaceful solutions to the
probems of Central America. We also note with en6

couragement that, despite enormous threats to itself,
Nicaragua continues to pledge its fullest co-operation
with the Contadora efforts. Even now we are being
assured that the Sandinist Government in Nicaragua
stands ready to engage in dialogue and negotiations. In
this, as also in their determination
to defend and develop a socio-economic
system of their own sovereign
choice, the Government and people of Nicaragua have
a right to demand and to expect the support and help of
the Security Council. How we wish that those.responsible for the mounting regional tension would reciprocate
Nicaragua’s expressed readiness and desire to search
,
for genuine peace in that region. .’

60. The Chinese delegation maintains that in order to
remove the tension in Central America, it is of vital
importance to put an end to all interference and threats
from outside and urges the super-Powers to refrain
from making Central America an arena for their rivalry
and from displaying their military might or resorting to
intimidation
for that purpose. The independence and
sovereignty of Nicaragua and of other Central American countries should be respected, and the affairs of
the various countries of the region should be left to the
respective peoples themselves.
:
61. We give our support to the Contadora Group in its
continued effort to achieve a peaceful and reasonable
solution to the Central American question.

56. Mr. LIANG Yufan (China) [inrerp&tionfiom
Chinese]: First of all, Sir, please allow me to ‘express
my congratulations
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for this month. I am sure
that,. with your rich experience in diplomacy, you will
certainly fulfil this important mission with much success. I wish also to avail myself of this opportunity to
express my admiration and gratitude to your predecessor, Mr. Javier Arias Stella, representative of Peru, for
the outstanding contributions he made during his term
as President of the Security Council in March.

62. The PRESIDENT
[interpretationfrom
Russian]:
The next speaker is the representative
of Guyana.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
63. Mr. SINCLAIR
(Guyana): It gives me special
pleasure to see you, Sir, presiding over the Security
Council in this month of April. You bring to your high
office, inaddition
to your well known brilliance, your
methodical, efficient manner and your mastery of the
art of diplomacy, which together give an assurance that
under your stewardship the Council will effectively and
successfully discharge its responsibilities
this month.
I must also take this opportunity
to express to your
immediate predecessor, Mr. Arias Stella of Peru, my
delegation’s
appreciation
for the very capable and
effective manner in which he conducted the Council’s
business in the month of March.

57. The Chinese’delegation
has listened attentively to
the statements of Mr. Javier Chamorro Mora, representative of Nicaragua, and of representatives from other
countries. And now 1 would like to speak briefly on our
standpoint with regard to the current situation in Central America.
58. Over a period of time the Contadora Group has
been endeavouring unremittingly
to attain a peaceful
settlement to the disputes among the Central American
countries, oppose outside interference and ease the
tension in the region. Colombia, Mexico, Panama and
Venezuela, together with the five countries of Central
America, have engaged in negotiations on several occasions, making it possible for the situation in the region
to develop towards a positive orientation. However,
the independence and sovereignty of Nicaragua and
other Central American countries have been subjected
to continuous military threat from outside, which renders it impossible to alleviate the tension in Central
America. This naturally causes wide concern for the
international community.
I
59. On 15 March 1984 the Co-ordinating Bureau of the
Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries adopted a communique’ on the situation in Central’America
[S/16422,
annex], in which it called for “an immediate end to all
foreign military manoeuvres and activities on Central
American territories and coasts, the installation of foreign military bases as well as all threats, attacks and
hostile acts against Nicaragua”.
The Co-ordinating
Bureau also condemned the “mining of Nicaraguan
seaports which has caused loss of human life and heavy
material damage and’ which endangers international
navigation”.
That communiquk reflects the concern of
the third-world countries in general over the present
situation in Central America.
,.
‘.

64. This is the sixth occasion in the past two years that
the Government of Nicaragua has had cause to complain to the Security Council about aggression against
it. Each complaint since the first has provided the
Council with an opportunity to assess the progressive
deterioration
of the situation ‘in Central America, in
particular in relation to Nicaragua. I do not need to
repeat the elements of the situation described by Nicaragua before the Council; they are indeed well known
to anyone who reads The New York Times or watches
television in New York. But there is no doubt that the
situation is one that must cause concern to all States
truly interested in seeing peace and security return to
Central America.
65. Mr. President, I wish to thank you and your colleagues on the Council for granting our request to participate in this debate. We have not sought this participation to enter into polemics or to engage in slander or
recrimination.
To do so would be to render a disservice
to the cause of peace in the region and to the people of
Nicaragua, whose fortitude and patience are being so
severely tried from one day to the next. At any rate,
do not, we all know who is behind all this military
activity directed against Nicaragua? Who among us is
in any doubt as to where the millions come from to fuel
counter-revolutionary
activity against the Government
7

of Nicaragua, or from where come the arms that are
turned against the people of Nicaragua? Rather, our
request for participation is motivated by our concern at
the dangerous course which events in Central America
are taking, in particular in relation to Nicaragua.

Disputes.’ Those instruments solemnly proclaim the
principles of respect for independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity, non-use of force in international
relations and the peaceful settlement of international
disputes.

66. As a State of the region, Guyana is grieved at the
hostility and aggression that have been unleashed and
are intensifying against the people and the territory of
Nicaragua. We condemn the escalation of that aggression, most recently in the form of the mining of
Nicaragua’.s major ports. Not only does this action
constitute an attempt to blockade Nicaragua; it also
constitutes a reckless endangerment of intemational navigation. We are also alarmed at the steadily increasing militarism in Central America. The people of
that subregion, who have been seeking for so long to
throw off the shackles of poverty, underdevelopment
and ignorance, are undeserving of these excesses,
which only place them on the brink of a full-fledged
armed confrontation with implications not only for
Central America but for the entire Latin American and
Caribbean region.

70. The lesson of recent experience in Central America is that departure from these principles endangers
peace and stability and leads to increased human suffering. My delegation finds puzzling the contradiction
in the attitude of some States which piously call for
respect for those principles in other areas while brazenly violating them in Central America.
71. My delegation sincerely hopes that the Council
will make an effective response to the threat to peace
and security which the Government of Nicaragua has
brought to our attention. We call, in particular,, on
the permanent members of the Council, which have a
special responsibility in respect of the maintenance
of international peace and security, to exert their influence to achieve an immediate end to the hostilities
being directed against Nicaragua and to promote negotiated settlements to whatever disputes may exist between Nicaragua and any of its neighbours. It is time
that the people of Nicaragua were left alone and were
allowed to enjoy their right to live in peace and security,
and to work for the development of their country, free
from outside intervention and interference.

67. My delegation would like to make a solemn appeal, once again, for a turning away from this frenzied
course of arms and more arms towards peaceful, negotiated solutions to the problems facing Central America. The Contadora process is the expression of the
wish of the peoples of Central America for just such
solutions. In their Document of Objectives, adopted in
September 1983, Central American foreign ministers
rejected military solutions to the problems of the region. Outside Powers must respect that wish of the
peoples of Central America.

72. The PRESIDENT [interprezutionfrom Russian]:
The next speaker is the representative of Mexico.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
73. Mr. MARfN BOSCH (Mexico) [interprefarion
from Spanish]: Please accept, Sir, the cordial congratulations of the Mexican delegation on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security CounciLWe are quite
sure that you will prove able to lead to a successful
conclusion the Council’s work during the month which
is now beginning. Allow me also to congratulate the
representative of Peru on his wise conduct of the work
of the Council, which last month had the benefit of his
diplomatic tact -and international experience.

68. The activities of the Contadora Group enjoy
world-wide support. Guyana, for its part, would like to
reiterate its support for that effort. We believe that the
Contadora,process offers a sound practical basis for
negotiated solutions to the problems which Central
American States have among themselves, solutions
that would respect the independence of the States concerned and also take account of their own needs and
interests. We call on ail Statesto intensify their support
for that effort, not merely in their rhetoric. Contadora
already has more than enough verbal support. What is
more important now is that States refrain from actions
which go against the goals and purposes of the Contadora Group or frustrate their achievement.

74. I thank the members of the Council for granting
me this opportunity to convey to the Council once again
the Mexican Government’s profound concern at the
steadily worsening situation in Central America. It is
with apprehension that we see the principles of the
Charter and international law being violated with
alarming frequency in that region and the persistent
tendency to coerce the free exercise of peoples’ right to
self-determination.

69. The activities of the Contadora Group have their
roots in the Charter of the United Nations and in the
solemn instruments which the General Assembly has
adopted over the years governing relations among
States-instruments such as the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States ‘in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations,’ the Declaration on the Inadmissibility of Intervention and Interference in the Internal Affairs of States,’ and the Manila
Declaration on the Peaceful Settlement of International

75. The efforts of the Contadora Group to bring peace
to Central America are based on compliance with the
principles of international law which guide the conduct of States. The document containing 21 objectives,
signed in September of 1983, emphasizes 12 of those
principles. They include the self-determination of peo8

ples, non-intervention, refraining from the threat or
use of force and the prohibition of terrorism and subversion.

79. It is precisely that “increase in acts of destabilization” that has given rise to this meeting of the Council.
The gravity of the list of facts read out by the representative of Nicaragua in his statement last Friday
[2525rh meeting] derives from the qualitative’increase
represented by the present level of military actions and
acts of destabilization being carried out against his
country. In accordance with what has been stated in the
Security Council and with what has been extensively
reported by the media, this is not merely a matter of
facilitating the training of counter-revolutionaries
by providing them with money and weapons, nor of
encouraging mercenary pilots to commit acts of terrorism. What is now being attempted, apparently, is
nothing less than the imposition of a naval blockade
against Nicaragua with a view to eroding its economic
infrastructure still further.

76. A few days ago, on 28 March, Mr. Miguel de la
Madrid, President of Mexico, said in Brasllia that the
experience of the Contadora Group shows that:
“It is possible for countries bordering on the area of
conflict and generally interested in the solution of
problems that might eventually involve them to play
an active and important role in restoring ‘dialogue
and negotiation, thus relieving tension and restoring
peace. It is equally important that the countries
involved, directly or indirectly, in a regional conflict should refrain from taking action that could exacerbate that conflict, should renounce hegemonistic
aspirations and should not engage in interference or
destabilization actions.”

80. The Security Council has received reports on the
laying of mines near Nicaragua’s main ports. As a result, a number of merchant vessels have been damaged
and fishing boats destroyed, and the navigation and
shipping of a State Member of the United Nations have
thus been disrupted.

President de la Madrid also said:
“Outsiders are attempting to solve conflicts in
Central America. The various paths of development
which its countries have chosen are being placed by
those outsiders in the context of a global confrontation which distorts them. The exacerbation of tensions and confrontations could lead, if we do not
studiously avoid it, to a generaiized conflict that
would endanger the security of Latin America and
beyond. Latin America needs a stable and pluralistic
Central America which can fit into the patterns of
co-operation and enrich’the joint endeavours of the
region.

81. In October last year, when considering the critical
situation in another part of the world, the Council categorically- opposed the disruption of international
shipping and the blockading of ports. In resolution 540
(1983) it affirmed, in paragraph 3, “the right of free
navigation and commerce in international waters’* and
called upon the belligerents “to cease immediately all
hostilities in the region of the Gulf, including all sealanes, navigable waterways, harbour works, terminals,
offshore installations and all ports with direct or indirect access to the sea”.

“The path to achieving that is clearly one of dialogue and negotiation, based on respect for national
identities and forms of expression+ and it is certainly
not the path of confrontation and conflict, of destabilizing actions or the imposition of models designed
elsewhere by those who think that they know better
than the Central Americans themselves what Central,
Americans want and should have.”

82. What is happening in Central America clearly refleets the major choices facing the international community: on the one hand, the absurd attempt to achieve
peace by waging war, and on the other, the negotiated
and rational solution of existing conllicts; the arms race
on one hand and the quest for just balances and lasting
settlements of contemporary problems on the other.

77. The objectives agreed on by the Central American
countries include the prohibition of the stationing on
their territory of foreign military bases or any other
forms of foreign military interference, as well as the
prohibition of the use of their territory by persons,
organizations or groups seeking to destabilize the
Governments of Central American countries, and the
refusal to provide them with or to permit them to receive military or logistical support.

83. The military actions of destabilization and economic blockade taking place in Central America are in
flagrant opposition to the peace-making efforts that the
countries of the Contadora Group have been making for
more than a year. Therefore President de la Madrid, on
his recent visit to Colombia, stated:
“Contadora is a Latin American effort to resolve a
Latin American conflict. The region can find its own
answers to the problems affecting it. We reject the
use of force: genuine peace and democracy in the
area can be achieved only through abandonment of
the temptation to resort to violence and, through
effective promotion of the full development of our
nations. For Central America, Contadora is not just
one choice among many; it is the only possible way
lawfully to achieve harmonious co-existence among

78. In the joint statement signed in Bogota on
27 March, the Presidents of Colombia and Mexico
stated that while the Contadora process “had definitely
contributed to avoiding the outbreak of war in the isthmus and to generating the elements for honourable and
equitable negotiations”, they continue to be worried
“at the increase in acts of destabilization, shows of
force and the violation of human rights”.
9

the countries of the isthmus. Because we are right,
we shall not flinch from achieving our aims.”
84. Thus there are two opposing views of the real state
of affairs in Central America and of its politics. While
the Contadora countries propose disarmament in the
area, respect. for the self-determination
of ,each people.and measures to achieve the economic and social
development of the region, there are‘ those who continue to‘hold an outmoded view of international relations, according to which militarism,
pressures and a
war economy are the best guarantees of their3 own security and strategic designs.
_.

ates its commitment
to continue its effort, side by side
with the Contadora countries, to prevent widespread
violence from spreading in the area and to help build the
bases for permanent and long-term stability. The success of Contadora, however, depends on the political
will and the assistance of the other countries involved in
the ,co’ntlict. It is now up to them.
90. The PRESIDENT
[inte@retationfiom
Russian]:
The next speaker is the representative, of the Syrian
Arab Republic. 1’invite him to take a place at the Council table.and to make his
I statement.
91.

(Syrian Arab Republic) [interAllow,me at the outset to congratulate you; Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of-the Security Council for this month. We are
convinced that thanks to your experience, objectivity
and wisdom the Council will succeed, despite all.the
obstacleswe expect, in putting an end to the imperialist
plot being directed against Nicaragua and other States
in Central America and in other regions of the world.
I also‘take this occasion to express to your predecessor,
the representative of Peru, our admiration for the ideal
way in which he conducted the work of the ,Security
Council in .a month that all agree was fraught with
challenges to the preservation ‘and enforcement. of
international relations as prescribed by the Charter.

85.. History has frequently demonstrated the limitations and fallacies of such ‘an” approach. Rigid military thinking has often endedup affecting those who
apply it and has turned against’its authors. When the
Contadora Group, proposes the conclusion of agreements in accordance with the law, it is espousing, within the Central American sphere, the ideals and purposes
of the internatipnal
community
on a universal level:
dialogue and respect for norms, general and complete
disarmament,
economic and social development,
the
elimination of confrontation and a gradual relaxation of
tension. The work of the Contadora Group has received
the support of the international
community precisely
because of this complete identity between the universal
principles of co-existence among States and its objectives of peace and stability.

Mr..EL-FATTAL

pre(utionfiom

Arabic]:

92. The Security Council is’meeting to consider the
extremely dangerous situation facing Nicaragua and
the people’s Sandinist revolution. Nicaragua requested
the convening of the Council in the wake of the startling
escalation of acts of aggression against it. This escalation is designed to eliminate the Sandinist revolution by
all means, and in the first place by overt and covert
military force. It is of great concern to us that this
escalation of aggression is taking place simultaneously
with the attempts, which began more than a year ago, to
solve the crisis in Central America by peaceful means,
through the efforts and,,initiatives
of the Contadora
Group. These efforts and initiatives are based on understanding and on principles which, if they were allowed
to be implemented,
would restore to the region stability, peaceful coexistence and co-operation between
the States thereof. Those principles would also recognize that the States of the region are entitled to selfdetermination
and. to pluralism based on the right of
peoplesto choose their social and economic systems in
full freedom, without any external pressure or intervention.

86. A universal consensus has been confirmed here
with respect to the fact that the conflicts in Central
America originate in the economic and social conditions experienced by the peoples of the region. At this
stage no one could venture to define this crisis in terms
of ,a, mechanical reflex of East-West confrontations.
87, That being the conviction of the Government of
Mexico from the very start, and as it is firmly supported
by the.Contadora Group,-let,us act accordingly. Let us
use all the political, diplomatic and .material resources
available to us to put an end to the hostilities, establish just and lasting agreements among the parties and
engage in a great reconstruction effort for the countries
of Central America with,the determined assistance of
the international
community,
The time has come for
everysne to .assume his responsibility.
88. A just and lasting solution of the Central American
crisis will be achieved only through genuine commitment and participation
by all States, in particular the
permanent members of the Security. Council, whose
responsibility
for the maintenance, of international
peace and security., must be exercised in. accordance
with the principles of the Charter and within the institutional framework, laid down by, it.

93. Unfortunately,
however,, despite all the effo,rts
exerted‘ by the Contadora Group, despite all the
agreements approved by all parties in Central America,
we are ‘firmly convinced from what is taking place on
the scene that the United,States
is doing everything
possible to place obstacles in the path of peaceful
means. Indeed, it is striving to destroythem from their
very inception; it is trying to,concentrate on the use of
military force in order to undermine the independence
of the countries of central America, with Nicaragua at

89. For all these’reasons., the international
commu-.
nity cannot remain passive in the face of the escalation
of military actions; destabilization and ecqnomic blockading now going on against Nicaragua. Mexico reiter10

the forefront. Nicaragua has chosen a democratic political system, ensuring economic and social development in the interest of all the people of the country,
without discrimination. It seems, however, that the
policy of the revolutionary regime of Nicaragua conflicts with so-called American interests and that Nicaragua’s non-alignment is contradictory with the aims
of the expanding American hegemony and the imposition of this hegemony on all the countries of the region,
without exception. It is as if the region, with all its
States and peoples, its riches and expectations, were
the property of the American Administration; as if fate
had willed the countries of Central America.to remain
satellites in the orbit of imperialism; as if this subordination, rejected by Nicaragua, were an irreversible-natural law or inescapable physical law. It is, also, as if the
huge capacities of the United States could be harmed by
a regime which has chosen for itself freedom, independence and non-alignment, a regime that refuses to take
orders from abroad.
,
94. The fact is that the United States rejects the presence of progressive regimes, wherever they are, any
progressive regimes that draw their legitimacy from the
will of the peoples concerned. In Nicaragua, the United
States is working for the return of Somozism.-,The
United States may have condemned Somoza after his
downfall, but it has not condemned Somozism and is
working to restore it under another name.

force and the negation of all the achievements of the
masses. This is, moreover, accompanied by acts of
provocation in the form of military manoeuvres which
will continue until 1988.
97. In addition to all that; the newest form of escalation has been the blockade of Nicaraguan ports by ‘the
use of mines. There have also been acts of sabotage
against the economic infrastructure that Nicaragua
needs to feed its people and,’ by the efforts of its sons
and daughters, to‘build in the country a society providing for every individual dignity and freedom and real
political participation. It is these acts of aggression that
prompted the representative of Nicaragua to put these,
questions to the international community:
“May I ask the international community whether the
Nicaraguan people are .notjustifiably alarmed at the
large-scale military manoeuvres which have been
going on uninterruptedly . . . in the territories and
waters of Central America and the waters of the
Caribbean. May I ask the international community if
the Nicaraguan people are not justifiably alarmed at
the criminal mining of their ports, which endangers
international navigation and makes explicit the economic blockade begun a number of years ago. May
I also ask the international community ‘if the Nicaraguan people are not justifiably alarmed at the
constant efforts of the American Administration to
obtain funds necessary to finance the mercenaries
of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA).” [See

95. We agree with an American author who has
pointed out Washington’s obsession about Nicaragua.
Professor Richard H. Ullman, in an article published in
Foreign Afluirs, the fall 1983 issue, pointed out the
psychological symptoms plaguing the American mentality. He wrote:

2525th meeting,

par-a. 8.1

98. On 30 March we listened also to the statement by
the American delegation, which proved that the United
States is intent upon’ committing acts of aggression
under the banner of “achieving democracy in Nicaragua’ ’ , as though American democracy-the bankruptcy of which is-proven daily in every field, and which
is indicted by widespread poverty, unemployment,
drug use and control of United States foreign policy by
the Zionist lobby-were a common product which
could simply-be manufactured and imitated by devel-’
oping countries. I confess to the United States delegation that we are not such manufacturers of miracles; we
cannot build a democracy similar to that of the United
States, a democracy where the Government has been
snatched by a band of Zionists who impose conditions
on it for the destruction of our people.

“The Reagan Administration is at war with Nicaragua. Like other wars the United States has fought
since 1945, it is an undeclared war. It is also a small
war. No U.S. serviceman has yet fired a shot, but
,American-made bullets from American-made guns
are kilhng Nicaraguans, and the President of the
United States has made the demise of the present
Nicaraguan Government an all-but-explicit-aim of his
foreign policy.
I
“Indeed, the President and his closest advisers
se&m obsessed with Nicaragua, and their obsession
has infected their Government at all levels.?’

99. ,We warn the Council that the Somozist “democracy’*- which was condoned by the United States for
approximately half a century, ‘which .w& ultimately
destroyed by the Sandinist revolution, and which the
United States is now trying to re-impose-is nothing
but a propaganda pretext on which to commit aggression against Nicaragua. The United States delegation
has not said one word to address the fears of Nicaragua,
which are the result of pressures and State terrorism
practised by America, both directly and through
agents. Our delegation ‘is thus more convinced than
ever that the United States does not stop at interven-

96. We listened very carefully to the statement made
on Friday last by the representative of Nicaragua. That
statement clearly indicated Nicaragua’s genuine fears
concerning aggressive acts perpetrated against it,
including the concentration of land, sea and air forces
near the borders of Nicaragua and in its territorial
waters, as well ‘as acts of sabotage carried out inside
Nicaragua by counter-revolutionaries, funded by. the
United Statesand with the participition of agents of the
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA). The aim of all these
activities is the overthrow of the Nicaraguan regime by
11

tion in the internal affairs of Nicaragua; it is trying
to make the world believe that all acts of aggression
against Nicaragua are acceptable and legitimate. When
the Council was considering the American invasion of
Grenada, the United States delegation attempted to
legitimize the unacceptable by saying, “The prohibitions against the use of force in the Charter [of the
United Nations] are contextual, not absolute.” [See
2491st meeting, para. 53.1 Whoever spoke those words
ought without question to be awarded the Nobel Peace
Prize, just as it was awarded to Begin. If that theory
were correct, we do not see why there would be any
need for a Charter of the United Nations, for the United
Nations, for the Security Council, or for the meeting the
Council is now holding to consider the complaint of
Nicaragua.

there is a refusal to solve the Central American crisis by
peaceful means, through the implementation
of agreements achieved by the efforts of the Contadora Group.
To say that there is no connection between United
States military activities in the region on the one hand
and United States pressure against Nicaragua on the
other is to stray very far indeed from the principle of
peaceful coexistence, peace and the peaceful settlement of disputes. It is nothing but an attempt to bring
Nicaragua to its knees by force, to make the Nicaraguan revolution give up its principles. This is inexcusable hypocrisy and resembles the other hypocrisy of the
American Administration,
that the crimes committed
by the CIA-which
arrogates to itself and its helpers
and its agents the role of a national liberation movement
-are acts of national liberation which the international
community should acquiesce with and accept. We in
the Syrian Arab Republic know full well the methods
used by imperialism to drain our region and to continue
to make it the arena for American-Israeli
wars waged
against the Arabs, the Palestinian, Syrian or Lebanese
people.

100. If we compare the statement made by the Nicaraguan delegation with that made by the United States
delegation, we can see that Nicaragua was appealing to
the world, and to the Security Council in particular, to
put a stop to the acts of aggression directed against it,
while the United States merely insulted the intelligence
of the world by slandering Nicaragua, as though Nicaragua were able to compete with the United States in
imposing its hegemony on the countries of the region.
But the international
community
knows the truth; it
stands by those who speak the truth, those who are in
the right; it defends the weak against the strong. I hope
that my optimism is not excessive.

104. The crisis in Central America is an integral part
of the United States plot to extend American hegemonism to ail the strategic areas of the world. Therefore,
the current events in Central America are of direct
concern to us. We cannot consider those events to be
geographically
distant from us, for the planner and
executant of the events is located geographically near
to all non-aligned States. That planner makes no distinction among continents; its aims and its methods are
everywhere the same.

101. As a small, non-aligned State, the Syrian Arab
Republic once again renews its full commitment to the
resolutions adopted at the Seventh Conference of
Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries on the subject of Central America. Through its
arrogance, Washington has constantly placed itself in
confrontation
with the non-aligned countries, which
have publicly condemned more than once its actions
against Nicaragua, the aim of which is to undermine the
stability of that country, to destroy its Government, to
attack it from all sides, and finally to launch a military
invasion against it.

105. We therefore call on all States to do all they can
to frustrate the plots and acts of aggression against
Nicaragua and other States. The United States must
immediately
stop using force, whether direct or indirect, against Nicaragua.
The United States must
shoulder its responsibility
as a permanent member of
the Security Council; it must respect the independence.
of the States of Central America and not entangle them
in local wars; it must not interfere in their internal
affairs.

102. It has become clear that American intervention
in Latin America is now the rule, not the exception. The
record of the United States is replete with proof of this.
The series of acts of terror and aggression against Nicaragua and other States began in 1948 and has continued to this day; there is no need to go into that
record. I should like merely to mention that history has
proved that one of the faces of American democracy is
aggression; if not, it is a tendency, and if not a tendency
then an instinct. That is extremely dangerous.

106. We also caution certain States participating
in
the conflict in Central America that their dependence
on Israeli-made
weapons and aircraft and Israeli
expertise in frustrating the aspirations of the Arab
people and consolidating the Zionist colonizing occupation in the Arab nation is but direct assistance to our
enemies. We hope they will stop opening up their
markets to Israeli weapons of destruction
which
provide economic and financial assistance to our
enemies.

103. In declaring its total solidarity with the people and Government
of Nicaragua,
my delegation
expresses its deep regret at the fact that the United
States is carrying out, either directly or through other
States, acts which are in violation of the principles of
international law and of the Charter. The acts of aggression perpetrated daily against Nicaragua prove that

107. In conclusion, we must support Nicaragua’s
appeal to the Governments of the world to give the
people of Nicaragua the necessary technical and
miftary
means to defend itself against the State
terrorism unleashed by the United States against the
people and the Government
of Nicaragua. We are
-12

“I would, however, bring to the attention of the
Council and others who are interested the fact that
at this time, as we meet here, several thousand
Miskito Indians are fleeing from the Sandy Bay
Norte area of Nicaragua. This is north of Puerto
Cabezas, about which we have heard a good deal.”

convinced that peace will not be restored to Central
America until the United States takes its hands off that
region and stops its intervention.
108.

Mr. CHAMORRO

MORA (Nicaragua) [interMy Government decided to
request the convening of this lofty body in the light of
the grave escalation that has taken place in the past
few weeks as a result of the acts of aggression waged
against my country by a great Power-a
permanent
member of this Council-in
a dirty undeclared but
open war. We did so in order fundamentally
to
denounce the new aspects of this aggression, involving
mainly the mining of our ports, in violation of the
principles of the Charter, the norms of international
law and free international
trade and navigation.
pret&ion

from

Spanish]:

[Ibid.,

paru. 82.1

113. On that same day, 30 March, Piraiia gun-boats
armed with mortars and high-calibre machine guns
attacked the port of Corinto, resulting in an intense
exchange of fire, which became a virtual naval battle,
with forces of the Sandinist Navy. On 31 March, the
explosion of another mine seriously damaged the
engine room and electrical system of a Japanese ship,
the Taushiro Mat-u, which had been loading bananas at
the wharf of the port of Corinto.

109. That is why I wish to take this occasion to put
clearly on record the gravity of this situation, which
with each passing day is being aggravated as this
great Power, the United States of America, seeks to
press on recklessly towards its ultimate objective,
which, by its own admission, is the overthrow of the
people’s Sandinist revolution. I wish also to take this
occasion also to refer to certain comments made by
some prominent
politicians,
not just in the United
States but also in other countries.

114.

This

morning we read a cable containing a
issued to the press at San Jose, Costa
Rica, to the effect that a mercenary organization
sponsored by the CIA for its covert operations-and
it
bears clarification
that often mercenaries do not
necessarily have to be of nationalities different from
that of the country against which they are operating;
indeed, many Nicaraguans have been recruited and
paid by the CIA-had
mined a 50-kilometre length of
Lake Nicaragua, from the Sapoa River to the town of
Colon. Lake Nicaragua is where the United States
had always intended to build an inter-oceanic canal
through Nicaragua to enable communication
between
the Atlantic and Pacific. That indeed was the occasion
for the first United States intervention, in 1854, which
I mentioned previously.
communique’

110. With regard to the various acts of aggression, on
28 March the Panamanian
ship Homin No. 7 was
attacked by Piraiia speed-boats from Honduras, using
50-mm machine guns, while it was loading sugar in the
port of Corinto. Three helicopters also took part,
directing rocket fire at the target. On 30 March a
group of former Somozist guards attacked the indigenous Miskito community of Nimayen, near Sandy Bay,
60 kilometres south of the Honduran border on Nicaragua’s Atlantic coast, kidnapping some members of
its population.

115. In the north-east of Nicaragua, in the department of Zelaya, heavy fighting is now taking place
between CIA ,mercenary forces and Sandinist forces.
Those mercenaries, after their forays, withdraw to
Honduran
territory
and, re-equipped,
return for
action.

111. In this particular case, I believe that members of
the Council will be interested to note that in her
statement on Friday [2525th meeting] the representative of the United States referred to internal matters
of my Government. She spoke specifically of the case
of the Miskitos, declaring that on that very day she had
received information that a large number of Miskitos
had been seen fleeing the Sandy Bay sector towards
Honduran
territory.
That we did not have that
information at the moment-information
that she had
received so expeditiously-indicates
to my delegation
that communications
between the United States Government, the United States Mission to the United
Nations and the CIA are co-ordinated and immediate.

116. In the next few days we expect another invasion
from Honduran territory of the north-central sector of
Nicaragua, which is the strategic sector over which
they have been trying to gain control through the
various invasions they have launched.
117. In connection
with the acts of aggression
committed, the dangers of those actions, the mining of
the ports and the sophisticated hardware used, I wish
to read from the press conference held by the
Nicaraguan
Chief of Staff, Commander
Joaquin
Cuadra, who stated that:
“In the past 10 days Nicaraguan frogmen have
managed to blow up more than 27 mines in the
course of difficult missions off the coast of Corinto,
on the Pacific.

112. To refresh the memories of Council members
and to inform, those who were not present at that
meeting of the Council or who have not had an
opportunity
to read the verbatim record that has
already been distributed, I shall quote three lines from
Mrs. Kirkpatrick’s
statement:

“Those mines had been laid on a large scale with
sophisticated
technical apparatus by the United
13

States Government, using commando units in the
service of the American CIA.

thing but the security measures that the United States
might be obliged to take were quite another and in his
opinion did not impede the Contadora process.

“Three kinds of mines have been detected in
Nicaraguan waters, namely those which explode on
direct contact with a ship; those which are detonated by the sound of motors; and those which are
activated by the pressure waves of a vessel passing
near by.”

123. I had intended to read out verbatim the relevant
part of the statements made by the Presidents of
Mexico and Colombia during President de la Madrid’s
visit to Colombia, but since the representative of
Mexico has already read extensively from the text,
there is no need for me to do so too.

The Chief of Staff of the Sandinist People’s Army goes
on to say that, in laying mines in our ports, especially
in the port of Cot-into, Washington could even be using
submarines and small submersibles, which’amounts to
naval terrorism by the CIA, using Pirafia speedboats
against Nicaraguan and foreign shipping.

124. On the other hand, The New York Times of
31 March reported a statement made by Senator
Edward Kennedy which I feel is interesting in the light
of Nicaragua’s complaint about United States aggression. He said:

118. The use of such speedboats-which has become
a frequent phenomenon-armed with heavy machine
guns, 20-mm guns and grenade launchers, could be in
keeping with the classic American tactic of a mother
ship, because it cannot be ruled out that those boats
may have come from an American frigate stationed
40 miles off the coast of Sandino and Corinto.

“The Administration is slowly but surely putting
our ‘combat troops into harm’s way, into a war in El
Salvador. What next? Some guerrilla is going to
shoot down’one of those U.S. helicopters, the pilot
will be killed or taken hostage, and President
Reagan will go on the stump declaring that it is an
act of war. One secret war in Nicaragua is not
enough. One secret war is not too much for us.”

119. Commander Joaquin Cuadra went on to say:

125. I am sure that Council members and delegates
will have had an opportunity to read this morning the
positions on various matters, including foreign and
domestic policy, set out in The New York Times by the
Democratic candidates. I wish simply to sum up the
points made by the three candidates about Central
America. All three, without exception, advocate
putting an end to support for covert operations against
Nicaragua. All three, without exception, agree that
military manoeuvres in Honduras should be halted. All
three, without exception, agree that military aid to El
Salvador should be tied to improvements in human
rights and an end to the activities of the death squads.

“Those speedboats have motors of more than
200 horsepower and can travel at speeds of over
120 kilometres per hour; their use is intended to
distract Nicaraguan defences in order to facilitate
the laying of mines through the use of equipment
provided by the United States Government.”
120. These activities, which in both the planning and
the operational phases are carried out under the
auspices of a great Power, the United States, ‘are of
concern not only to my Government but also to
serious people and responsible Governments as well
as to those who realize the danger posed by those
reckless actions in which the United States Govemment continues to engage against my Government.

126. We would like to know what we can understand
from all this. Why is President Reagan the only person
who disagrees with those positions? He is pressing
ahead with sowing death and destruction in Central
America and escalating military activities there.

121, In this regard I wish to refer to some statements
made by the Secretary-General on 21 March, during
his visit to Mexico, and by President de la Madrid and
reported on in the international press. When asked
about the presence of United States warships off
Nicaragua, the Secretary-General condemned any
action that might result in aggravating the Central
American crisis. Later he stated at a press conference
at the airport that the Contadora Group deserved
support not only in words but in deeds. For his part,
President de la Madrid on the same occasion declared
his opposition to the escalation of violence, which was
not at all conducive to peace negotiations, pointing out
that the members of the Contadora Group and the
peoples of Latin America also shared this sentiment.

127. I shall end by reading extracts from two
advertisements, published on 25 March and 1April, by
one of the Democratic candidates, Senator Gary Hart,
concerning President Reagan’s policies in Central
America. The first, published in The New York Times
on 25 March, said:
“The policies of the Reagan Administration in
Central America have set the stage for another Viet
Nam. This Administration is fueling an ever-widening conflict . . . a conflict that is taking a tremendous toll in the lives of innocent civilians . . . a
conflict that is destroying the economies of all the
countries in the region . . . a conflict that could lead
to direct U.S. involvement.

122. Yesterday I pointed out that Reagan’s new
Special Envoy to Central America had publicly stated
that, the activities of the Contadora Group were one
14

.,

“These are reckless and inhumane policies and
they are not worthy of support. They must be
reversed . . . before it is too late.

“Too often America has been required to use its
military power to bolster these regimes. Too often
American lives have been lost in the process.

“The commitment
of U.S. military
force to
Central America cannot be the answer to the
problems in Central America, as it was not the
answer in Viet Nam.

“Right now such short-sighted and reckless’policies have ‘put us on the edge of disaster in Central
America. Ronald Reagan has been using military
force to deal with problems that are essentially
social, political and economic.

“Since last year, the Reagan Administration,
under the guise of manoeuvres, has maintained a
regular military presence in Honduras which has
already resulted in the loss of an American life.

“Concentrating
large numbers of U.S. combat
troops in ‘Honduras
. . . funding guerrilla operations against Nicaragua
. . . pouring arms and
military equipment directly into El Salvador and
indirectly into Guatemala, the Reagan Administra-:
tion is setting the stage for direct U.S. involvement.
If it continues unchecked, Ronald Reagan will lead
us into another unwinnable war.

“As a first step on the path to peace, I have called
for the immediate withdrawal of U.S. combat troops
from Central America”.
Next I shall quote from the advertisement
as follows:

of 1 April,
“That is .why I have called for the immediate
withdrawal of U.S. combat troops from Central
America.”

“I have travelled throughout Central America and
Southeast Asia . . . I have seen the pain, the
starvation, the dying . . . I have seen people in a lifeand-death struggle simply to survive from day to
day.

128. I should like to ask the United States delegation
yet again whether Mr. Hart, Mr. Kennedy, Mr. Mondale and Mr. Jackson are the Communists that it is
afraid of and whom it does not believe. If they are not,
what is its explanation for the fact that they have a
clear, well-defined position on the grave consequences
of warmongering by the present American Administration in Central America, and in particular against my
country?

“Poverty . . . hunger . . . disease . . . these are the
root causes of political and social unrest in the
developing world. Suffering people will fight to end
their suffering. . . . If they have no other alternative,
they will turn to violence.
“All too frequently in the past America’s leaders
have failed to respond to the human crisis in these
countries. Rather than working for fundamental
change to -improve the lives of the vast majority,
they have sided with the privileged few in defense
of the status quo. . . . How often have we. seen
our country support regimes that maintained their
power by force and repression?

The meeting

1

rose at 6.20 p.m.

NOTES

’ General Assembly.resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.
2 General Assembly resolution 36/103, annex.
’ General Assembly resolution 37110, annex.

15

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nattons publications
ma? be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consulf your bookstore or write to: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geflem
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sent en vente dam les librairies et les agences depositaims du
monde entier. Informez-vous
aup& de votre libraire ou adressez-vous I : Nations Unies. Section
des ventes. New York ou Geneve.

COMO

CONSEGCIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las pubhcaciones
de las Naciones Unidas estan en venta en librctias y casas distribuidoras
en
t&as panes del mundo. Cons&e a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas. Section de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations,

New York

00400

90.61313-Jatlurty

1993-2.050
