VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Requests the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees to continue to perform these functions.
83rd plenary meeting
30 November 1976

31/37.

National experience in promoting the cooperative movement

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2459 (XXIII) of 20 December 1968 and 3273 (XXIX) of 10 December 1974
and Economic and Social Council resolution 1668 (LII)
of 1 June 1972,
Recalling the objective expressed in Article 55 of the
Charter of the United Nations to promote higher standards of living, full employment and conditions of economic and social progress and development for the
purpose of favourably influencing the welfare of peoples
as well as the peaceful and friendly relations among
nations,
Recalling the Declaration and the Programme of
Action for the Establishment of a New International
Economic Order9 and the Charter of Economic Rights
and Duties of States,10
Recognizing that the expansion of the co-operative
movement in the promotion of social and economic
progress is closely linked to structural and institutional
reforms which, inter alia, aim at equitable distribution
of income, popular participation in the development
process and equality of opportunity to contribute to
and benefit from the fruits of development,
Underlining the appeal to States contained in article 6 of the Declaration on Social Progress and Development11 that social progress and development require the participation of all members of society in
productive and socially useful labour and the establishment, in conformity with human rights and fundamental
freedoms and with the principles of justice and the
social function of property, of forms of ownership of
land and of the means of production which preclude
any kind of exploitation of man, ensure equal rights
to property for all and create conditions leading to
genuine equality among people,
Welcoming the recommendation contained in the
Programme of Action12 adopted by the Tripartite World
Conference on Employment, Income Distribution, Social Progress and the International Division of Labour,
held at Geneva from 4 to 17 June 1976, that greater
importance should be given to the development of cooperatives within the framework of national measures,
Taking note of the progress made by the co-operative
movement, both in developed and developing countries, and the contribution made by it in promoting
collective self-reliance and mutually beneficial interdependence,
Recognizing the social and economic benefits accruing from producers', consumers', credit, multipurpose
and other kinds of co-operatives to all sections of society
and, more particularly, to the middle-income and lowincome groups,
3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI).
3281 (XXIX).
11 Resolution 2542 (XXIV).
12 See E/5857.

Stressing the need to assist the rapid development
of the multipurpose co-operative movement, particularly
in the agricultural and allied rural sectors of economic
and social life in the developing countries,
Drawing attention to the lasting benefits enjoyed by
large sections of society in urban and rural areas in
many parts of the world owing to the noteworthy expansion in co-operative housing projects in the last three
decades, and the considerable potential for further activity in this field,
Bearing in mind the positive experience which many
countries have already gained in implementing agrarian
reforms and in promoting the co-operative movement
and which would be conducive to the establishment of
the new international economic order and to the realization of the objectives of the Second United Nations
Development Decade, 18
l. Recognizes the necessity to pay due attention
to the international exchange of experience in the growth
and further development and diversification of the cooperative movement;
2. Invites Governments and relevant specialized
agencies to report to the Secretary-General on their experience in promoting the co-operative movement and
in building the necessary socio-economic infrastructure
for it;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with Member States, to submit to the General Assembly
at its thirty-third session, through the Economic and
Social Council, a report on their national experience in
promoting the co-operative movement and on the results
so far achieved by international co-operation in this
field;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-third session the item entitled "National experience in achieving far-reaching social and economic
changes for the purpose of social progress" and to consider under this item the report of the Secretary-General
on national experience in promoting the co-operative
movement.
83rd plenary meeting
30 November 1976
31/38.

National experience in achieving far.
reaching social and economic changes for
the purpose of social progress

The General Assembly,
. Guided by the desire to promote a better quality of
hfe, full employment and other conditions for social
and economic development,
Recalling the Declaration on Social Progress and
Development,
Mindful of the provisions of the Declaration and the
Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order 14 as well as the Charter
of Economic Rights and Duties of States, 15
Bearing in mind resolutions 1581 A (L) of 21 May
1971, 1667 (LII) of I June 1972 and 1746 (LIV)
of 16 May 1973, in which the Economic and Social
Council emphasized the importance of fundamental

9 Resolutions

10 Resolution

95

13 See

E/5597.
Resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI).
w Resolution 3281 (XXIX).

14

96

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

structural socio-economic changes for the strengthening
of national independence and achievemei:it of t~e ultimate goals of social progr~ss and con~idered it ~ppropriate to study the experience of various countries
in this field,
Recalling that in resolution 3273 (XXIX) of 10 December 1974 th~ General Assembly reaffirmed the right
of every Stat~ to carry out fundamenta\ social and economic changes for the purpose ~f social progress an~
the necessity to continue the studies of national experience in this field,
Desirous of securing a speedy and complete removal
of obstacles to the economic and social progress of peoples, especially colonialism, ra~ism, racial. discrimination, apartheid, aggression, forei~n occupation_ or_ domination and all forms of inequahty and expl01tat1on of
peoples,
Convinced that peaceful coexist~nce and friend~y
relations among States would contribute to economic
and social development,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General16
prepared on the basis of information received from
Governments on national experience in achieving farreaching social and economic changes,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of all nations to
pursue freely their econo_mic and social ?ev.elopment
and to exercise full sovereignty over all their nches and
natural resources;
2. Considers that the elimination of all forms of
subjugation and dependence such as aggression, foreign
occupation, colonialism, apartheid, racism and ~11. forms
of racial discrimination constitutes a prereqmsite for
social and economic advancement;
3. Emphasizes that the carrying out of internal ~asic
socio-economic changes designed to safeguard national
independence and to ensure speedy improvement of the
well-being of the population is of great importance for
the achievement of social and economic progress;
4. Re-emphasizes the advisability of holding, within
the programm~ of advi_sory services, regula~ interregional and reg10nal s_emmars to study the natlon_al e~perience of developmg and developed countries m
carrying out far-reaching social and economic changes
for the purpose of social progress;
5. Calls upon the Commission for Social Development, the Economic and Social Council and the regio~al
commissions to pay special attention, on a regular basis,
to studies and analyses of national experience in carrying
out far-reaching socio-economic changes for the purpose
of social progress;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-third session, through
the Commission for Social Development and/or the
Economic and Social Council, a comprehensive report
prepared on the basis of information received from
Governments on national experience in carrying out
far-reaching changes for the purpose of social progress;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-third session the item entitled "National experience in achieving far-reaching social and economic
changes for the purpose of social progress".
83rd plenary meeting
30 November 1976
16 A/10166.

31/39.

Preservation and further development of
cultural values

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3026 A (XXVII) of 18 December 1972 and 3148 (XXVIII) of 14 December
1973,
Referring to the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, 17 in particular to article 15,
which reaffirms the right of everyone to participate_ in
the preservation and development of culture, and bemg
aware that one of the bases of international co-operation
in the cultural field is mutual respect for cultural integrity,
Considering that the cultural dimension of development is integral to the whole development process,
Convinced that the development of cultural values,
cultural exchange and co-operation contribute.to~ ?etter
understanding among States, peol?les an~ mdivi?uals
and contribute to the strengthemng of mternatlonal
peace and security, which is an important pre-condition
for socio-economic progress,
Stressing the need to evolve a harmonious blend of
the cultural values of the traditional civilizations with
developments in science and technology,
Profoundly convinced of the urgent need to develop
international cultural relations,
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the
Director-General of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization on the subject of
the preservation and further development of cultural
values, 18
Noting with satisfaction the work of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization in increasing awareness of the need for concerted
action in the field of preservation and further development of cultural values,
I. Requests the Director-General of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to submit to the General Assembly early in 1978
a progress report on the implementation of Assembly
resolution 3148 (XXVIII);
2. Further requests the Director-General of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization to continue efforts and research in this
field and to report to the General Assembly at its
thirty-third session;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-third session the item entitled "Preservation
and further development of cultural values".
83rd plenary meeting
30 November 1976
31/40.

Protection and restitution of works of
art as part of the preservation and further development of eultural values

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3026 A (XXVII) of 18 December 1972, 3148 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973,
11 Resolution

2200 A (XXI), annex.
ISA/31/111, annex.
