S/PV.9366 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9366

th meeting
Wednesday, 5 July 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kariuki. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Spasse
Mr. Muniz Pinto Sloboda
Mr. Gu Wenlong
Mr. Durán Medina
Ms. Freudenreich
Mr. Diaba
Mrs. Corquaye
Mr. Magosaki
Ms. Micallef
Mr. Buanahagi
Mr. Vorobiev
Mr. Hauri
Ms. AlMatrooshi
Ms. Brosnan

Agenda
Children and armed conflict
How to prevent and respond to grave violations against children in armed
conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict (S/2023/363)
Letter dated 23 June 2023 from the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General (S/2023/470)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-19585 (E)
*2319585*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9366 (Resumption 1)

Children and armed conflict

The meeting was resumed at 3.05 p.m.
The President: I would like to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than three minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Flashing lights on the collars of the
microphones will prompt speakers to bring their
statements to a close after three minutes.
I now give the floor to the representative
of Luxembourg.
Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg aligns itself with the statements to be
made on behalf of the European Union and the Group
of Friends on Children and Armed Conflict. I would
like to add some considerations in my national capacity.
I would like to thank the United Kingdom
presidency of the Security Council for organizing
today’s open debate, and this morning’s briefers for
explaining what is at stake.
We cannot ignore the alarming situation of children
trapped in armed conflicts around the world. In 2022,
18,890 children were victims of 24,300 grave violations
in 25 situations. These are the confirmed figures for
last year. The real figure is certainly much higher.
A striking example of this reality is Ukraine,
where children are directly affected by the use of
missile systems by Russian forces, bombardments of
populated areas and air strikes by the aggressor. These
disproportionate attacks have devastating consequences
on the lives of innocent children, causing loss of life,
serious injury and indelible trauma for this generation.
Other situations are equally alarming. Luxembourg
is particularly concerned at the deteriorating situation
of children in South Sudan and Myanmar. In such
countries as Syria, Yemen and the occupied Palestinian
territory, the lack of access to humanitarian aid is
having disastrous consequences for children trapped in
protracted conflicts. Those children, already vulnerable,
face daily challenges to their survival, particularly
young girls who are victims of sexual violence.
A particularly worrisome trend is the 112 per
cent increase in the number of attacks on schools and
hospitals. In 2022 alone, 1,163 attacks on schools were
recorded. Luxembourg actively supports the Safe
Schools Declaration and urges all States that have
not yet done so to endorse it, in order to prevent such
attacks and protect places of learning. Schools must
2/45

05/07/2023

remain zones of peace. To deprive children of their
fundamental right to education is to deprive them of
their future.
I would like to reiterate Luxembourg’s financial
and political support for the mandate of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Mrs. Virginia Gamba de Potgieter,
and all her teams. Their essential work with United
Nations country teams helps to document violations
of children’s rights in armed conflicts. Their mission
is crucial.
Luxembourg remains deeply attached to this
theme, as demonstrated by the fact that, together with
Belgium, Malta and Uruguay, we recently organized
a photography exhibition in Geneva entitled “From
Despair to Hope: Children Beyond Armed Conflict”,
in conjunction with the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict.
It is our duty to strengthen accountability
mechanisms in order to put an end to impunity for
serious violations committed against children. Children
deserve our commitment, our compassion and above all
our resolute action to build a better and safer future
for all.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Greece.
Mr. Sekeris (Greece): It is a great pleasure for
Greece to participate in today’s open debate on children
and armed conflict. I would like to warmly thank the
United Kingdom for organizing this timely meeting,
which provides with us an excellent opportunity to
reflect on the findings of the most recent annual report
of the Secretary-General (S/2023/363). I would also
like to warmly thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mrs. Gamba de Potgieter, as well as
the Deputy Executive Director of UNICEF for the very
interesting briefings this morning.
While fully aligning myself with the statement
to be delivered later by the European Union, please
al-low me to make some additional remarks in my
national capacity.
Unfortunately, in 2022, children continued to be
disproportionately affected by armed conflict, and
the number of children affected by grave violations
increased in comparison to 2021. Against this backdrop,
as the Secretary-General stresses in his report, it is of
23-19585

05/07/2023

Children and armed conflict

utmost importance that children, even those allegedly
associated with armed groups, be treated primarily
as victims. Consequently, child protection should be
effectively mainstreamed throughout the conflict cycle,
from early warning to disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration. Moreover, the support provided
by the donor community should be timely, genderand age-sensitive, survivor-centred and inclusive,
addressing the specific needs of children victims of
grave violations, focusing on girls and on children
with disabilities.
Greece places particular emphasis on the protection
of children in armed conflict, having already ratified
the relevant Optional Protocol to the Convention
of the Rights of the Child, and having endorsed the
Paris Principles, the Safe Schools Declaration and the
Vancouver Principles. Furthermore, Greece has been
duly implementing its national action plans on the rights
of the child and on the protection of children from sexual
exploitation and abuse as well as its comprehensive
national strategy on the protection of unaccompanied
minors. Additionally, the promotion of the children and
armed conflict agenda is one of the main priorities of
my country’s candidacy as an elected member of the
Security Council for the 2025–2026 term.
Finally, I would like to reiterate my country’s
principled positions in favour of protecting the rights
and dignity of conflict-affected children and of
preventing grave violations against these children,
in close cooperation with all relevant stakeholders as
a necessary precondition of a peaceful, inclusive and
resilient world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Austria.
Mr. Almoslechner (Austria): Austria thanks the
United Kingdom for convening today’s open debate and
fully aligns itself with the statements to be made on
behalf of the European Union and the Group of Friends
on Children and Armed Conflict.
We also wish to thank the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2023/363) and commend the work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Mrs. Virginia Gamba de
Potgieter. Furthermore, we pay tribute to the members
of the country task forces of the Monitoring and
Reporting Mechanism for their indispensable work.

S/PV.9366 (Resumption 1)

More than 25 years ago, the children and armed
conflict agenda was created with the aim of preventing
grave violations against children in armed conflicts
and holding perpetrators to account through global
commitments. While we have seen some important
progress in that regard, the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2023/363) for 2022 paints a bleak picture indeed.
The evidence suggests that the situation is worsening
on a global scale. As the number of armed conflicts
continues to surge around the world, the number of
children suffering and disproportionately bearing the
brunt of war is increasing.
Austria is appalled by the growing number of
verified grave violations. The overall increase in attacks
against schools, hospitals and protected personnel,
as well as the denial of humanitarian assistance and
the use of explosive weapons in populated areas, is
truly horrifying. Moreover, the report’s finding that
Government forces are now the main perpetrators of
the killing and maiming of children, attacks on schools
and hospitals and the denial of humanitarian assistance
is particularly disheartening.
We are extremely concerned about the country
situations in the report, including those that were
most recently added, and the largest increases in
verified grave violations in Myanmar, South Sudan
and Burkina Faso, among other places. And the truly
shocking numbers reported represent only the tip of the
iceberg — the small percentage of cases that the United
Nations can verify. We all know that the grave figures
that remain unreported are much higher.
For example, as a result of Russia’s unprovoked
and unjustified war of aggression on Ukraine, the
Commission of Inquiry on Ukraine has documented
massive human rights violations against children in
Ukraine, including killings, maiming, torture, rape,
abductions and forced displacement. For the countless
children who have lost their families and loved ones,
and those who can no longer access education or
health care, the consequences are devastating. They
have been brutally robbed of their childhood. Austria
calls on the Russian Federation, as well as all the other
Government authorities and parties to the conflict
listed in the Secretary-General’s report, to grant full
access to the United Nations to verify children and
armed conflict violations. We also strongly condemn
all forms of intimidation, violence and attacks against
child protection advisers, monitoring teams and all
other stakeholders involved.

23-195853/45

S/PV.9366 (Resumption 1)

Children and armed conflict

All Member States, as well as other parties to
conflicts, must respect international law, international
humanitarian law, refugee law and international
human rights obligations, as well as international child
protection norms. The rule of law is what ultimately
makes our very complex world more predictable,
reliable, safe and orderly. It is an indispensable
precondition for sustainable peace and security. Those
responsible for grave violations against children must
be brought to justice through swift investigations.
Austria reiterates its full and unwavering support for
the International Criminal Court.
We encourage all Member States that have not
yet done so to adhere to the Optional Protocol to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict and to endorse
the Vancouver Principles, the Paris Principles and
Commitments and the Safe School Declaration. Child
protection should also be a part of the predeployment
training of all peacekeepers. For Austrian peacekeepers,
such training is obligatory.
Since gender norms shape the way that children are
exposed to grave violations, gender-sensitive protection
schemes are particularly important. As a member of the
International Network on Conflict and Fragility of the
Development Assistance Committee of the Organization
for Economic Cooperation and Development, Austria
supports a systematic gender-sensitive approach to all
humanitarian and conflict prevention measures. In that
regard, let me also commend the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Pramila Patten.
We must stop any further backsliding of the
children and armed conflict agenda. The past two and a
half decades have shown that, when parties to conflict
decide to abide by their international-law obligations
and child protection commitments, crimes against
children can be prevented. We therefore welcome the
signing of handover protocols by parties to conflict, as
well as the support to children formerly associated with
armed forces or armed groups through protection or
reintegration programmes.

05/07/2023

Slovenia aligns itself with the statements made on
behalf on the European Union and the Group of Friends
of Children and Armed Conflict.
A lot of progress has been made since the United
Nations began its consideration of children and armed
conflict agenda for the very first time. The development
of a vast set of tools led to the creation of a strong
normative framework for the protection of children. We
underline the importance of this annual open debate
and the children and armed conflict mandate in the
United Nations peace and security architecture. The
independent, impartial and credible Monitoring and
Reporting Mechanism, together with Working Group
of the Security Council and the annual report of the
Secretary-General (S/2023/363), form essential pillars
of that framework as well. Despite all those efforts,
children continue to be disproportionately affected in
armed conflicts.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s annual report
and are deeply concerned about increasing number of
children affected by grave violations, as well as the higher
number of situations in which violations are occurring.
We are particularly concerned about the situations in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Israel and the
State of Palestine, Somalia, Syria, Ukraine, Afghanistan
and Yemen, where the highest numbers of grave
violations were reported in 2022. We are appalled by the
information on the systemic violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law. In
that regard, we call on all parties to conflict to uphold their
obligations and respect for international law. Combating
impunity and ensuring accountability remain our
priority. In that respect, we encourage cooperation with
the International Criminal Court and other international
justice mechanisms and call for child-rights expertise
within those mechanisms.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovenia.

Global initiatives such as the Paris Principles and the
Vancouver Principles, the Safe Schools Declaration and
the recently adopted Ljubljana-The Hague Convention
on International Cooperation in the Investigation and
Prosecution of Genocide, Crimes Against Humanity,
War Crimes and Other International Crimes can
provide additional tools to protect children’s rights and
strengthen child protection. We encourage all Member
States to further their commitments by endorsing
those instruments.

Ms. Jurečko (Slovenia): I would like to thank the
United Kingdom for convening today’s important open
debate, and the briefers for their statements.

We are worried about the report’s findings stating
that the use of explosive devices and their remnants
represent some 26 per cent of the methods used in the

4/45

23-19585

05/07/2023

Children and armed conflict

killing and maiming of children. In that regard, we
call on Member States to enhance efforts for clearing
explosive remnants of war and to invest more in
explosive-ordnance risk education.
Slovenia has a long tradition of supporting efforts
to protect children affected by armed conflicts. Our
Government has been financing various projects in
that regard, including for the clearance of landmines
and explosive remnants of war and for reintegration,
rehabilitation, health-care and psychosocial services for
children from Ukraine, Moldova, Lebanon, Palestine,
Syria, South Sudan and Afghanistan.
We are pleased that today we were able to hear a
young girl’s voice in the Security Council. Allow me
to take this opportunity to encourage the Council to
continue providing space for children to have a voice in
peace processes and to prioritize child protection in all
areas of its work.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Thailand.
Mr. Chindawongse (Thailand): I would like to
congratulate the United Kingdom on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
July and to commend the United Arab Emirates for
its successful presidency of the Council last month.
I want to thank the United Kingdom for convening
this important open debate, as well as the SecretaryGeneral for his recent report on children and armed
conflict (S/2023/363). I thank all the briefers for their
contributions to our discussion today.
It is alarming that, according to the report of the
Secretary-General, in 2022 the number of children
affected by grave violations increased as compared
to 2021. Thailand joins other speakers in condemning
all forms of violations and crimes against children in
situations of armed conflict, because coming from
a country that has provided safe havens for tens of
thousands of children fleeing armed conflict over the
past decades, we Thais have been close witnesses to
and fully understand the harm that befalls children
when conflicts occur. It is a harm that should always be
prevented — because children are our future. As such,
they should be accorded the necessary protection so
that they can indeed have a future. And if they have a
future, so will we. It is with that hope for a better future
for children affected by armed conflict that Thailand

S/PV.9366 (Resumption 1)

underscores the importance of scaling up prevention
and response efforts and, in that regard, would like to
underscore the following four points.
First, we must ensure strict compliance with and
promote States’ commitment to implementing the
provisions of international law for the protection of
children in armed conflict, including those contained
in the Convention on the Rights of the Child and its
Optional Protocol, as well as international humanitarian
law and other relevant international human rights law.
Secondly, the Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism
(MRM) plays a crucial role in the early detection of
violations and paves the way for early engagement with
parties to conflicts as part of prevention efforts. It will
help the international community to better address the
challenges faced by children in a more comprehensive
manner. Therefore, in addition to the six grave
violations that have been identified as priority areas
for the MRM, we also support efforts to monitor and
respond to other violations.
Thirdly, we believe that effective data-collection
and data-sharing are crucial. Data collected should
be age- and sex- disaggregated, as much as possible,
because boys and girls, across various age-groups,
experience conflicts differently. That will enable us
to scale up appropriate responsive measures required
for effective prevention, response, recovery and
sustainable reintegration.
Lastly, sustained support for the recovery and
rehabilitation of children affected by armed conflict
is critical. In that regard, we need both hardware
and software. On the one hand, the infrastructure,
health facilities and nutritional support are all critical
to rebuilding children’s physical health, as are
psychological support, education, continued learning
opportunities and the care of communities to rebuild
shattered lives and mental well-being, on the other.
Special attention must also be given to help children
who have suffered from sexual violence, which is
exacerbated during times of armed conflict and has a
disproportionate effect on girls.
All such efforts are necessary to ensure sustainable
reintegration and the prevention of re-victimization so
that the children affected can have hope for a better
future that is sustainable. Having a better future
for children should naturally be an integral part of
our summed-up future aspirations. If their future is
secured, our future will also be secured.

23-195855/45

S/PV.9366 (Resumption 1)

Children and armed conflict

In order to help such a better future for children,
we will need coordinated efforts across and among all
stakeholders, including national Governments, civil
society organizations and affected communities in
strengthening the protection of the rights and well-being
of children. We commend the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
for her continued engagement with the international
community, partners and relevant parties.
In conclusion, we all love and care for our children,
which is part of being a human being. But we can also
love and care for all children. That is what it means to
be part of humankind. Thailand therefore stands ready
to share its experiences and best practices that could
help enhance our collective efforts to protect children’s
rights and strengthen child protection, as well as
address the root causes of conflicts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Massari (Italy): I would like to thank the United
Kingdom for organizing this annual open debate, and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Mrs. Virginia Gamba de
Potgieter, and the Deputy Director for Programmes of
UNICEF for their informative briefings.
Italy aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
on behalf of the European Union and the statement made
by the representative of Canada on behalf of the Groups
of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict. I would like
to add the following remarks in my national capacity.
In line with the Convention on the Rights of the
Child, children, regardless of their legal status, must
have the right to enjoy their childhood in stable and
peaceful societies, where they can feel safe to learn and
become agents of positive change, peace and sustainable
development. In that spirit, we express our deep concern
about the increasing number of verified grave violations
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2023/363) for
2022. It is particularly disturbing to witness the rising
trend of violations carried out by State actors, while
States have the primary responsibility to protect, respect
and ensure children’s rights both in times of peace and
war. In that regard, the foundation of international law
and international humanitarian law is under deliberate
attack, and the international community must reaffirm
its commitment to respect for international law, human
rights and humanitarian principles.
6/45

05/07/2023

In that framework, Italy recalls the Paris Principles
and the Vancouver Principles and calls on all Member
States to endorse and fully implement the Safe Schools
Declaration in order to mitigate the consequences
of armed conflict on education and refrain from the
military use of civil infrastructure. In parallel, we must
not disregard crimes that are largely underreported,
such as sexual violence in conflict and rape used as a
tactic of war. We encourage maximum collaboration
across the different United Nations mandates to prevent
and end that scourge and ensure that the perpetrators
are brought to justice. We reiterate our staunch
support for the children and armed conflict mandate,
as a unique tool to mainstream child protection on the
political agenda of the Security Council. We welcome
the progress registered by Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and note with
concern the challenges highlighted in the Lake Chad
basin, the central Sahel and other regions.
Italy is proud to have supported the United
Nations guidance note on abduction and stands ready
to respond to the Secretary-General’s call to address
the specific needs of children with disabilities and
support the ongoing efforts of the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
in that direction. We take note of the listing of
the Russian armed forces and affiliates following
Russia’s unprovoked and unjustified war of aggression
against Ukraine. We urge all parties to accelerate the
implementation of joint action plans through credible
and effective measures aimed at protecting children
as the highest priority. Indeed, the children and armed
conflict mandate is a key tool to encourage change in the
behaviour of the parties, without ever underestimating
their responsibilities for actions taken and the moral
and legal call to end impunity.
In conclusion, we share the concerns expressed
by the Secretary-General in his report on the children
transferred to the Russian Federation from areas of
Ukraine. We encourage all possible efforts aimed at
facilitating family tracing and reunification, and we
call on all parties to the conflict to give child protection
actors access to the children to facilitate the process, in
line with the actual best interests of every child.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Croatia.
23-19585

05/07/2023

Children and armed conflict

S/PV.9366 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Šimonović (Croatia): We thank the United
Kingdom for organizing today’s important open debate.
We also express our gratitude to the briefers.

to advancing the children and armed conflict agenda and
encourages all States to endorse the Paris Principles, the
Vancouver Principles and the Safe Schools Declaration.

Croatia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union and the
statement delivered by the representative of Canada on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Children and Armed
Conflict. I would like to add some remarks in my
national capacity.

The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Skoog.

We welcome the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral on children and armed conflict (S/2023/363).
The dramatic increase in attacks on schools and
hospitals is particularly alarming. We are appalled
that Government forces were the main perpetrators of
most violations. They are blatantly failing in upholding
their responsibility to protect. The lack of respect
for international human rights law and international
humanitarian law has become all too common. We
fully support the United Nations and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict in their efforts to constructively
engage with all parties to all conflicts and encourage
developing strong action plans to end current violations
and prevent future ones. We welcome the progress
made with the new joint action plans in Yemen and
Iraq, as well as other positive developments with regard
to the repatriation of children and the adoption of
handover protocols. I would also like to thank UNICEF
and civil society partners for their dedicated work in
high-risk settings. We must do everything we can to
protect children affected by conflicts, especially girls,
who are particularly vulnerable, as potential victims of
sexual violence.
We strongly advocate for accountability for grave
violations, as that is the key to achieving sustainable
peace. The United Nations-led Monitoring and
Reporting Mechanism is a reliable and objective
source of information, drawing attention to committed
violations. Together with the Secretary-General’s
annual report and its annex, it represents an important
accountability tool and helps prevent further violations
against children. It also serves as a warning shot for their
perpetrators that listed violations may be prosecuted.
Finally, we call on all parties to end violence
against children and abide by their obligations under
international law. Croatia reiterates its full commitment

Mr. Skoog: I congratulate the United Kingdom on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. I thank you, Sir, for organizing this debate
and the invitation to participate.
I will speak on behalf of the European Union and
its member States. The candidate countries North
Macedonia, Montenegro, Albania, the Republic of
Moldova and Bosnia and Herzegovina; the potential
candidate Georgia; as well as Monaco and San Marino,
align themselves with this statement. I will make
an abbreviated statement, given the many speakers
remaining on the list.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s 2023 report
on children and armed conflict (S/2023/363). We
are deeply alarmed by the more than 27,000 grave
violations around the world, and we also realize that
that is just the verifiable tip of the iceberg. Earlier today,
Ms. Violeta gave a testimony about Colombia and on
the broader effects of all such violations on children
and on all societies. I want to thank her for being here.
I also want to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the Deputy Executive Director
for Programmes of UNICEF for their briefings today
and for the work that they are all doing.
Children should never be victims of conflict.
We know how difficult it is to get non-State armed
groups to comply with the law in this area, but we are
particularly dismayed at Russia’s part in such violations
through its full-scale aggression against Ukraine and
its regular State army. There should be zero tolerance
of violations of international human rights law and
international humanitarian law, and we therefore call
on all States to bring to justice all who are responsible
for such violations and encourage them to cooperate
with international justice mechanisms, including the
International Criminal Court. I want to briefly highlight
a few points.
First, we recognize the importance of the work of the
Office of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, UNICEF, all United Nations child-protection
actors and civil-society organizations. They need to be
supported and provided with adequate resources.

23-195857/45

S/PV.9366 (Resumption 1)

Children and armed conflict

05/07/2023

Secondly, we welcome the signing of new joint
action plans on prevention, including in Yemen with the
Houthis, and in Iraq. Follow-through is needed.

Representative of the Secretary-General, the Deputy
Executive Director for Programmes at UNICEF and the
civil-society youth representative, Ms. Violeta.

Thirdly, the children and armed conflict mandate
is very valuable. We underline the importance of clear
criteria and procedures in decisions to list and delist
parties. We note new listing decisions on the Russian
armed forces and their affiliates in Ukraine, as well as
in Burkina Faso and Myanmar.

We thank the Secretary-General for his report,
pursuant to resolution 2427 (2018), which describes the
alarming trends related to the impact of armed conflict
on children, including information on grave violations
that have been committed. Fortunately, there are also
indicators of when measures taken by listed parties
have had positive consequences for children. The
Council has continued to adopt specific resolutions on
children and armed conflict since 1999, each of which
has included increasingly stringent provisions aimed
at ensuring the protection of children. Those mandates
have enabled peace processes to be implemented,
resulting in the release of at least 190,000 children
over the past 25 years, and have prevented numerous
killings and instances of maiming, as well as acts of
sexual violence against children and attacks on schools
and hospitals. In that regard, it is important to stress
that peace is the ultimate guarantee of children’s safety,
and we call on all parties to conflicts to engage in good
faith in peace talks that include child protection as a
key issue.

Fourthly, Russia’s unprovoked and unjustified
war of aggression has also taken a devastating toll on
children. We urge the Russian Federation to abide by
its obligations under international humanitarian law
and international human rights law and to immediately,
completely and unconditionally withdraw all of its
troops and military equipment from the entire territory
of Ukraine, within its internationally recognized
borders. For many Ukrainian children the damage is
already done, but withdrawal would be the best way to
end the ongoing violations.
Fifthly, we look forward to the swift implementation
of the joint action plan agreed on with Russia and
Ukraine. We also echo the Secretary-General’s
recommendation to give child-protection actors access
to children transferred to Russia in order to facilitate
family reunification.
Lastly, we are also closely following the situations
in the Niger and Haiti, both newly designated as being
of concern.
Under international law, States have the primary
responsibility to protect, respect and ensure children’s
rights, in time of peace and of war. We expect the
Security Council and its individual members to uphold
its mandate under the relevant resolutions. We need
to strengthen the mandate and make a stronger link
to protection and respect for international law and to
combating the climate of impunity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guatemala.
Ms. Rodríguez Mancia (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): Guatemala thanks the United Kingdom
for convening today’s important open debate, which
provides an opportunity to analyse the findings of
the Secretary-General’s annual report on children
and armed conflict (S/2023/363). We also appreciate
the briefings made earlier today by the Special
8/45

Guatemala would like to emphasize its peaceful
nature as a State and strongly condemns the recruitment
of children who are victims of clashes between parties
to conflict and whose innocent lives are cut short. It
is vital to promote the integral protection of children,
as well as their social reintegration and their education
in skills that will enable them to live a life free of
violence and victimization. We deplore the fact that
despite the efforts of the international community to
prevent threats to children, abuses against children by
armed groups continue to be reported. Such abuses
are a grave violation of their human rights and display
blatant disregard for human life. The verification in
the Secretary-General’s report of the abduction of
Ukrainian children by Russian armed forces following
the illegal, unjustified and unprovoked aggression by
the Russian Federation against Ukraine is particularly
alarming. The International Criminal Court has opened
a case in that regard and issued arrest warrants for the
abduction of Ukrainian children.
Indiscriminate attacks on hospitals and schools, the
direct targeting of civilians with explosive weapons and
the use of chemical weapons capable of killing thousands
of children should be subject to strong sanctions by
the Council. Guatemala reiterates its commitment to
23-19585

05/07/2023

Children and armed conflict

ensuring and protecting the rights of children, and we
therefore call on countries that have not yet done so
to endorse the Safe Schools Declaration. We recognize
the valuable work of the Security Council, as well as
the efforts of the Special Representative, in seeking to
ensure protection for children in armed conflict and
respect for and compliance with international norms.
We urge them to remain faithful to that commitment
and to contribute to the New Agenda for Peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Dominican Republic.
Mr. Blanco Conde (Dominican Republic) (spoke
in Spanish): First of all, I congratulate the United
Kingdom on organizing today’s debate and thank the
briefers for their briefings and recommendations.
The Dominican Republic remains concerned about
the continued violations and abuses against children in
armed conflict. The impact of conflict on children is
devastating and multifaceted. The psychological and
physical trauma caused by violence, forced recruitment,
sexual exploitation and forced displacement are
unimaginable, and the statistics in this year’s report
of the Secretary-General (S/2023/363) are alarming.
More than 27,000 grave violations have been recorded
and a staggering number of killings and instances of
maiming, affecting as many as 8,631 children.
Given the situation, we absolutely cannot remain
indifferent. In that regard, we are grateful that the
Council’s Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict is conducting a field visit to Nigeria this month,
its first to any country since 2019. Such engagement is
essential if we are to arrive at more effective and agile
solutions addressing the issue of children and armed
conflict. The findings of that important Group play
a fundamental role in promoting accountability and
encouraging the parties to conflicts to take specific
measures to prevent and end violations against children,
and should be visible and accessible to States and all
interested parties. However, we are deeply concerned
about the fact that for the past two years the Working
Group has been unable to come to conclusions on the
situation in any other countries.
We fully agree with the report on the need to
provide comprehensive support for children affected
by armed conflict, including psychosocial assistance,
education and reintegration programmes, measures
that are essential to helping children and their families
rebuild their lives and regain a sense of normalcy.

S/PV.9366 (Resumption 1)

In Haiti, an alarming number of children — 3 million,
the highest on record — require urgent humanitarian
assistance. The country is dealing with extreme levels
of violence that further compound problems of hunger
and malnutrition in a nation that is already poor
and combating a resurgence of cholera. UNICEF’s
representative in Haiti, Mr. Bruno Maes, underscored
that to be a child in Haiti today is more dangerous and
more challenging than ever, faced with unimaginable
threats and adversity. It is crucial that those vulnerable
children receive the necessary protection and assistance
they so desperately need. Therefore, the Dominican
Republic considers it very timely that this year’s annual
report (S/2023/363) incorporates Haiti as a situation of
concern with immediate effect and will report on the
violations committed against Haitian children in the
next report of the Secretary-General.
In that vein, the consistent and transparent
application of the criteria set out in the 2010 annual
report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/181) regarding
the listing and delisting of parties in the annexes is
imperative. Reducing violations is not enough; we need
to see a complete cessation of grave violations before a
party to the conflict can be removed from the list.
The Dominican Republic has endorsed the Safe
Schools Declaration, the Paris Principles and the
Vancouver Principles and has also ratified the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict,
demonstrating my country’s commitment in that regard.
We call on States that have not yet done so to endorse
and ratify those instruments.
I would like to congratulate Special Representative
Gamba de Potgieter and her team for the progress made
in engaging with parties to conflict in countries such
as Burkina Faso, Colombia, the Syrian Arab Republic
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, resulting in
positive outcomes for children.
Finally, the reality of children forced to live in the
midst of armed conflict around the world is a stain on
our collective conscience. We must foster cooperation
among States, civil society, local communities and
international organizations, the United Nations and, in
particular, the Security Council, and stand together as
a beacon of hope by redoubling our efforts to safeguard
the rights and well-being of children caught up in the
crossfire of war.

23-195859/45

S/PV.9366 (Resumption 1)

Children and armed conflict

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Denmark.
Ms. Wegter (Denmark): On behalf of the Nordic
countries — Finland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden and
my own country, Denmark — I would like to thank the
United Kingdom for convening this meeting and for
the opportunity to reflect upon the recent report of the
Secretary-General (S/2023/363). Let me also thank all
the briefers for their valuable insights.
We would like to focus on the following: first, the
need to invest in the prevention of violations; secondly,
the need for humanitarian assistance to complement
local self-protection strategies; and thirdly, the value
of principled direct engagement with parties to
armed conflict.
First, children are particularly vulnerable to
violations and abuses before, during and after conflict.
We need to invest in a protective environment for
children before conflict in order to reduce their
vulnerability during conflict. We must invest to
increase the likelihood of the successful reintegration
of children associated with armed actors. We must do
so in a manner that takes into account the underlying
gender aspects of violations, not least those concerning
sexual violence in conflict. That means investing in
supporting governance structures and initiatives that
protect children during conflict. One example is the
Safe Schools Declaration, which facilitates protection,
prevention and reintegration. Our overall investments
in education, mental health and psychosocial wellbeing are critical enablers of child protection.
Secondly, the briefing by the Special Representative
reaffirmed that too many children and communities
are suffering during conflict, with little or no access
to humanitarian assistance and protection. More often
than not, children and their families are left to their
own devices. We need to insist on humanitarian access
to all children, whatever the circumstances, and make
sure that our humanitarian assistance complements
the self-protection strategies of those communities by
supporting them in a flexible and adaptable manner.
Thirdly, international organizations can play a
crucial role in protecting children. Success is often
determined by sustained, principled and contextsensitive engagement directly with parties to armed
conflict. The evacuation of 280 children from an
orphanage in Khartoum by the International Committee
of the Red Cross shows that it is possible to appeal
10/45

05/07/2023

to belligerent parties. It speaks to the importance of
direct engagement and the vital role played by such
organizations. At the same time, we must hold armed
parties to account and remind them of their obligations
under international law, as well as promote regional
human rights instruments that are so desperately
needed to ensure protection and prevention.
In conclusion, we emphasize our full support for
the mandate on children and armed conflict and our
support for the Special Representative in her diligent
work over the years. It shows that direct engagement
with reference to international legal frameworks can
play an important role in protecting children.
The listing of parties to armed conflict in the
annexes to the Secretary-General’s report is key for
both prevention and accountability. We support the
listing of parties in a coherent and transparent way,
holding the parties to the same criteria and procedures
to protect all children equally and to protect the
integrity of the mandate. The fact that the Russian
armed forces and affiliated armed groups have been
listed gives testimony to the integrity of the Special
Representative’s mandate, which is to be welcomed. At
the same time, it is of course deplorable that the report
for the first time needs to list a permanent member of
the Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Amorín (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, Uruguay would like to thank the Permanent Mission
of the United Kingdom for convening this open debate.
We also in particular thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, Mrs. Virginia Gamba de Potgieter; the Deputy
Executive Director for Programmes at UNICEF,
Mr. Omar Abdi; and the civil society representative for
their briefings and contributions today.
Uruguay is alarmed by the findings of the
Secretary-General’s 2022 report on children in armed
conflict (S/2023/363), which reflects an increase in
violence in relation to 2021, demonstrating a disregard
for international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. The report highlights that, while
non-State armed groups perpetrated 50 per cent of
grave violations, Government forces were primarily
responsible for the killing and maiming of children, as
well as attacks on schools and hospitals and the denial
23-19585

05/07/2023

Children and armed conflict

of humanitarian access. It is doubly worrisome that
States Members of this Organization continue today to
bear ultimate responsibility for such practices.
The report reflects the distressing reality faced by
children in situations in 24 countries, and we regret
in particular the inclusion of three new situations in
2022, namely, Ethiopia, Mozambique and Ukraine. We
also deplore the 20 per cent increase in the recruitment
and use of children and child abduction, as well as the
112 per cent increase in the number of attacks against
schools and hospitals, particularly in Ukraine, Burkina
Faso, Myanmar, Mali and Afghanistan.
Despite the grave situation of children living in armed
conflict, we cannot fail to welcome the progress made in
protecting children through engagement with the parties
to conflict in various contexts, leading to the release of
more than 12,460 children from armed groups and forces
in 2022. We also welcome the progress made to protect
children’s rights in Burkina Faso, Colombia, the Central
African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Iraq, Israel, the State of Palestine, Nigeria, the Syrian
Arab Republic, the Syrian Arab Republic and Yemen
in the areas of training, prevention and accountability,
by strengthening national legislation and through the
adoption of action plans and other commitments.
In that regard, Uruguay would like to highlight in
particular the progress made in the situation in Colombia,
where August saw the suspension of air strikes against
armed groups’ camps in which children could have been
present, in addition to Colombia’s accession to the Safe
Schools Declaration. We welcome both of those steps in
the right direction.
Furthermore, Uruguay supports the work carried
out by the United Nations and the Special Representative
in her work with the parties to conflicts to put an end
to and prevent violations. We understand that the work
of the Office of the Special Representative should be
supported without reticence and that there is a clear need
for more resources to continue with the line of work in
progress. That is why we insist on the need for more
child protection experts on the ground to strengthen the
capacities of the Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism.
We urge that more resources be made available for
dedicated posts for this Mechanism in order to bolster its
capacities on the ground.
In that regard, States must continue to work to
guarantee the rights of children, who are entitled to
special protections under international human rights

S/PV.9366 (Resumption 1)

law, independently of their parents or guardians, support
the children reintegration process as a crucial element
for ensuring sustainable peace and security and break
the cycles of violence. We must include regional actors
and non-governmental organizations in that process so
that they can play a role in the provision of sustainable
political, technical and financial support in such efforts.
Member States must ensure that victims have
access to legal proceedings, with all the accompanying
guarantees. In our view, it is key that prevention
activities be conducted by the Member States under the
mechanisms established in the United Nations. In that
context, it is vital that the Organization’s peace forces
active policies on the ground to prevent such practices.
Uruguay is no stranger to these issues. As a
troop-contributing country that has an unbreakable
commitment to the protection of civilians and, in
particular, to the protection of children in armed
conflicts, Uruguay has consistently strived to improve
the training of its deployed officials. We are aware that
the degree of commitment with the service of national
contingents should be accompanied by training in
order to achieve more effective protection of local
populations, in general, and children, in particular.
To that end, implementing those commitment in
order to prevent and put an end to violations against
children requires focused strategies and improved
practices. In that regard, in line with the agreed
international instruments, in 2020 Uruguay adopted
a policy for child protection for personnel deployed in
United Nations peacekeeping operations, thus making
my country the first in peacekeeping operations that
has a specific policy for child protection in conflict
situations. It is worth noting that my country received
the support and collaboration of the United Kingdom,
UNICEF and Keeping Children Safe for the adoption
of that policy.
Since 2021, Uruguay has had a national guidebook
in place for child protection instructors in peacekeeping
missions. It includes chapters on training, prevention,
detection and protection of victims’ rights and the
creation of reports and investigations to provide to
personnel prior to their deployment. In line with that
policy, Uruguay’s national school for peacekeeping
operations is certified to include in its courses the
issues related to the protection of civilians and children
in armed conflicts.

23-1958511/45

S/PV.9366 (Resumption 1)

Children and armed conflict

Uruguay once again calls on the States that have
not yet done so, to adopt the applicable protocols on
child protection, including the Paris Principles, the
Vancouver Principles and the Safe Schools Declaration.
We remain at the full disposal of the United Nations
and its Member States to share its national experiences
in that regard and to continue to work closely with them
to make progress in this area.
The President: Let me remind all speakers to try
to limit their statements to no more than three minutes.
I now give the floor to the representative of Romania.
Mr. Feruță (Romania): In addition to the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union, I
would like to add a few points.
I also join others in thanking the briefers for their
sober reports on the situation of children in armed
conflicts around the world.
It is indeed appalling to witness such a high
number of violations affecting so many children, but
also to see the disregard for international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. The report of
Secretary-General Guterres (S/2023/363) points to a
massive failure in protecting one of the most vulnerable
categories. It is worrisome that perpetrators are
blatantly disregarding international humanitarian law
and are rewarded with impunity.
The inclusion of the Russian armed forces as
responsible for committing grave violations against
children in the Secretary-General’s latest report on
children and armed conflict is a step towards ensuring
the accountability of the perpetrators.
Almost 500 days since the start of Russia’s
unprovoked and unjustified war of aggression in
Ukraine, ending the climate of impunity is the way
forward to prevent and respond to the grave violations
against children in armed conflict. The States Members
of the United Nations also need to hear and know more
about the fate of the 700,000 children that the Russian
authorities admit taking from Ukraine.
Romania remains committed to advancing
and protecting children’s rights, including for the
prevention and response to grave violations during
armed conflicts. The best interests of the child is the
core principle of our legislation, policies and actions.
We have applied it, together with UNICEF, in relation
to the refugee children from Ukraine.
12/45

05/07/2023

My Government has been making continued efforts
to implement all Security Council resolutions related
to today’s topic. I echo the need for efforts to combat
abuse and sexual exploitation, to ensure the protection
of civilians and children in armed conflicts and to
improve the training process for our armed forces.
My country also supports States affected by
landmines, whose victims are — too often — children,
through our participation in international United
Nations peacekeeping missions.
Romania pays special attention to family
reunification as a precondition for a child to grow up
and develop harmoniously. Our national legislation
ensures the protection of child refugees and the
protection of children during armed conflict, as well
as the responsible of public authorities in that regard.
Children are our future, and they must always be
protected. Part of their future is also the right to
education. We join the call on Member States to endorse
the Safe Schools Declaration.
Finally, we would like to reaffirm our full support
for the work of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
and for UNICEF on the protection of children and
respect for international law. We acknowledge that
the children and armed conflict mandate in the United
Nations peace and security architecture is an essential
tool for their protection.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Black (Canada): I have the honour of delivering
this statement on behalf of the Group of Friends of
Children and Armed Conflict. We welcome today’s
open debate, convened by the United Kingdom, and
thank today’s briefers.
We once again encourage the Security Council
to regularly include children and youth briefers in its
work and call for the safe and meaningful inclusion
and participation of children and youth in all matters of
peace and security.
The Group of Friends welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s annual report (S/2023/363), while expressing
our serious concern with the scale and scope of the
27,180 grave violations that affected 18,890 children.
The trends presented in the report are disturbing and
must be reversed.
23-19585

05/07/2023

Children and armed conflict

We call upon all parties to armed conflict to fully
comply with their obligations under international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law and to act
to prevent and end grave violations against children.
To that end, we strongly encourage all parties to
armed conflict to sign and implement action plans and
other concrete, time-bound measures to enhance the
protection of children in armed conflict.
We call for full accountability for grave violations
through national and international justice mechanisms,
such as the International Criminal Court. True justice
also involves reparations and access to gender- and
age-sensitive comprehensive specialized services,
including medical, mental health and psychosocial
support and sexual and reproductive health-care
services, as well as legal and livelihood support, to
survivors of grave violations.
We encourage all States Members of the United
Nations to accede to the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement
of children in armed conflict and to consider
endorsing and implementing practical child protection
instruments, such as the Safe Schools Declaration, the
Paris Principles and Commitments and the Vancouver
Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the
Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers.
We call for adequate resourcing for child protection
specialists and activities and urge support to the full
implementation of child protection mandates by United
Nations peace operations.
The Group of Friends expresses its appreciation for
the work of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, UNICEF and all child-protection actors from
the United Nations and civil society.
The children and armed conflict architecture that
the Council established is increasingly challenged to
address the sharp increase both in grave violations
against children and the number of situations in which
they are occurring. We are particularly concerned with
the report’s finding that Government forces are now
the main perpetrators of the killing and maiming of
children, attacks on schools and hospitals and denial
of humanitarian assistance. In that regard, we note new
listing decisions this year.
The plight of children in armed conflict remains
dire and necessitates the full and effective use of all
tools at our disposal to prevent and end grave violations

S/PV.9366 (Resumption 1)

against children. We reiterate the importance of the
independence, impartiality and credibility of the
Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism and the listing
mechanism, as contained in the Secretary-General’s
annual reports on children and armed conflict.
We note that Haiti and the Niger are designated
in the report as situations of concern with immediate
effect. We also note the listing decisions in the annexes,
as well as the criteria for those decisions.
We reiterate our call for the information presented
in the Secretary-General’s annual reports, as collected
and verified by the Monitoring and Reporting
Mechanism, to be reflected in the annexes of the report
in an accurate and timely manner. And we recall the
importance of the Secretary-General utilizing clear
criteria and procedures for listing and delisting parties
to armed conflict deemed responsible for committing
grave violations across all situations contained in
the report.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of New Zealand.
Ms. Schwalger (New Zealand): I deliver this
statement on behalf of Canada, Australia and my own
country, New Zealand (CANZ).
I thank the Special Representative and her Office
for their tireless work.
It is shocking to CANZ, as it should be to all of us,
that 27,180 verified grave violations against children
occurred in 2022. In one year alone, 18,890 children
around the world were recruited and used in conflict.
Unfortunately, these figures probably represent only a
small fraction of the number of actual victims around
the world. A 112 per cent increase in the number of
attacks on schools and hospitals is simply unacceptable.
It represents immense suffering for the children
affected, their families and their communities.
The fundamental measures that protect all civilians,
including children, involve respecting international
humanitarian and human rights law. The worsening
statistics in this year’s report of the Secretary-General
(S/2023/363) underline a serious disregard, especially
by Government forces, of international humanitarian
and human rights legal obligations, which is a trend
which we must reverse. CANZ strongly condemns all
grave violations committed against children by any
State or party, and in any conflict.

23-1958513/45

S/PV.9366 (Resumption 1)

Children and armed conflict

CANZ calls for Russian armed forces and
affiliated armed groups and their leadership to be
held accountable for the grave violations they have
committed against children during their ongoing war of
aggression. The killing and maiming of more than 1,386
Ukrainian children in 2022 are devastating. CANZ
recalls guidance of the Secretary-General on contacts
with persons who are the subject of arrest warrants or
summonses issued by the International Criminal Court
(ICC).
The recruitment and use of children in Syria is
staggering. Some 1,696 children have been deprived
of a childhood; instead, they are being recruited by an
array of State and non-State actors and used in combat.
No childhood should be spent fighting.
CANZ condemns the high numbers of verified
cases of rape and sexual violence. These are particularly
concerning, given the consistent underreporting of this
grave violation. This demonstrates the use of sexual
and gender-based violence as a weapon of war.
The denial of humanitarian access, including
in Yemen, Mali and Myanmar, is another deeply
worrisome trend. We call on all parties to allow and
facilitate safe, timely and unimpeded humanitarian
access. To this end, CANZ underscores the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General’s request that
the Taliban immediately revoke their ban on women
working for non-governmental organizations and the
United Nations in Afghanistan.
The 112 per cent increase in attacks on schools
and hospitals, including the 66 verified attacks
committed by the Myanmar armed forces, along
with unlawful abductions, adds to an already dire
picture. The protection international humanitarian
law provides for civilian persons and civilian objects
must be respected in all situations. In addition to
our commitment to international humanitarian law,
the three CANZ members have all endorsed the Safe
Schools Declaration.
CANZ welcomes the inclusion of Haiti and the
Niger as situations of concern, given the number of
violations reported.
While the situation put forward in this year’s
report is alarming, we wish to acknowledge the
critical positive steps taken to protect and reintegrate
children in the last year. We welcome the signing of
action plans — first, by the Government of Iraq in that
14/45

05/07/2023

country, and secondly, by the Houthis in Yemen. We
also welcome commitments and developments in other
countries with regard to prevention, accountability,
national legislation, training and capacity-building.
Tackling impunity, through prompt investigation
and, where appropriate, prosecution for war crimes,
genocide and crimes against humanity, is needed to
strengthen our response to grave violations against
children. We implore States to cooperate with
international justice mechanisms, including the ICC.
CANZ encourages the Security Council to ensure
that child protection tasks and capabilities are included
in all relevant peacekeeping and special political mission
mandates, and that these are adequately maintained
through transitions or during reconfigurations.
More child protection expertise is needed to
reinforce the children and armed conflict Monitoring
and Reporting Mechanism’s capacities. The demands
on the system are greater than ever before. All
United Nations actors must dedicate resources for the
Mechanism in situations on the children and armed
conflict agenda, and the international community must
do better in supporting United Nations country teams.
CANZ is proud to underscore our support for both
the Paris Principles and the Vancouver Principles on
Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment
and Use of Child Soldiers. We call upon countries
that have not yet done so to endorse these important
commitments. We remain a strong supporter of the
children and armed conflict mandate, and we wish, like
others, to work together to protect our children — who
are our future — from the scourge of war.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chile.
Mr. Vidal (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile thanks
the United Kingdom for convening today’s open
de-bate. We take note of the briefings and statements
heard today. We of course wish the United Kingdom
every success as it presides over the Security Council
this month.
Chile aligns itself with the statement made by the
representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends on Children in Armed Conflict earlier.
There is no doubt that the international community
must increase its efforts to safeguard children in armed
conflict. This means providing children with security,
23-19585

05/07/2023

Children and armed conflict

education, rehabilitation and support networks. Our
position is clear and unequivocal on this issue. Protecting
children and their rights is a moral imperative because
children represent the most valuable element of the
future of humankind.
Precisely for that reason, Chile has ratified most of
the international treaties that seek to protect children in
conflict situations. In the same vein, we are committed
to the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and
the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child
Soldiers. We favour a preventive approach to conflict.
In this regard, we believe that the best way to prevent the
recruitment of children is to foster a culture of peace, as
well as democratic, inclusive and resilient societies, in
order to avoid segregation and social marginalization.
In the long term, children in conflict must be
protected from the beginning to the end of the cycle
of violence, with a view to reaching full and systemic
reintegration. In line with this, we value General
Assembly resolutions 64/290, of 2010, entitled “The
right to education in emergency situations”, and 74/275,
entitled “International Day to Protect Education from
Attack”, of 2020. We have also joined the Safe Schools
Declaration, which was adopted in Oslo in May 2015.
We welcome the comprehensive report of the
Secretary-General on this subject (S/2023/363)
and underline the concern expressed on the role of
Government entities as perpetrators of violations,
especially the targeting of schools and hospitals. The
recruitment and use of children by armed groups is
unacceptable. We deeply regret the serious situation of
violations against children’s rights in armed conflicts in
several countries; in fact, three new ones were added to
the list in the reporting period. We join the SecretaryGeneral’s call to Member States to provide special
protection and care for children and adolescents, as
well as support for their reintegration. With regard to
the report’s recommendations, Chile shares the views
expressed by the Secretary-General.
Finally, and as has been our practice, we will
continue to cooperate with the United Nations to prevent
grave violations against children and will participate in
any ad hoc groups that may be created in that regard.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain.
Mr. Gutiérrez Segú Berdullas (Spain) (spoke in
Spanish): Spain aligns itself with the statement made

S/PV.9366 (Resumption 1)

on behalf of the European Union, and that delivered by
the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Children and Armed Conflict.
This agenda is a priority for my country in the context
of promoting respect for international humanitarian law
and the protection of civilians. The protection of all
children in armed conflicts is one of the main lines of
action in the strategy for humanitarian diplomacy that
Spain adopted in January.
We thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2023/363), as well as Special Representative Virginia
Gamba de Potgieter and her Office for their tireless work,
which we will continue to support. We will also continue
our active cooperation with UNICEF.
We are concerned about the situation described in
the report, especially the increase in violence against
children in armed conflicts in the past year. The data, such
as the 122 per cent increase in attacks against schools and
hospitals, are alarming and unacceptable. The figures
remind us of the vulnerability of children in conflict
situations and the need to ensure humanitarian access.
We are also concerned about the situation in Ukraine,
where Russia’s aggression continues to hit schools,
hospitals and other civilian infrastructure, as well as
claim the lives of children. The evidence of the forced
deportation of thousands of Ukrainian minors is also
extremely grave, constituting war crimes. We all have a
responsibility to apply international law with the utmost
rigour and to hold accountable those who violate it.
Spain is working to ensure the right to education
in conflict situations. We will continue, through
our establishment of the Giga Technology Centre
in Barcelona, our financial commitment to the Giga
Initiative aimed at closing the digital divide in education
by 2030 by connecting all schools around the world to
the Internet, including those in countries in conflict.
My country is fully committed to the implementation
of the Safe Schools Declaration, as well as the Political
Declaration on Strengthening the Protection of Civilians
from the Humanitarian Consequences Arising from the
Use of Explosive Weapons in Populated Areas. In that
regard, we urge countries that have not signed those texts
to do so without delay.
We are also pursuing our commitment to ensuring
children’s right to health and to implementing resolution
2286 (2016), on the protection of health care in conflict,
of which we were a co-sponsor.

23-1958515/45

S/PV.9366 (Resumption 1)

Children and armed conflict

Women and girls continue to be especially
vulnerable to sexual violence in conflict. It is therefore
essential to support preventive approaches and
women’s effective participation in decision-making,
thereby strengthening the women and peace and
security agenda.
It is essential for peace operations to improve
and expand child protection mandates. The Security
Council can enhance protection mandates, including by
appointing protection advisers and expert teams, and
has Spain’s support in that regard.
On 1 July, we assumed the six-month presidency
of the Council of the European Union. During these
months, we will raise awareness on humanitarian
issues, including the protection of civilians and children
in armed conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kuwait.
Mr. Mohammad (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to take this opportunity to warmly
congratulate you, Mr. President, on the assumption
of your friendly country, the United Kingdom, of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month, and I
wish you every success. I also thank you for convening
this important open debate on children and armed
conflict and for preparing the concept note (S/2023/470,
annex) for this meeting. I would also like to thank the
briefers for their valuable remarks earlier today.
As we meet today, we have before us the annual
report of the Secretary-General, António Guterres,
on children and armed conflict (S/2023/363). What is
stated therein should shock our collective conscience.
The information and figures included in the report
are alarming and unfortunate, and they reflect the
disconnect we are seeing at the United Nations in general
and in the Security Council in particular. As we speak in
the halls of the United Nations, and specifically here in
the Council Chamber, about the protection of civilians
in armed conflicts and the importance of complying
with international humanitarian law and international
human rights law, the report reveals a picture on the
ground that is completely different from what we are
calling for in the halls of the United Nations.
The report shows how children have become targets
on the front lines in armed conflicts, indicating that
the United Nations has verified more than 27,000 grave
violations against children in armed conflicts, including
16/45

05/07/2023

a range of violations such as the killing and maiming of
children, the recruitment or use of children by armed
forces and groups, attacks on schools or hospitals,
sexual violence, the abduction of children and the denial
of humanitarian access to children. Conflicts around
the world rob children — who are the most vulnerable
group in armed conflicts — of their innocence and
their inherent right to life, decent living, survival and
development. In the face of the horrific information in
the report, the international community cannot stand
idly by and allow a situation in which innocent children
live in terror and are subjected to violence and harm.
Children should live in an environment that guarantees
their protection and a sense of safety.
When we speak about children and armed conflict,
we are compelled, time and again, to address the
suffering of the defenceless Palestinian people and
their children. In that regard, the State of Kuwait
reaffirms its condemnation in the strongest terms of
the violations by Israel, the occupying Power, against
the Palestinian people and their children. Those
violations have been committed before the eyes of
the international community for decades. The Israeli
occupation forces continue to perpetrate heinous
crimes against the Palestinian people, most recently
in the city of Jenin, which led to the martyrdom and
injury of many Palestinians, including children.
The children of Palestine have been suffering grave
violations over many years, not limited only to killings,
maiming and detentions, but also the destruction
of educational, health and other basic facilities,
displacing them and their families and leading to the
deterioration of the humanitarian and living conditions
in their communities.
In that regard, we renew our call on the Council
to shoulder its political, legal and humanitarian
responsibilities to stop the repeated attacks by the Israeli
occupation forces against the brotherly Palestinian
people and their children, and to work to provide them
with international protection, while also stressing the
need to hold accountable those responsible for the
crimes committed against the Palestinian people. We
once again ask the Council: how much longer will
the Council continue to apply double standards when
dealing with the Palestinian people and their just
cause? How much longer will the Council allow Israel,
the occupying Power, to continue its actions, practices
and violations as if it is above the law? How much
longer will the Council remain silent as the Palestinian
23-19585

05/07/2023

Children and armed conflict

people — including their children — are denied
their legitimate rights, as if the rules and provisions
of international law do not apply to the rights of the
Palestinian people? The inability of the international
community to address the Palestinian question and
hold Israel, the occupying Power, accountable remains
the greatest failure in the history of the United Nations
in general and the Security Council in particular. It
represents a disgrace to humankind.
In conclusion, expressing our outrage over the
atrocities committed against children in armed conflicts
around the world is not enough. It is time to end violence
against children. It is time to hold the perpetrators of
crimes against children accountable. It is time to end
conflicts, achieve sustainable peace, implement the
Security Council’s resolutions and support the efforts
of the United Nations to protect children and provide
basic services, relief and humanitarian assistance
without discrimination or impediments. If we can make
progress in implementing such measures we will help
to protect the world from losing yet another generation
of innocent children to war and conflict. The State of
Kuwait stresses that strengthening international efforts
is more crucial than ever in addressing all forms of
grave violations against children in armed conflict
in order to provide them with effective protection,
guarantee their legitimate rights, prevent further
crimes against them and hold those responsible for such
violations accountable.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
Mr. Al-Maawda (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, Mr. President, I would like to offer our
congratulations to the United Kingdom on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for this month
and our thanks for convening this important debate. We
are also grateful to Mrs. Virginia Gamba de Potgieter,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, for her comprehensive
briefing, and to the other briefers for their statements.
We align ourselves with the statement delivered by
the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Children and Armed Conflict.
The discussion today provides an important
opportunity to consider the findings of the SecretaryGeneral’s annual report (S/2023/363) on children and
armed conflict. The report highlights the sad reality and
the negative impact of conflicts and crises on children’s

S/PV.9366 (Resumption 1)

lives, and notes the increase in the number of children
affected by grave violations in 2022, including through
damage to schools and hospitals and deprivation of
education and health services. We commend the efforts
to highlight and include such violations in the report.
In the light of the huge numbers of violations and their
disastrous consequences for human rights, our efforts to
address them must be commensurate with their gravity
and impact on international peace and security. In the
first place, we must step up efforts to protect children at
all stages of conflict and ensure respect for international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
In our view, strengthening accountability mechanisms
is one of the crucial factors in ending impunity. It is
equally important to ensure that children in conflict
situations receive adequate protection and attention.
We firmly believe that armed conflict should not
interfere with the right to education. Failing to guarantee
children’s right to education risks undermining human
rights and sustainable development, especially in
societies that are suffering from conflict. The State of
Qatar is well known as a major contributor to support
for quality education worldwide. We have prioritized
protecting and strengthening the right to education,
particularly in emergency situations, within the
framework of our international emergency development
and relief programmes. In that regard, I would like
to point out that Qatar launched an initiative in the
educational arena when we spearheaded international
efforts around the adoption of General Assembly
resolution 74/275, which proclaimed 9 September as
the International Day to Protect Education from Attack.
Following its adoption, Qatar’s Education Above All
Foundation launched TRACE, the Track Attacks on
Education data portal, which collects data related to
attacks on educational institutions and aims to identify
their perpetrators. The Foundation’s programmes
have helped provide quality education for millions of
children all over the world.
We commend the important role and efforts
of the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
and UNICEF. I want to point out that in the period
from 2018 to 2023, the State of Qatar has contributed
$2.5 million to the Office of the Special Representative
with a view to strengthening its role and its ability to
implement its crucial mandate. We also supported the
operationalization of the Analysis and Outreach Hub in
Doha, which we opened in June 2022 and which will

23-1958517/45

S/PV.9366 (Resumption 1)

Children and armed conflict

05/07/2023

work to improve institutional knowledge on current
and future efforts for the protection of children, with
a focus on their reintegration, and to implement the
Practical Guidance for Mediators to Protect Children
in Situations of Armed Conflict.

to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict. We also
encourage all parties to support other important tools
such as the Paris Principles and Commitments and the
Vancouver Principles.

In conclusion, ensuring full respect for children’s
human rights and creating an environment conducive
to children’s secure education contribute to building
stable, safe and prosperous societies. We reiterate the
State of Qatar’s commitment to supporting all efforts
aimed at protecting children in armed conflict and at
preventing such conflict.

Civilians and civilian infrastructure must be
respected. San Marino is extremely concerned
about the disregard we are seeing for international
humanitarian law. We call on all parties to strictly abide
by international humanitarian and human rights law.
Furthermore, the use of explosive weapons in populated
areas has resulted in increases in the numbers of deaths,
physical injuries and trauma among civilians, including
children, who subsequently find themselves unable to
return to their daily lives even after a conflict ends.
San Marino is deeply concerned in that regard, and we
therefore immediately endorsed the recently adopted
Political Declaration on Strengthening the Protection of
Civilians from the Humanitarian consequences Arising
from the Use of Explosive Weapons in Populated Areas
and encourage all States to do the same and to abide by
its commitments.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of San Marino.
Mr. Beleffi (San Marino): I would like to thank
the delegation of the United Kingdom for convening
this important meeting, the Secretary-General for
his annual report (S/2023/363) and the briefers for
their presentations.
San Marino aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group
of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict and with the
statement delivered on behalf of the European Union.
We firmly support the children and armed conflict
agenda and call on all armed forces and armed groups
listed in the report’s annexes to engage constructively
with the United Nations to develop and implement
action plans to end and prevent grave violations against
children. San Marino is particularly worried about
the high number of grave violations against children
described this year in the Secretary-General’s report.
Armed conflict continues to devastate children’s lives
and compromise their fundamental rights. The report
shows a disturbing increase in attacks on schools and
hospitals, which is unacceptable. San Marino firmly
condemns attacks on schools and hospitals, as well
as their use for military purposes. Children’s right to
health care and education are fundamental and should
always be preserved.
We reiterate our support for the Safe Schools
Declaration. Educational facilities should be a
safe place for all children, students and teachers.
Education is a powerful tool for peace and should
therefore be supported and respected. San Marino
is also very concerned about the substantial increase
in the recruitment and use of child soldiers. We call
on all Member States to ratify the Optional Protocol
18/45

We reiterate the importance of accountability for
all grave violations against children and of refusing to
accept impunity for the perpetrators of such violations.
The international community has the duty not only
to stop and prevent those violations, but also to assist
child victims and work for their reintegration. The
Government of San Marino appreciates the work of
national non-governmental organizations in their
efforts to prevent the use of child soldiers and for the
promotion of children’s rights.
I would like to express San Marino’s unwavering
support for the work of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict and of her Office. We welcome the new action
plans and commitments that have been signed or that
are in progress. No child should ever live the horror of
war. That should not be forgotten. Ultimately, children
are the root of peace, and we should therefore invest in
them, their safety and their future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Estonia.
Mr. Tammsaar (Estonia): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the three Baltic countries — Latvia,
Lithuania and, my own country, Estonia.
23-19585

05/07/2023

Children and armed conflict

I thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s
Security Council open debate, and I thank the briefers
for their briefings.
Every year, the report on children and armed
conflict provides us with a horrific overview of the
violations committed against children around the globe.
Sadly, this year’s report (S/2023/363) is no exception,
as we are once again witnessing an overall increase in
violence against children, as exemplified by more than
27,000 verified cases of grave violations committed in
ongoing protracted conflicts — be it in the Lake Chad
basin and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, or in
the Secretary-General’s designated new situations of
concern in Haiti and the Niger. Unfortunately, there is
also an increase in the number of actors listed as parties
committing grave violations against children.
The most significant addition to the list of grave
violations is the Russian Federation. It is beyond shameful
that a Member State whose primary responsibility is
to maintain peace and security in the world, a member
that lectures us here in the Council about what is right
and what is wrong, has itself committed 878 verified
appalling cases of grave violations against children
in Ukraine. The actual number is deemed to be much
higher. Besides, that number does not include the
thousands of children abducted or illegally deported
from occupied Ukrainian territories to Russia.
According to the report, the armed forces of a
permanent member of the Security Council do not
only use children as human shields and attack schools
where they are studying, but the Russian military,
mercenaries and security forces also torture, abduct,
rape and kill children on a daily basis during the
military aggression, led by a criminal wanted by the
International Criminal Court.
We commend the Special Representative’s efforts
to agree and implement the joint prevention plan with
Ukraine and the joint action plan with the aggressor
State, Russia. Yet Russia’s commitment is utterly
unconvincing. On the day of the release of the report
alone, which recognizes Russia’s engagement with the
Special Representative on the use of explosive weapons
with wide-area impact, three children were killed,
among many civilians, by a Russian targeted ballistic
missile strike against a restaurant in Kramatorsk.
Therefore, a question should be posed. Does Russia
care about those children who lost their lives? I am
afraid the honest answer is “absolutely not”. And maybe

S/PV.9366 (Resumption 1)

that is the reason that the report remains rather vague
on the practical measures agreed with the Russian
Federation, while mentioning the numerous initiatives
and steps Ukraine has implemented. The only thing
that matters for Russian leadership, which, in spite
of the internal power struggle, remains obsessed with
Ukraine and with restoring Russia’s former imperial
grandeur, is to erase a sovereign Ukraine from the
map and exterminate the Ukrainian nation at any cost.
Targeting children is an ugly but integral part of that
inhuman plan.
In conclusion, armed conflicts, into which children
are involuntarily drawn, scar their lives forever
and further fuel the cycle of violence. Although the
childhood of targeted children cannot be salvaged, the
perpetrators of those heinous actions must always be
held fully accountable. The only thing left for me to
say is to reassure those present in the Chamber that we
in the Baltic States will continue to support the Office
of the Special Representative, UNICEF and other child
protection actors in their efforts to protect the rights of
children around the globe.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bulgaria.
Ms. Stoeva (Bulgaria): Bulgaria aligns itself with
the statements delivered on behalf of the European
Union and the Group of Friends of Children and
Armed Conflict.
I would like to express my appreciation to the
United Kingdom for organizing this year’s open debate
on children and armed conflict. Bulgaria would also like
to thank today’s briefers for their remarks — Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Virginia
Gamba de Potgieter and UNICEF Deputy Executive
Director for Programmes Omar Abdi — and especially
Ms. Violeta for her both sobering and inspiring story.
Allow me to reiterate Bulgaria’s robust support for the
children and armed conflict mandate.
The recent report of the Secretary-General
(S/2023/363) is a striking reminder of the urgency of
the issue at hand. Alarmingly, the overall number of
children affected by armed conflict has increased
since 2021. Considering the difficult access and strict
verification standards, the 27,180 children affected by
grave violations in 2022 may well be only the tip of
the iceberg.

23-1958519/45

S/PV.9366 (Resumption 1)

Children and armed conflict

We are particularly concerned about the Niger and
Haiti, both newly designated as situations of concern.
Bulgaria supports the signing of action plans, such as
the most recent one with the Houthis in Yemen in 2022,
and we welcome progress in engaging with parties to
protect children in conflicts in Africa, South America,
the Middle East and Eastern Europe.
Bulgaria has been vocal about the Russian
Federation’s war of aggression, including its impact
on children. The Group of Friends of Children and the
Sustainable Development Goals, co-chaired by Bulgaria,
issued two joint statements on that subject. The listing
of Russia in annex II to the report, highlighting parties
that commit grave violations affecting children, is yet
additional proof of the moral bankruptcy of the Kremlin,
which has led a permanent member of the Council to
find itself on the same list as non-State armed groups,
including terrorists. Bulgaria reiterates its call on the
Russian Federation to immediately cease its aggression
and withdraw from the territory of Ukraine within its
internationally recognized borders.
We urge all parties to adopt and implement handover
protocols for children encountered or detained during
military operations to civilian child protection actors,
refrain from using schools and hospitals for military
purposes and endorse the Safe Schools Declaration.
We should all support the Vancouver Principles, ratify
the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict and implement the Paris Principles. We also
urge parties to refrain from using explosive weapons in
populated areas and to endorse the political declaration
on that subject.
I would like to reaffirm Bulgaria’s commitment to
the protection and promotion of the rights of the child
in armed conflict and highlight the importance of the
continuation of education in areas of armed conflict.
Education is central to preventing the recruitment and
use of children by armed forces and groups.
Last but not least, allow me to pay tribute to all those
working in the field for the protection and promotion of
the rights of the child in the context of armed conflict.
Oftentimes, they are the only chance for children in
armed conflict. Their work is invaluable, and they do
make a difference.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative Türkiye.
20/45

05/07/2023

Mrs. Özgür (Türkiye): The Secretary-General’s
report (S/2023/363) highlights the worsening global
trend for children in armed conflict. The heavy toll on
children as a result of the war in Ukraine is concerning.
Children deserve more and special attention as one
of the most fragile groups. That is why Türkiye has
prioritized children in its humanitarian assistance
to Ukraine.
Since March 2022, we have hosted more than 1,000
Ukrainian orphans and 500 caregivers in Türkiye. We
took necessary measures to meet their accommodation,
care, health and education needs in our country. We
also brought together the Russian and Ukrainian
ombudspersons in Ankara in January. They discussed
humanitarian issues, including the return of children
and family reunification. We will continue our efforts
in that regard.
In Iraq, decades of war, authoritarian rule, ethnic
and sectarian violence and infighting have had adverse
effects on children. By exploiting the security vacuum,
terrorist organizations — mainly Da’esh and the
Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) — have mobilized
every possible means to realize their inhumane and
destructive agendas in that country. As widely reported
by members of the Yazidi community, the PKK/
People’s Protection Units (YPG) terrorist organization
has kidnapped hundreds of Yazidi children from the
Sinjar and Al-Hol camps in Syria and subjected them
to ideological brainwashing for recruitment purposes
since 2015. Indeed, the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2023/363) shows that the PKK terrorist organization
is primarily responsible for the recruitment and use
of children in Iraq. Likewise, the PKK-Democratic
Union Party (PYD)-Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF)
terrorist organization once again tops the list for the
recruitment and use of children in Syria, in addition
to the horrendous numbers of girls and boys that it has
killed or maimed. Moreover, it is the PKK-PYD-SDF
that has been primarily responsible for the military
use of schools and hospitals in Syria, as well as the
abduction of children.
However, we are surprised by the report’s random
approach in its references to the PKK terrorist
organization in Syria. The truth is that the so-called
SDF, the Internal Security Forces, the PYD, the YPG
and the Women’s Protection Units are all elements of the
same terrorist organization — the PKK. The separatist
terminology — “under the authority of the autonomous
administration of northern and eastern Syria” — used
23-19585

05/07/2023

Children and armed conflict

in complete disregard for the territorial integrity of a
United Nations Member State, also refers to the very
same terrorist organization. The PKK perpetrated more
than 530 attacks in Syria last year alone, killing and
maiming hundreds of civilians, including children.
It has also continued to forcibly impose its separatist
curriculum on schools in the areas that it controls in
Syria and to dismiss, arrest and mistreat teachers who
oppose its oppression. My Government continues to
share with the United Nations the relevant data and
evidence of violations inflicted on children in Syria by
the PKK-PYD-SDF.
I also want to put on record my country’s position
with regard to the incorrect references in the report to
Türkiye’s counter-terrorism operations in Syria and Iraq.
Those operations are conducted as part of Türkiye’s
inherent right to self-defence, in line with Article 51 of
the Charter of the United Nations and in full compliance
with international law and international humanitarian
law. They target terrorists exclusively, and the utmost
attention and care is taken to avoid any harm to civilians
and civilian infrastructure. Türkiye supports the efforts
of the United Nations in addressing the situation of
children in armed conflict and will continue to work
closely with the United Nations system, including the
Office of the Special Representative, to that end.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Armenia.
Mr. Margaryan (Armenia): We thank the
presidency of the United Kingdom for convening today’s
open debate on the theme of children and armed conflict.
We appreciate the comprehensive presentations by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Mrs. Virginia Gamba de
Potgieter; the Deputy Executive Director for Programmes
at UNICEF, Mr. Omar Abdi; and the civil-society briefer.
Armenia emphasizes the critical importance of
upholding the goals, objectives and principles enshrined
in the Safe Schools Declaration and the Paris and
Vancouver Principles with the aim of promoting and
protecting the rights of all children, especially those
in conflict-affected areas, and of preventing grave
violations of children’s rights. The Secretary-General’s
report on children and armed conflict (S/2023/363)
reveals the growing number of challenges faced by
children as multidimensional conflicts, including across
regions, continued to have an adverse impact on the
lives of civilians during the reporting period of 2022.

S/PV.9366 (Resumption 1)

It demonstrates that monitoring and verifying grave
violations remain extremely challenging, including owing
to constraints on access, leading to the underreporting
of such violations. Underreporting is a major challenge
that can lead to bias and inadequate responses and enable
the perpetration of further violations, including in my
own region.
In September 2022, Azerbaijan conducted an armed
attack on Armenia’s territorial integrity, exposing a
number of villages and towns deep inside Armenia to
massive shelling by heavy artillery and uncrewed aerial
vehicles. Azerbaijan’s premeditated criminal actions
violated the right to education of 25,000 children displaced
from Gegharkunik, Vayots Dzor and Syunik provinces.
Since 12 December 2022 the civilian population in
Nagorno-Karabakh has fallen victim to an inhumane
blockade by Azerbaijan that has severely affected the
rights and livelihoods of the most vulnerable — children.
As we speak, the ongoing blockade of the Lachin
corridor, in violation of the existing legal obligations
and an order from the International Court of Justice,
continues to endanger the lives of innocent people in
Nagorno-Karabakh.
For almost seven months now, families with children
have been suffering from critical shortages of essential
goods, including food, fuel and medical supplies. The
humanitarian situation has been further exacerbated
by the complete disruption of its gas and electricity
supplies. Owing to weather conditions, 118 schools
have had to suspend their activities, depriving 20,000
children of their right to education. That includes early
education, with preschools no longer operational due to
food insecurity, affecting more than 6,800 children. The
provision of health services has been severely disrupted,
with an acute lack of antibiotics and other types of
medication leaving children susceptible to otherwise
easily treatable diseases, while hundreds of newborns
are experiencing nutritional problems exacerbated by an
ongoing shortage of infant formula.
On 22 February, the International Court of
Justice issued an order requiring Azerbaijan to take
provisional measures
“at its disposal to ensure unimpeded movement
of persons, vehicles and cargo along the Lachin
corridor in both directions.”
So far Azerbaijan has failed to ensure compliance
with the Court’s legally binding order of the
Court. Azerbaijan’s denial of safe and unimpeded

23-1958521/45

S/PV.9366 (Resumption 1)

Children and armed conflict

humanitarian access for United Nations agencies to
Nagorno-Karabakh undermines the comprehensive
assessment of the humanitarian, protection and earlyrecovery needs and the human rights situation of the
population to ensure the protection of the rights of
children and their access to inclusive and quality
education, health care and social services.
As the leading United Nations advocate for the
protection of children affected by armed conflict, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General has a
central role to play in raising awareness of the need to
increase efforts to protect children whose inalienable
rights are under brutal attack. The intentional disruption
of the Lachin corridor, which has left 30,000 children
and their families besieged, constitutes a violation
of massive scope and gravity. We call on the Special
Representative to use her important mandate to monitor
the situation and to make efforts to ensure humanitarian
access in order to avoid any further deterioration of
the conditions affecting the lives of the children in
Nagorno-Karabakh.
The United Nations and its humanitarian arm,
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, as well as the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
and the Council itself, have a particular responsibility
to prevent grave violations and safeguard the physical
security of children, whose rights and safety must be
respected and protected at all times in all parts of the
world, including Nagorno-Karabakh.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines.
Mrs. Lora-Santos (Philippines): The Philippines
thanks the delegation of the United Kingdom for
holding this open debate and the briefers for their
informative presentations.
The Philippines is committed to protecting children
and fulfilling all its obligations under the Convention
on the Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocols,
including their right not to know the horrors of war. We
take a whole-of-Government approach to issues relating
to children and armed conflict and to addressing grave
violations committed against children. We would like
to point to the finding in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2023/363) that grave violations against
children in the Philippines decreased by 38 per cent in
2022. The Government is committed to implementing
22/45

05/07/2023

its law on children in situations of armed conflict across
the relevant national agencies, local governments and
civil society, down to the grass-roots level.
Civil-society organizations, non-governmental
organizations and indigenous communities have a
meaningful role to play in raising awareness of childprotection issues and particularly in preventing the
recruitment of child combatants. The Council on the
Welfare of Children is the focal inter-agency body
that coordinates the enforcement and implementation
of all laws on children, ensuring a child-friendly and
-sensitive society where every child enjoys their rights.
It promptly intervenes in cases of children rescued
from armed rebel groups and reintegrates them into
their families and communities, in collaboration with
the Department of Social Welfare and Development.
In June 2021, the Government signed the strategic
plan to prevent and respond to grave child right
violations in situations of armed conflict. The Philippine
National Police issued a child protection policy that
incorporates the provisions of the law on children in
situations of armed conflict and its handling protocol.
More than 3,000 child protection actors were trained on
the laws and policies on child protection. The children
and armed conflict agenda was also incorporated in
the Bangsamoro Children’s Code in the Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao.
Children are zones of peace. That is a central
principle in our law on children in situations of armed
conflict. It means that everyone is required to preserve
the peaceful integrity of children, exemplify mutual
respect and non-violent behaviour in the presence of
children and resolve all armed conflicts that cause
damage to children. At all times, even during armed
conflict, the human rights and best interests of children
must be the primary consideration in any decision.
That entails not only the prohibition of attacks on
schools of the use of schools for military purposes, but
also the creation and facilitation of alternative ways
of delivering education services to children during
situations of armed conflict.
To protect learners and schools from conflict or
its effects, we have the National Policy Framework
on Learners and Schools as Zones of Peace. That
framework serves as a guide to the defence and
education sectors for the creation of safe, inclusive and
conflict-sensitive learning environments for children.
No attacks on schools are tolerated.
23-19585

05/07/2023

Children and armed conflict

S/PV.9366 (Resumption 1)

Having the law on children in situations of armed
conflict and its implementing protocols, regulations and
frameworks streamline the coordination of the efforts
of all agencies concerned in order to ensure the safety
of children. Positive outcomes can be maximized and
achieved earlier with the involvement of civil society,
non-governmental organizations, communities and
families. We cannot overemphasize the importance of a
whole-of-society approach in protecting children from
armed conflict, as well as in preventing armed conflict
and building peace, in general.

Those that seek Israel’s destruction know that Israel
will never target children or deliberately put innocent’s
in harm’s way — not now, not ever — while they
weaponize this ethical integrity in their jihad war against
us. They turn mosques into arms caches, as we saw just
two days ago in Jenin. They utilize hospitals as rocket
launchpads. They use schools and even United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) schools as cover for terror tunnels.
We know that the United Nations knows that, yet it was
hardly even mentioned in the report.

The President: We are halfway through the list for
this afternoon, so I encourage all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than three minutes in order to
allow us to finish in good time.

Imagine what would have happened if a terror tunnel
that was discovered underneath an UNRWA school
in Gaza last November had collapsed, or if explosives
stored in it had detonated while Palestinian children were
playing in the yard above. Palestinian children deserve
to grow up in safety, but sadly the modus operandi of
their leadership is to use them as human shields. They do
that because they know that targeting innocence is a red
line that Israel does not and will not cross. The fact that
terrorists understand and exploit that, but United Nations
entities refuse to condemn or, at the very least, address it
is truly incomprehensible.

I now give the floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Miller (Israel): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important meeting, and I thank the
briefers for their statements earlier today.
The safety and well-being of children, as well as
their safety and protection, is a matter of the utmost
importance for Israel. That is why we commend the
United Nations for also putting the protection of
children at the forefront. Any measure taken to protect
children in armed conflict is a measure that Israel
stands by.
Nevertheless, after reading the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2023/363), it seems that, when it comes to
Israel, the United Nations has once again opted to
advance a politicized agenda, rather than focus on those
truly responsible for the danger, maiming and deaths
of children. The report demonizes Israel despite the
fact that when it comes to protecting the lives of the
innocent, especially children, Israel goes above and
beyond the letter of the law in order to do so.
Video footage of Israel aborting strikes on terrorists
due to the proximity of children and other civilians are
widely circulated. Several such videos were publicized
throughout Operation Shield and Arrow in Gaza, in
May, and such extensive measures are taken during
every Israeli defensive operation. The Israel Defense
Forces are one of the most moral militaries in the
world, and no one-sided politicized report will prove
otherwise. Yet sadly, Israel’s iron-clad moral compass is
interpreted as weakness by our enemies — a weakness
that they constantly aim to exploit.

One reaps what one sows. When Palestine leaders
invest extensive resources and funding into furthering
incitement and hatred, it is no surprise that they are
raising a generation of youth driven by violence. The
number of minors carrying out terror attacks is growing
exponentially. Palestinian teens set out to murder Israelis
because they see the so-called honour such attacks would
bring them and the payments through the Palestinian
Authority’s “pay-for-slay” programme that the families
receive for their crimes. That is not discussed in
the report.
Hamas and Palestinian Islamic Jihad sponsor
annual summer camps for Gazan youths to become
indoctrinated to murder Israelis. That is something
that those terror organizations take great pride in and
publicize on a wide scale, yet they are similarly not
mentioned once in the report. In fact, Hamas — the
designated terror organization that holds the civilians
of Gaza hostage, recruits children, hides behind them
and uses them as human shields — is only mentioned
once in the report, and in a positive light. Again, this is
truly incomprehensible.
Children should be in schools to further their
education, not incited to hatred. Children should be
encouraged to throw balls, not rocks. Children should

23-1958523/45

S/PV.9366 (Resumption 1)

Children and armed conflict

05/07/2023

be given toys to play with, not weapons. It is tragic that
Palestinian children are not given the childhood they
deserve, but is also tragic that the United Nations chooses
to turn a blind eye to their horrifying upbringing.

condemn those acts and demand accountability for
their perpetrators. State actors are obliged to comply
with international humanitarian law and international
human rights law.

There is no mission more crucial than protecting
children, so it is heartbreaking to see that the United
Nations permits hateful political agendas to seep into
this topic as well. The deaths and injuries of children
must be prevented at all costs, and they must never
serve as pawns for the Palestinians’ twisted anti-Israel
agenda here at the United Nations or elsewhere. When it
comes to protecting children, the time has come to stop
falsely vilifying Israel and start condemning those who
cynically and deliberately put children in harm’s way.

In that context, we welcome the listing of
Russian armed forces and affiliated armed groups as
perpetrators of grave violations in the past year. I would
like to emphasize that these listings are based on facts
and collaborated by numerous independent reports
from a large number of sources.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Czechia.
Mr. Kulhánek (Czechia): I would like to start
by thanking the United Kingdom for convening this
important meeting. I wish to thank all the briefers.
Let me also take this opportunity to congratulate the
United Arab Emirates on its successful completion of
its Security Council presidency and extend my best
wishes to the United Kingdom presidency.
Czechia aligns itself with the statements delivered
on behalf of the European Union and the Group of
Friends of Children and Armed Conflict.
We thank the Secretary-General for his recent
report on children and armed conflict (S/2023/363)
and the Office of the Special Representative Gamba de
Potgieter and other United Nations entities, including
UNICEF, for their engagement in monitoring and
reporting. The report underscores the urgency of acting
on the children and armed conflict agenda, as violent
conflicts worldwide continue to destroy children’s lives.
We are deeply troubled by the number of children
affected by grave violations in the past year — reaching
nearly 19,000. We express our concern about the list
of parties responsible for those grave violations across
all geographical situations. We also take note of the
addition of new situations of concern in the Niger
and Haiti.
Sadly, grave violations against children continue
to occur and are mostly perpetrated by State actors.
That was evident, for instance, in the recent attack
on a restaurant in the Ukrainian city of Kramatorsk,
where children were killed and wounded as a result
of shelling by the Russian armed forces. We strongly
24/45

We also welcome that the report explicitly mentions
the abductions of Ukrainian children to Russia, but
true extent of that practice is greater. These violations
must be investigated, and the Russian authorities must
ensure the immediate return of the abducted children to
Ukraine. We support the International Criminal Court’s
jurisdiction in the situation and call on the international
community to intensify its efforts to expose it. In that
regard, let me recall that tackling the abductions is also
part of the mandate of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for children and armed conflict. In
order to prevent violations of children’s rights in armed
conflict, we must strengthen accountability efforts.
All who are responsible for grave violations against
children must be brought to justice, and we must uphold
and reinforce the international legal and normative
child-protection standards.
Czechia remains fully committed to supporting
the protection of children’s rights and to the children
and armed conflict agenda. We urge all parties to
conflicts to cease violations and work to develop
joint action plans with the United Nations. We call
on the Security Council to work closely with the
Special Representative, including on specific country
situations, and to incorporate child-protection aspects
into its deliberations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Hossain (Bangladesh): I thank the Permanent
Mission of the United Kingdom for convening today’s
vital open debate. I also thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Gamba de Potgieter and
UNICEF Deputy Executive Director Abdi and others
for their insightful briefings this morning.
The grave violations against children that we
are witnessing in so many conflict zones around the
world are a moral outrage and a stain on our collective
23-19585

05/07/2023

Children and armed conflict

conscience. Despite the constant efforts of the United
Nations, including the Security Council, there were
27,180 such violations in 2022 alone, a significant
increase from the previous year. That highlights the
urgent need for enhanced measures to protect children
in armed conflict. We thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report (S/2023/363). We commend
the Special Representative, the country task forces, the
Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism and the Security
Council’s Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict for their efforts in the release and support of
12,460 children associated with armed forces or groups.
Drawing on its own experiences of enduring the
horrors of war, Bangladesh remains committed to
protecting civilians, especially children, in armed
conflict. As the leading troop- and police-contributing
country for the United Nations, we have sent our
peacekeepers to serve in many difficult situations to
protect children from being killed, maimed or affected
by sexual violence. Furthermore, they have been
protecting schools and hospitals and ensuring their
sanctity as spaces of education and healing. Based on our
belief in the importance of such protection, Bangladesh
has been providing shelter to more than 1.2 million
Rohingya for the past six years. More than 50 per cent
of them are children who have endured unimaginable
atrocities and persecution in Myanmar. The situation in
Myanmar continues to remain dangerous for children,
who are often used as soldiers by the armed forces and
other ethnic armed groups. It will be critical to address
those challenges with urgency in order to ensure an
environment in Myanmar that is conducive to the safety
of all children. In addressing the guiding questions for
this debate, I would like to highlight the following
key points.
First, we firmly believe that it is our collective
responsibility to ensure that children do not pay the
price for the wars that are waged by us, the adults. We
must take decisive and tangible measures to enhance the
protection of those vulnerable children, who are among
those who need our support most. The protection of
children in armed conflict is primarily the responsibility
of the State. States should therefore ensure that their
national laws are in line with international human
rights law and international humanitarian law, as well
as the Convention on the Rights of the Child and its
Optional Protocol. That includes enacting legislation
that criminalizes grave violations against children and
establishing robust judicial systems to effectively hold
perpetrators accountable.

S/PV.9366 (Resumption 1)

Secondly, we note the efforts to integrate childprotection provisions and capacity into United Nations
peacekeeping operations and special political missions.
However, the available resources do not match the scale
of child-protection risks in conflict-affected areas. We
urge for the increased and timely allocation of critical
resources to effectively address the protection needs of
children in conflict.
Thirdly, innovation plays a crucial role in addressing
the evolving challenges in all areas of our work,
including those faced by children in armed conflict.
We need to explore and pilot innovative approaches
that leverage technology, digital platforms and datadriven solutions to better protect children. Leveraging
technological advancement for the collection and
analysis of data to anticipate risks, and taking early
action for the protection of children in armed conflicts,
are therefore also very much needed. In that regard,
collaboration between Governments, civil society and
the private sector is essential to effectively leverage
technology for child protection.
Finally, we must tailor our responses to the specific
needs of girls. That involves investing in genderresponsive programming, empowering girls through
education and challenging harmful gender norms.
Furthermore, we stress the importance of addressing
child-protection concerns in early warning, conflict
analysis, mediation and transitional justice, as well
as in disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
processes, as recommended by the Secretary-General.
The role of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) is
critical in that regard. We call on the Council to use
the PBC’s advisory role to identify critical gaps in
protection in conflict-affected countries and recognize
good practices in the rehabilitation and reintegration of
the children affected.
Nearly 25 years have passed since the Council
adopted its first resolution on this issue. We must
do something concrete to address the root causes, so
that all the children in the world who are suffering in
conflict can have a protected childhood.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Chatrnúch (Slovakia): Slovakia aligns itself
with the statement made earlier on behalf of the
European Union, and that delivered by the representative

23-1958525/45

S/PV.9366 (Resumption 1)

Children and armed conflict

of Canada on behalf of the Group of Friends of Children
and Armed Conflict. I would also like to make some
remarks in my national capacity.
We would like to thank the United Kingdom for
organizing today’s open debate on the issue of children
in armed conflict, which remains pertinent, timely
and highly relevant. The Secretary-General’s latest
report (S/2023/363) depicts a grim yet very real picture.
The statistics recording verified grave violations of
international law, including the killing, maiming,
recruitment and abduction of children, can only be
described as appalling and entirely unacceptable.
Slovakia reiterates its strong commitment to
international law and the principles it is based on.
Respect for international law is an irreplaceable tool for
the effective protection of children in armed conflict.
Its basic spirit, focused on the protection of the life and
health of children who, as a vulnerable group, often pay
the highest price in conflicts, must be fully respected.
That approach must also be based on the fundamental
understanding that it is not an à la carte option but an
obligation of all parties to conflict. Slovakia therefore
believes that it is crucial for all the parties to a conflict
to fully respect international law, and we call on all
States and other relevant stakeholders to reaffirm their
commitments to upholding international law, including
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. We also call for full accountability
for grave violations through national and international
mechanisms, including the International Criminal
Court. All perpetrators must be brought to justice and
held responsible for the crimes they commit.
We once again reiterate our strong condemnation
of Russia’s ongoing aggression against Ukraine, in
violation of international law and the Charter of the
United Nations and its principles. We note the new
decision in the Secretary-General’s report to list
Russia’s armed forces and its affiliated armed groups in
Ukraine, which only confirms the information emerging
from other reports of the crimes that the Russian
Federation has committed in Ukraine. The listing in the
second annex to the report, together with branches of
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, among others,
is self-explanatory and needs no further comment.
Last but not least, we would like to reiterate our
concerns about the meeting held between United Nations
representatives and Maria Lvova-Belova, who is subject
to an arrest warrant from the International Criminal
26/45

05/07/2023

Court for possible war crimes involving the unlawful
deportation of children. The Relationship Agreement
between the United Nations and the Court requires that
the United Nations refrain from any actions that would
frustrate the activities of the Court and its various organs
or undermine the authority of their decisions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Ms. Leendertse (Germany): Germany thanks
the United Kingdom presidency for convening this
important debate.
We align ourselves with the statement delivered on
behalf of the European Union and the statement made by
the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Children and Armed Conflict.
Germany is deeply concerned about the statistics
and trends presented in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2023/363). We strongly condemn all grave
violations against children worldwide in all conflict
situations. We urge all United Nations States Members
to comply with their obligations under international
humanitarian law and international human rights law
and to do everything in their power to protect children
affected by armed conflict. Germany encourages all
Member States that have not yet done so to endorse the
Safe Schools Declaration, as well as the Paris Principles
and Vancouver Principles, and to ratify the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict. In our
view, it is crucial to focus on reintegrating children who
were previously associated with armed forces. We urge
all parties involved to adopt and implement handover
protocols that provide clear guidelines for the prompt
transfer of children from security forces to civilian
child protection agencies. Ensuring access to safe and
inclusive education must continue to be a top priority
throughout the reintegration process.
We are witnessing an alarming increase in child
abductions and a distressing number of cases involving
sexual violence against children. We must therefore
address the gender aspects of those violations with
even greater urgency. Germany remains steadfast in its
commitment to advocate for adequate funding that takes
into account the gender-specific needs in child protection
efforts within United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Supporting the victims must also include ensuring
their access to comprehensive sexual and reproductive
health services.
23-19585

05/07/2023

Children and armed conflict

I want to conclude by emphasizing my deep concern
regarding the dire situation faced by Ukrainian children.
Due to Russia’s illegal, unprovoked and unjustifiable
war of aggression, a vast number of Ukrainian children
is subjected to severe violations. We therefore commend
the listing of Russia’s armed forces as a necessary step.
The perpetrators of grave violations worldwide must be
held accountable and brought to justice. To that end,
Germany and the Netherlands created the International
Centre for the Prosecution of the Crime of Aggression
against Ukraine, which will be based at the European
Union Agency for Criminal Justice Cooperation.
Upholding the principles of justice and accountability
is not only essential for the victims and their families,
but also crucial for preventing future violations. That
applies to the situation in Ukraine as much as it does
to all other conflict areas. For Germany, promoting
children’s rights and advancing the children and armed
conflict agenda will continue to be a key pillar of our
human rights policy.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Algeria.
Mr. Gaouaoui (Algeria) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to take this opportunity to once
again express the best wishes of my country’s delegation
to the delegation of the United Kingdom and to wish
it every success during its presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I would also like to thank the
briefers for their important statements.
The topic of discussion today is extremely
important, as it concerns children, who are our present
and future. Unfortunately, however, the level of care
for children who are suffering from the horrors of
armed conflict is falling short of our aspirations and
goals. Statistics continue to indicate an increase in the
violations that they are subjected to and in the harm
that they undergo as a result of decisions and practices
the repercussions of which they must bear. Therefore,
I would like to reiterate in this Chamber Algeria’s
call to end the blatant and systematic disregard for
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law in armed conflict, as it impedes our
ability and our combined efforts from protecting that
vulnerable group.
Last month, Algeria was elected as a non-permanent
member of the Security Council for the period 2024 to
2025. Algeria places great importance on the protection
of children in armed conflict, as it firmly believes

S/PV.9366 (Resumption 1)

in the need to save children from the repercussions
of armed conflict and in the importance of raising
a healthy generation that will uphold the values of
peace and coexistence. In that context, Algeria has
ratified all international conventions and instruments,
including the Optional Protocol of the Convention on
the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children
in armed conflict. Algeria has spared, and will spare,
no effort to defend the rights of children and reaffirms
its steadfast belief in the need to employ all means to
ensure improved protection for our children. Algeria
was invited to participate in the United Nations highlevel event to launch a study on the evolution of the
children and armed conflict mandate on the occasion of
the mandate’s twenty-fifth anniversary. That invitation
is perhaps the United Nations way of acknowledging
Algeria’s pioneering role in that regard.
Algeria reiterates the need to adopt a comprehensive
strategy that would safeguard all children everywhere
from the horrors of armed conflict regardless of the
circumstances. International efforts must ensure that
no child is left behind. Children are our hope for a
future where peace, security and development for
all prevails. Clearly, much work lies ahead of us for
realizing the protection of children and adapting to
the changing realities that escalating and multifaceted
conflicts impose on us. Change will be possible if we
pool our efforts to uphold justice and the rule of law and
address the root causes of conflict, including the lack
of development and other related scourges, especially
human trafficking and smuggling.
I would like to reiterate the following points, which
we feel are extremely important.
First, it is important to respect and protect the rights
of children in armed conflict. In that regard, all parties
to a conflict must uphold their commitments to protect
children and end grave violations committed against
them, which will be achieved only when attacks on
children, educational institutions, health-care facilities
and other vital infrastructure are ended. We must work
together to stop the use of explosive weapons and to
bring about a world free of mines and explosives.
Secondly, we must hold the perpetrators of
children’s rights abuses accountable. The failure to
reach that goal is a moral and humanitarian failure.
We must always address violations committed against
children in armed conflict so that perpetrators of
those crimes that have been verified and documented

23-1958527/45

S/PV.9366 (Resumption 1)

Children and armed conflict

will be held accountable. That will be achieved only
through close cooperation among the Governments
and the country teams responsible for reporting and
monitoring. Therefore, it is important to support those
teams by promoting their capacities and providing them
with the necessary funding so that they can fulfil their
duties and mandates, without any politicization.
We therefore cannot disregard the grievous and
systematic violations that the children of Palestine are
subjected to as a result of the occupying authority’s
policies. We condemn in the strongest of terms those
violations, and we call on the international community,
especially the Security Council, to shoulder its
responsibilities, provide the protection necessary for
the children of Palestine and hold accountable all those
who have violated their rights.
Thirdly, we must require maintaining the safety
of children and their communities and support postconflict recovery, which will be achieved only through
stepping up investment in the protection of children
who live in conflict areas. That includes prioritizing
mental health, psychosocial support and reintegration,
which are extremely important with regard to the
protection of children, especially girls, who are subject
to abuse, and helping them recover from the trauma of
war. In that regard, we note the important role of the
strategic outreach between peacekeeping forces and
local communities to guarantee the safety and security
of children and raise awareness to safeguard them from
the dangers of conflict and its repercussions.
Fourthly, we stress the need to achieve a lasting
and comprehensive peace for all. The primary objective
of our Organization and of establishing the Security
Council is to save future generations from the scourge
of war and resolve conflict by political and peaceful
means. It is therefore important to offer tangible and
effective support to the efforts led by the United Nations
to achieve lasting peace and activate all available
mechanisms to that end.
In conclusion, we would like to reiterate Algeria’s
continuing willingness to participate actively and
constructively in any international effort aimed at
putting an end to the suffering of children in areas of
conflict, including during our country’s upcoming term
on the Security Council. We stress that the protection of
children requires everyone to act with the best interests
of children in mind, work together to address the
root causes of conflict and provide a safe and healthy
28/45

05/07/2023

environment for children that allows them to explore
their full potential and contribute positively to the
global effort to achieve comprehensive security and
sustainable development for all.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Abd Karim (Malaysia): Malaysia would like
to thank the United Kingdom for convening today’s
important debate. Our thanks also go to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mrs. Gamba
de Potgieter, and the other briefers for their valuable
contributions. The subject of the debate is important
to Malaysia, as was reflected in our initiative in
introducing resolution 2225 (2015).
Malaysia is appalled by the reported increase in the
numbers of children who have been victims of grave
violations in armed conflict. We are equally appalled
by the reported use of live ammunition and excessive
force, which have caused countless deaths and injuries
of children. The increasing attacks on schools and
hospitals have deprived children of education and health
care. The denial of humanitarian access in various
conflict zones has hindered efforts to provide children
with basic necessities. It is alarming to note that a total
of 38 parties to conflicts around the world, State and
non-State actors alike, have no measures in place to
improve the protection of children in compliance with
relevant Security Council resolutions.
Ensuring the protection of children in armed
conflict is a collective responsibility that requires the
joint efforts of all. Malaysia urges all States to become
party to the Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of
children in armed conflict as soon as possible. We also
emphasize the need to endorse and implement the Safe
Schools Declaration and the Vancouver Principles.
Our commitment to the Protocol and Principles is an
integral part of our obligation to respect relevant human
rights law and humanitarian law, particularly regarding
children in conflict.
We echo the Secretary-General’s proposal that the
Security Council ensure that the provision and capacity
for child protection are included in the relevant mandates
of United Nations peacekeeping operations and special
political missions. United Nations peacekeeping
missions are among the most visible actors on the
ground in conflict zones and play an instrumental role
in the protection of children in armed conflict. The
23-19585

05/07/2023

Children and armed conflict

work of the United Nations and its agencies, including
the engagement between the relevant mandated
departments within the framework of Security Council
resolutions, remains crucial. Malaysia commends the
vital work of the Country Task Force on Monitoring and
Reporting and underlines the importance of a reporting
mechanism that is credible, impartial, objective and
transparent. The glaring absence of Israel in the annex
to the report (S/2023/363), as happened last year, has
continued to puzzle our delegation. Israel, the occupying
Power, must be held accountable for the violations and
crimes it has committed against Palestinian children in
the occupied Palestinian territory. Malaysia reiterates
its call for the inclusion of Israel in the annexes to
future reports.
Impunity for crimes against children in armed
conflict must end. No one should bear the burden of
wars, let alone our future generations. It is therefore
incumbent on us to provide them with the peace and
protection they rightly deserve.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium.
Mr. Bouthé (Belgium): I thank you, Mr. President,
for the United Kingdom’s convening of today’s timely
meeting and for giving us the opportunity to discuss
this important topic. We congratulate you on your
ambitious programme of work and wish you the best
of luck with your country’s presidency of the Council.
(spoke in French)
Belgium reiterates its unwavering support for the
children and armed conflict mandate and for the work
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
as well as for UNICEF’s Monitoring and Reporting
Mechanism, which my country supports financially.
Its data-collection process is the veritable backbone of
the mandate. It gives it credibility and forms a solid
basis for the adoption of prevention and action plans
with the parties to the conflict. Those plans are key
tools for ensuring effective protection for children
affected by conflict. When tools related to children and
armed conflict such as the Monitoring and Reporting
Mechanism are used effectively, and the integrity
and impartiality of the listing mechanism annexed
to the annual report (S/2023/363) are respected, the
mandate can save the lives of those most vulnerable
to conflict — children. We support the Secretary-

S/PV.9366 (Resumption 1)

General’s call for the adoption of a mainstreaming
approach to child protection in all United Nations
mandates and activities related to conflict mitigation.
(spoke in English)
Belgium welcomes the Secretary-General’s most
recent report on children and armed conflict. We share
the Secretary-General’s concern about the scale and
severity of grave violations against children in so many
places around the world. Allow me to expand on a few
country situations.
Belgium welcomes the listing of the Russian armed
forces and their affiliates in Ukraine. A swift and
drastic reduction in children’s casualties should be an
absolute priority. We particularly share the SecretaryGeneral’s deep concern about the high numbers of
attacks on schools and hospitals, and about the transfer
of Ukrainian children to Russia. Family tracing and
reunification, with the help of United Nations entities,
should be a priority.
This year once again, the number of verified grave
violations committed by non-State armed groups
against children in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, especially in North Kivu, is appalling. Belgium
encourages the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to continue its efforts to implement its
action plan, and we echo the Secretary-General’s call
to prioritize the fight against sexual violence, which
remains an issue of grave concern in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, including when it involves the
Congolese armed forces.
Belgium remains deeply concerned about the
dire situation of children in Israel and the occupied
Palestinian territory. The increasing level of violence
in the West Bank and East Jerusalem is troubling. We
condemn the Israeli security forces’ excessive use of
force, which has resulted in unacceptably high numbers
of Palestinian children killed or maimed. Belgium is
also gravely concerned about the continuing increase
in detentions of children by Israel and reports of their
ill-treatment during detention. We echo the SecretaryGeneral’s call for adopting and implementing clear and
time-bound commitments to end and prevent any more
violations against children by all parties and support
his request to strengthen and broaden the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict to cover Israel
and the occupied Palestinian territory.

23-1958529/45

S/PV.9366 (Resumption 1)

Children and armed conflict

Belgium regrets that the gravity and number of
violations by armed groups in the Niger have resulted
in the country being added as a situation of concern.
We call on the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, in close cooperation with the country’s
authorities, to look into ways on how to strengthen
existing efforts to prevent a further deterioration of
the situation.
Finally, Belgium is deeply concerned about the
lack of meaningful improvement of the situation of
children in Afghanistan. We support the SecretaryGeneral’s call on the Taliban and all parties to allow
and facilitate safe, timely and unimpeded humanitarian
access to children.
Once again, while the numbers of grave violations
against children in the Secretary-General’s report are
just the tip of the iceberg, they are still intolerable.
The work of preventing violations against children
worldwide remains vast. Yet we all agree that we should
protect children from conflict. Let us work together
to safeguard and strengthen the children and armed
conflict mandate, as it is more important than ever.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Ms. Moutchou (Morocco): At the outset, my
delegation would like to thank the United Kingdom, in
presiding over the Security Council for this month, for
organizing this very important open debate on children
and armed conflict. We would also like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Mrs. Virginia Gamba
de Potgieter, and the Deputy Executive Director for
Programmes at UNICEF, Mr. Omar Abdi, and his team
for their comprehensive insights. And we would like to
take this opportunity to thank Ms. Violeta for sharing
her testimony with us.
With the adoption of General Assembly resolution
51/77, on 12 December 1996, which created the mandate
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict, the question of the
protection of children affected by conflict was afforded
the international attention it deserves. That was
subsequently enhanced by the formulation of legally
binding instruments, including the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict, and enriched
30/45

05/07/2023

through 13 Security Council resolutions calling for a
renewed commitment to the protection of children in
armed conflict and the prevention of grave violations.
In addition, ambitious and engaging soft law
commitments were made with a view to strengthening
the solid legal framework, in the form of the Paris
Principles, the Vancouver Principles and the Safe
Schools Declaration. Article 38 of the Convention on
the Rights of the Child underlines the necessity “to
ensure protection and care of children who are affected
by an armed conflict” and to ensure that they do not
take a direct part in hostilities. In addition, the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the involvement of
children in armed conflict condemns
“with the gravest concern the recruitment, training
and use [...] of children in hostilities by armed
groups distinct from the armed forces of a State”
and recognizes the responsibility of those who recruit,
train and use children in that regard.
Nonetheless, the reality that millions of children
around the world are facing on a daily basis remains
grim. There is still much more to do. We continue to be
concerned about the scale, severity and recurrence of
violations and abuses endured by children around the
world. The findings of the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2023/363) are appalling, particularly the
fact that the number of children verified as affected by
grave violations increased in 2022 by comparison to
2021. We are especially concerned by the fact that the
highest numbers of violations are 8,631 children killed
or maimed, 7,622 recruited or used and 3,985 abducted.
And those numbers reflect only the reported and
verified ones. The real figures are much higher. Indeed,
as we speak, thousands of children around the world
are victims of wars, forced to take part in hostilities
as fighters, recruited and trained as child soldiers,
including in refugee camps, used as human shields or
exploited as sex slaves. They cannot speak up for their
rights. They are threatened. They fear violence, stigma
and humiliation.
It is especially alarming that non-State armed
groups,
including
mercenaries
and
terrorist
organizations, target children — the most vulnerable
members of a population and easily manipulated and
brainwashed — for their own criminal, terrorist,
immoral agendas. They do so with total impunity
and in defiance of the international community and
human rights and humanitarian instruments. Children
23-19585

05/07/2023

Children and armed conflict

forced or trapped into armed groups suffer a broad
range of violations and abuses of their human rights,
particularly their right to education and health,
including mental health. They need to be taught
about peace and coexistence, not war and killing.
They should be on school benches and in their homes
and with their families, not wearing uniforms in the
middle of hostilities and so-called military parades.
The recruitment and use of child soldiers, including in
refugee camps, must end. Former child soldiers must be
offered counselling and an environment conducive to
their smooth reintegration.
International humanitarian law and human rights
law provide an extensive protection framework for
children in all situations. The problem is ensuring that
Member States and armed groups implement and comply
with it. The primary responsibility falls on Member
States to protect all children in their territories, without
distinction of any kind. The Kingdom of Morocco
condemns in the strongest terms the recruitment and
exploitation of children as child soldiers. We will spare
no effort to support the international community’s
endeavour to prevent that war crime, recognized as
such by the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court. Morocco, as a State party to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child and its three Optional Protocols,
as well as the Paris Principles, the Vancouver Principles
and the Safe Schools Declaration, is and will remain
fully committed to the protection and promotion of all
children’s rights. We will take every opportunity to
reaffirm that unwavering commitment.
Finally, we hope that this open debate and the
strong commitments expressed today will strengthen
international mobilization to effectively protect
children from the six grave violations, including by
preventing their use or recruitment in hostilities, while
ensuring their best interests and promoting a better life
for all children around the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important and timely
debate on children and armed conflict.
We have once again received the report of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict
(S/2023/363) with deep disappointment at the suffering
of children around the world and at the dismissiveness
of the suffering of our children. Once again the lives

S/PV.9366 (Resumption 1)

of Palestinian children seem not to matter, and the
violators of their rights are held to standards that are
different from the universal criteria set forth in the
children and armed conflict mandate. The SecretaryGeneral’s report mentioned that the State of Palestine
was among the areas in which the highest number of
violations against children were verified in 2022.
According to the report, Palestinian children were
killed and maimed by both Israeli air strikes and live
ammunition, abducted by Israeli settlers, illegally
denied access to medical and humanitarian assistance
by the Israeli authorities and subjected to attempts to
recruit them and use them as human shields by Israeli
occupying forces.
All of those are triggers for listing, yet Israel was
not added to any of the report’s lists. The conclusion
of the report does not match the data it verifies. It
actually contradicts it. The decision not to list Israel is
very offensive, and the claim that Israel was not listed
because it supposedly decreased its air strikes — while
ignoring the larger number of children killed by Israel
in 2022 and the rising numbers of child casualties and
violations of children’s rights by Israel in 2023 — is
even more offensive. Only days after the release of the
report, Israel launched 10 air strikes on the Jenin refugee
camp, a densely populated civilian area, wantonly and
willingly endangering human lives, including those
of children. Not only has Israel failed to uphold its
obligations under international humanitarian law to
protect the Palestinian civilian population, but it targets
them deliberately and systematically, killing, maiming
and terrorizing.
What is the Council waiting for to implement
its resolutions and offer the Palestinian people
international protection? When will it activate the
mechanisms it has established to protect civilians?
When will it pursue accountability measures that
are known to deter such crimes, which endanger the
lives of civilians, including those of children, the most
vulnerable? It is shocking to us that while we are calling
on the international community, including the United
Nations, to provide international protection for the
Palestinian civilian population — including children,
of course — we see that the decision has been made to
place that protection somewhere else, to protect Israel
and shield it from any accountability and responsibility.
Israel’s reputation apparently matters more than the
lives of the Palestinian children and the traumatic pain
of their bereaved families.

23-1958531/45

S/PV.9366 (Resumption 1)

Children and armed conflict

Let us be clear and honest about the facts — the
reason Israel was not listed is not because somehow its
violations against Palestinian children have decreased
or, suddenly, Israel decided to respect its obligations
under international law. Previous Israeli Governments
did not do that, and we do not expect the most extremist
Israeli Government, with fascist elements in it, to do
it now.
Not listing Israel is a failure to uphold the children
and armed conflict mandate. It is an abandonment of
Palestinian children. It is depriving the Palestinian
people of the international protection they are entitled
to. It undermines the universality of the children and
armed conflict mandate and the credibility of the
United Nations list worldwide.
Israel’s so-called commitments, shared with
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
during her most recent visit to the region, are simply
empty words. Their actions, every single day, prove
that. The United Nations Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs reported that 2022 was the
deadliest year for Palestinians in the occupied West
Bank since 2006, with Israel killing more than 40
Palestinian children. Since the start of 2023, more
than 30 Palestinian children have been killed by Israel,
and the United Nations has warned that if this pace
continues, 2023 is going to be even more deadly for
Palestinians than 2022.
It is evident that Israeli violations against
Palestinian civilians, including children, are increasing
in both intensity and occurrence. Look at what happened
in May in the besieged Gaza Strip, where Israel’s air
strikes killed four children asleep in their beds. Look
at what is happening in Jenin refugee camp, where four
children were killed by Israel’s brutal assault and many
others seriously wounded, and where more than 3,000
Palestinians have been forced to flee for safety from
the lethal Israeli onslaught. Look at the destruction
there, the demolitions across the West Bank, the forced
displacement and expulsion of families, the destruction
of schools, forcible transfers, settlement growth, the
racist and hate speech used by Israeli officials, the
provocation and incitement and the settler violence, as
witnessed in Turmus Ayya and in Huwwara. Look at
the toll of those violations on Palestinian children.
It is very regrettable that the current Israeli settler
Government was given another chance, another free
32/45

05/07/2023

pass, to evade accountability and more time to kill,
persecute and oppress.
Listing and delisting parties is a method created
by the Security Council because the Council Members
saw it as an effective method to deter, protect and hold
perpetrators accountable, and it has proven an effective
method for the past 25 years. Why is it that now, 56
years since the start of the Israeli occupation and with
all the Israeli violations committed against Palestinian
children in the past 25 years, despite being a standing
item on the Security Council’s agenda, Israel, the
occupying Power, has never been listed for its violations
against Palestinian children?
As long as Israel is not listed for its violations
against Palestinian children, its commitment will not be
serious; its violations will continue, and the credibility
of the United Nations children and armed conflict
mandate will be undermined. That is to the grave
detriment of the Palestinian children who are in need
of the Council’s protection and to the detriment of our
international system, which continues to be undermined
by this ongoing failure to uphold international law
equally in all circumstances.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): I would like to thank the
United Kingdom presidency for organizing this year’s
annual Security Council debate on Children And Armed
Conflict. We also thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, Mrs. Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, and the
other briefers for their insightful statements.
Pakistan shares the deep concern expressed in the
Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2023/363), which
portrays a harrowing account of 27,180 verified grave
violations against children, is staggering. One in six of
the world’s children currently live in countries or areas
affected by conflicts. It is evident that we need to do a
lot more to ensure the safety, welfare and prosperity of
our children.
It does not take much to imagine the horrible
experiences that children suffer and endure in situations
of armed conflict. It is evident that considerably
more needs to be done to ensure the safety and
welfare of children in such situations. In particular,
children suffer immensely in situations of foreign
occupation. It is therefore the most visible anomaly
23-19585

05/07/2023

Children and armed conflict

in the report that the two blatant situations of foreign
occupation — perpetrated by Israel, on the one hand,
and by India in Jammu and Kashmir, on the other — are
not listed in this report and given a free pass.
We just heard from the Ambassador of Palestine
about the situation of children in the occupied Palestinian
territories and the killing of children that is happening,
as we speak, in Jenin. I must also point to the visible
oppression of the children of Jammu and Kashmir
by India’s occupation forces. An entire generation
of Kashmiri children has grown up in a climate of
unspeakable fear, violence and repression. The human
rights and humanitarian situation of children in Indianoccupied Jammu and Kashmir has deteriorated since
5 August 2019, when India unilaterally and illegally
passed legislation to annex the occupied and disputed
territory. We still remember the gut-wrenching picture
of a three-year old Kashmiri boy, sitting in shock, on
the dead body of his grandfather, after he was killed
by Indian forces. It is estimated that 13,000 Kashmiri
children and youth have been arbitrarily captured by
the 900,000 Indian occupation forces in Jammu and
Kashmir. Thousands of innocent Kashmiris, including
women and children, have been killed in fake encounters
and staged cordon and search operations. Children and
youth have been subjected to torture and ill-treatment
in order to elicit information or extract confessions or
secure commitments not to participate in the Kashmiri
struggle for self-determination and freedom from
India’s illegal occupation.
Last year Pakistan released a comprehensive
and well-researched dossier covering accounts
corroborated by audio and video evidence of 3,432
cases of war crimes, including against women and
children, perpetrated by senior officers of the Indian
occupying forces in Jammu and Kashmir since 1989.
Those officials must be held accountable.
The Secretary-General’s latest report has rightly
urged India to implement measures, including
prohibiting the use of lethal and non-lethal force on
children, ending the use of pellet guns, preventing
all forms of ill-treatment of children in detention and
protecting children from sexual offences. We would
also urge the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General to demand the release of the
13,000 abducted Kashmiri youth, whose whereabouts
are not known and who we are told are subjected to
torture to ensure that their families do not join the
freedom struggle. It is only when India implements

S/PV.9366 (Resumption 1)

these obligations under international humanitarian law
that it should be removed from the report, in particular
the list in the report.
As one of the earliest signatories to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child, Pakistan is fully alive to
its responsibilities under the Convention. We have
undertaken wide-ranging legal, policy and operational
measures focusing on the protection of children in
security situations. Earlier this year, Pakistan set up a
national committee for the protection of children and
designated a national focal person in this regard. We
have also recently endorsed the Vancouver Principles
on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment
and Use of Child Soldiers.
Pakistan supports the mandate of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to deal with
situations of children in armed conflict. However,
we believe that the legal parameters of the Special
Representative’s mandate must be scrupulously
respected. The singular focus should address situations
of armed conflicts. In that context, my delegation
wishes to state for the record that references to
Pakistan in the Secretary-General’s report do not fall
within the purview of the Special Representative’s
mandate. However, despite our principled position, we
will continue to engage with the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to further
strengthen child protection in Pakistan, in line with our
national framework and international obligations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Yemen.
Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Mr. President, allow me to congratulate you on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council this
month and to wish you and your team every success.
I would like to congratulate Ambassador
Nusseibeh and the delegation of the United Arab
Emirates for assuming the presidency of the Council
last month. I would also like to thank Mr. António
Guterres, Secretary-General of the United Nations,
and his Special Representative, Mrs. Virginia Gamba
de Potgieter, for their efforts to protect children in
regions of armed conflict. This issue is a priority for
the Republic of Yemen, which is a country suffering
from armed conflict. I would particularly like to thank
Mrs. Gamba de Potgieter and Mr. Omar Abdi, Deputy
Executive Director for Programmes of the United
Nations Children’s Fund, for their briefings.

23-1958533/45

S/PV.9366 (Resumption 1)

Children and armed conflict

05/07/2023

The Yemeni Government has reviewed the 2022
report of the Secretary-General on children and armed
conflict (S/2023/363). We draw the Security Council’s
attention to the fact that national reports warn that
Houthi militias have used the humanitarian truce
in Yemen to intensify mobilization and recruitment
campaigns, whereby they recruited more than 30,000
new children. At the beginning of this summer, the
leaders of those militias stated that they are targeting
1.5 million children through the so-called summer
camps, which is an effective way to recruit children and
send them onto the battlefield.

that belongs to the dark ages, in which humanitarian
instruments — and civilization itself — are seen as a
threat to their existence.

The report of the Secretary-General refers to many
violations suffered by children in areas under the control
of terrorist Houthi militias. It is unfortunate, however,
that the report does not refer to violations involving
distorting school curriculums and establishing the socalled summer camps, through which thousands of
Yemeni children are being indoctrinated, brainwashed
and inculcated into extreme terrorist ideas of death
and hatred. We are surprised that the international
community has remained silent about the open
recruitment operation being carried out by those militias,
which is the largest in the history of humankind. That
operation is inconsistent with calls for de-escalation and
for bringing the conflict to an end. It is also inconsistent
with all international instruments and norms. Rather,
it reveals the true position of the militias, which are
trying to create a time bomb, threatening regional and
international peace and security.

Palestinian children are suffering various grave
violations, including killing and maiming, by Israel,
the occupying Power. Most recently, the incident in
the city of Jenin and its camp led to the death of five
children, amid silence of the international community.
It is important that Palestinian children receive the
protection they need from the violations by Israel, the
occupying Power. That protection starts with adding
Israel to the list of countries that are violating children’s
rights. It is important to hold Israel accountable for its
continued crimes against the Palestinian people. Not
adding Israel to that list undermines the credibility
of the list and United Nations efforts in various
conflict zones.

Violating children’s rights is not an unintentional
sin committed by the Houthi terrorist militias; it is a
deliberate tactic that lies at the core of their vision.
For those militias, it is not enough to brutally violate
children’s rights and use children in armed conflicts
and terrorist acts; those violations are a tool to paralyse
and control Yemeni society and weaken families.
The Houthi militias continue to blatantly and
increasingly violate children’s rights, without
responding to international efforts and stances, which
have accorded great importance to that issue in Yemen.
The Houthi militias are sending thousands of children
to battlefields and military operations. They continue
to open extremist jihadi mobilization and recruitment
centres that they call summer camps. That behaviour
is typical of racist terrorist groups. In the case of
the Houthis, it complements their totalitarian vision
34/45

The Houthi militias have also been targeting
the health sector by launching erroneous media
campaigns that oppose vaccinations, in particular the
immunization of children. As a result, diseases that
Yemen eliminated some time ago, such as polio and
measles, have re-emerged. The militias have also given
expired drugs to children with cancer, which has led to
the death of some of them. That is an issue to which the
Secretary-General report does not refer.

The Yemeni Government reiterates its committed
to supporting efforts by the United Nations and by
the country team in Yemen. We continue to cooperate
with them to end the violations against the rights of
children and using them in armed conflict. We call
on the international community and the Security
Council to bring pressure to bear on Houthi militias
to stop their crimes and violations against children
in areas under their control, including getting them
to refrain from establishing so-called summer camps
and distorting curriculums with extremist concepts
that serve the agendas of those militias. The Yemeni
Government hopes that the upcoming report of the
Secretary-General will include those violations. It is
important to take practical and effective steps to stop
grave violations perpetrated against children in Yemen
by militias in the areas under their control.
We also call on the United Nations and
international partners to support Government
programmes to rehabilitate conflict-affected children,
help the Government develop effective programmes to
23-19585

05/07/2023

Children and armed conflict

reintegrate those children into society and ensure their
mental and psychological health so that they can live
with other children as non-combatants.
The President: In view of the fact that there are 13
more speakers on the list, I encourage all the remaining
speakers to limit their statements to no more than
three minutes.
I now give the floor to the representative
of Azerbaijan.
Ms. Ahangari (Azerbaijan): We would like to
thank the United Kingdom for convening today’s open
debate on this very important topic. We note with
concern that, as reflected in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2023/363), the number of children affected
by grave violations increased as compared to the
previous year. As children continue to be the targets
of grave violations, effective prevention and protection,
as well as ending impunity, remains a constant global
challenge and an ongoing imperative.
First and foremost, ensuring full compliance with
international humanitarian law is key for the effective
protection of children in armed conflict. Equally
important is to provide accountability for violations, as
wrongful acts left unpunished often serve as a catalyst
for the commission of new crimes.
During its nearly 30 years of aggression against
Azerbaijan since the early 1990s, Armenia committed
multiple war crimes, resulting in the deaths of 10,000
civilians, including hundreds of children, mass ethnic
cleansing and forcible displacement. The most notorious
violation was the killing of hundreds of civilians,
including 63 children, within only a few hours, in the
town of Khojaly. About 700 secondary schools and
more than 800 preschools suffered considerably from
the devastating effects of that aggression.
The scale of the brutalities is also evidenced by
the fact that almost 4,000 citizens of Azerbaijan,
including 71 children, went missing in connection
with the conflict, and that Armenia refrains from
clarifying their fate. Most of the Azerbaijani captives
were subjected to severe torture, including beatings,
mutilation, starvation and humiliation. The perpetrators
of those numerous atrocities remain unpunished, in
clear disregard of international law.
Despite the end of the conflict, Armenia refuses
to share accurate and comprehensive information about
the thousands of landmines it laid on the territory of

S/PV.9366 (Resumption 1)

Azerbaijan, which continue to kill and maim civilians.
Ten children and youth were among the 302 citizens
of Azerbaijan who became victims of landmines since
November 2020.
No child should be robbed of childhood.
Regretfully, in breach of the obligations on the
protection of the rights of the child and international
humanitarian law, Armenia has widely practiced the
recruitment of children by armed forces and groups
over decades. Of particular concern is the exploitation
of children for hate propaganda and the promotion of
intolerance against Azerbaijan. The continued practice
of recruiting children and involving them in military
training undermines the efforts for peace and security
at the regional level.
It is important for the United Nations, as well as
its specialized institutions and their respective mandate
holders, to undertake the necessary measures to ensure
that Armenia is held accountable for its wrongdoings
and that it ceases the unlawful use of children for
military purposes.
In conclusion, I would like to briefly respond to the
statement made earlier by the delegation of Armenia. Its
allegations regarding Azerbaijan’s so-called blockade of
the Lachin-Khankandi road and disruption of electricity
and natural gas in its Karabakh economic region are
false and provocative. Azerbaijan has never created
impediments to residents’ freedom of movement on the
road or to the road’s use for the supply of food, medicine
and other humanitarian purposes, including access for
the International Committee of the Red Cross. That is
supported by abundant documented evidence.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ireland.
Mr. Ryan (Ireland): Ireland aligns itself with the
statements made on behalf on the European Union and
the Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict.
At the outset, I would like to thank the President for
convening today’s meeting, as well as the briefers for
their insightful briefings earlier today and their tireless
work on this issue.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2023/363)
before us today reveals the grim reality of children in
armed conflict. It tells the distressing story of a year
marked by increased suffering and grave violations
against children, the scale and severity of which should
weigh heavily on the Security Council.

23-1958535/45

S/PV.9366 (Resumption 1)

Children and armed conflict

It was a year that saw millions of children in Ukraine
have their lives upended by the Russian Federation’s
unprovoked and unjustified war of aggression, exposing
them to increased risks of death, injury, abduction,
trafficking, sexual exploitation and forced separation.
Furthermore, hundreds of thousands of teenage
girls in Afghanistan found themselves locked out of
second-level education under Taliban rule, a decision
we deplore in the strongest terms. In addition, some
2.4 million children in Syria remained out of school and
at risk of child labour, early and forced marriage and
trafficking and recruitment into armed conflict.
In the occupied Palestinian territory, this year’s
report shows clearly how children on both sides of the
conflict continued to bear the brunt of Israel’s enduring
occupation. It notes with alarm the high number of
Palestinian children killed or maimed by the use of live
ammunition during Israel’s law enforcement operations
in the occupied West Bank.
From Haiti to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Myanmar to Yemen and the Sahel, the alarming
prevalence of violations against children underscores
the need for decisive action to safeguard their rights
and to hold perpetrators to account.
In that respect, we commend the SecretaryGeneral for including the armed forces of the Russian
Federation and affiliated armed groups in the annexes
to this year’s report. That step is an important means
of accountability in its own right, and one that can
help deter future violations. We must therefore ensure
that all parties to armed conflict deemed responsible
for committing any of the six grave violations against
children are held to the same standard.
Ireland condemns in the strongest terms, among
other violations, Russia’s unlawful deportation and
transfer to Russia and to Belarus of Ukrainian children.
We call on the Russian Federation and Belarus to
immediately ensure their safe return. Ireland urges all
parties involved in armed conflict to fully comply with
their obligations under international humanitarian law,
international human rights law and international refugee
law, to cooperate with the United Nations to develop
action plans and to end violations against children.
We underscore the need to refrain from using
explosive weapons in populated areas and encourage all
Member States to endorse and adhere to the Political
36/45

05/07/2023

Declaration on Strengthening the Protection of Civilians
from the Humanitarian Consequences Arising from the
Use of Explosive Weapons in Populated Areas.
The impact of armed conflict on children is both
immediate and long-lasting. It not only subjects them to
physical harm and emotional distress, but also disrupts
their access to essential services, robs them of their
childhood and undermines their future prospects. It is
our collective responsibility to break that cycle and to
create a world in which every child can thrive in safety,
dignity and peace, unburdened by the scourge of war.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iran.
Mr. Ahmadi (Islamic Republic of Iran): I thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this important
annual open debate. I also thank the briefers for
their contributions.
International humanitarian law requires all parties
to armed conflicts to take necessary measures to protect
civilians, especially children. That obligation must
be fully honoured by all parties involved. However,
children are repeatedly subjected to a host of egregious
violations. They are disproportionately affected by the
devastating consequences of armed conflicts and endure
unspeakable suffering. Meanwhile, children who are
refugees, internally displaced or stateless as a result
of conflicts are more likely to endure severe violations
and other major abuses, such as recruitment and
exploitation, sexual violence, trafficking and detention.
Those flagrant violations not only rob them of their
childhood but also hinder their future development,
perpetuating cycles of violence and instability.
The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2023/363) highlights the ongoing disproportionate
impact of armed conflict on children in 2022, with a
disturbing rise in the number of grave violations as
compared to the previous year. Regrettably, the Middle
East region remains a tragic witness to the appalling
violations against children, from Afghanistan and
Yemen to Palestine.
In Afghanistan, the United Nations confirmed
1,797 grave violations against 970 children. The de
facto authorities should ensure that all Afghan children,
including girls, have access to education. Iran, as a
neighbouring country and host to millions of Afghan
people, has provided basic services such as education
and health care to Afghan children living in Iran.
23-19585

05/07/2023

Children and armed conflict

In the occupied Palestine territories, the Israeli
regime persistently engages in the most systematic
and flagrant violations of children’s rights in the
Middle East. In 2022, the United Nations documented
a staggering 3,133 grave violations, affecting 1,139
Palestinian children in the occupied Palestine territories
and the Gaza Strip. Tragically, 54 children lost their
lives. As the Observer of Palestine mentioned in his
statement, the true numbers of violations and victims
are higher than what the United Nations has reported.
In addition, the United Nations verified 123 attacks by
the Israeli armed forces targeting schools and hospitals.
Those atrocities clearly constitute war crimes and
crimes against humanity. The perpetrators responsible
for those abhorrent acts must be held accountable and
brought to justice for their crimes.
It is imperative for the international community to
prioritize the protection of children in armed conflicts.
Regardless of children’s circumstances, their rights,
safety and well-being must always be safeguarded.
Ensuring the protection of children in armed conflict
demands a multifaceted approach with several key
aspects. First, ending ongoing conflicts and preventing
their resurgence are essential. That requires that all
the parties to a conflict comply fully and effectively
with international humanitarian law, which sets forth
guidelines for the protection of civilians, including
children. Addressing the root causes of conflict
is equally imperative. Children are often coerced
into participating in conflicts to provide financial
support for their families. Tackling issues such as
poverty and limited access to quality education and
employment opportunities is crucial in mitigating
such grave violations. Furthermore, illegal unilateral
sanctions and economic blockades can exacerbate the
plight of children in conflict-affected areas and must
be addressed.
We strongly reject an unwarranted and unjustified
reference made to the Iranian armed forces in the
Secretary-General’s report. Iran has consistently
fulfilled its commitments under international
humanitarian law, and our counter-terrorism efforts
have always been conducted in strict accordance with
international law and full respect for international
humanitarian law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sri Lanka.

S/PV.9366 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Pieris (Sri Lanka): Sri Lanka fully endorses
the Safe Schools Declaration, acknowledging the
critical importance of protecting education and
educational institutions during armed conflict. We
would like to take this opportunity to reaffirm our
commitment to implementing that framework, aimed at
upholding the rights of children and educators, and call
on all parties involved in armed conflict to refrain from
attacks on educational institutions. Einstein expressed
the importance of education succinctly when he cited
the line “Education is that which remains, if one has
forgotten everything he learned in school.” Education
therefore is a sine qua non even in times of conflict.
Regrettably, the nature of warfare has tragically
transformed schools, once safe havens for children,
into deliberate targets. Innocent children face grave
danger while travelling to and from educational
institutions. Only a few minutes ago we were told
about such happenings in Palestine. Moreover, schools
and educational facilities have been requisitioned
as military facilities and recruitment centres by
combatant forces. Such actions lead to a decline in
school attendance, higher dropout rates and diminished
educational achievement, with serious setbacks for
children. Sri Lanka joins a majority of Member
States in committing to the Guidelines for Protecting
Schools and Universities from Military Use during
Armed Conflict, safeguarding the civilian character
of educational institutions. While Sri Lanka does not
recruit children into armed forces, as a matter of policy
and as prescribed by law, it acknowledges its obligations
concerning child soldiers under international law.
Education cannot be protected if places of education
are not safe from conflict. It cannot be protected if those
imparting knowledge and their beneficiaries suffer
physical harm or the imminent danger of harm. That
requires parties to conflict to exercise military restraint
around school zones and to clearly mark schools as
safe zones and adhere to the norms of the non-use of
educational facilities as bases, barracks, detention
centres or weapon-storage units, thereby changing
the character of such facilities and not providing the
protection required under international humanitarian
law. The problem can be circumvented to a large degree
with the availability of digital technology, which enables
students to connect with their teachers and learning
materials from the safety of their homes. Educational
technology could be a new focus of investment for
Governments or multilateral organizations working in
areas of conflict.

23-1958537/45

S/PV.9366 (Resumption 1)

Children and armed conflict

Sri Lanka had to confront the distressing issue
of child soldiers recruited by a non-State group that
terrorized our nation for decades. Following the ending
of such acts of terror in 2009, the Government took on
the significant responsibility of rehabilitating 594 child
soldiers who had been recruited by the non-State actors
and reuniting them with their families. Through its
national educational action plan, Sri Lanka enhances
the capacity of trainers in psychosocial support,
empowering them to effectively provide guidance and
counselling to conflict-affected children.
In my view, in the context of conflict, the
prevailing humanitarian definition of childhood, rooted
in international law, lacks cross-cultural grounding
and limits the potential of diverse solutions to address
complex social issues. A nuanced understanding is
essential to craft appropriate and effective strategies.
Embracing the right to education becomes a beacon
of hope for war-torn children, empowering them to
heal, learn and reclaim their future. By investing
in education, we can strive for a just and promising
tomorrow, enabling resilient young individuals to
overcome adversity and contribute positively to society.
I will conclude with a very apt observation by Nelson
Mandela, who said,
“Education is the great engine of personal
development. It is through education that the
daughter of a peasant can become a doctor, that the
son of a mineworker can become the head of the
mine, that a child of farm workers can become the
president of a great nation.”
It is also through education that the children of great
warriors in conflict become leaders. We must say it loud
and clear to those engaged in conflict that our failure to
protect our children and their means of education, even
in the course of a conflict, can result in the destruction
of a nation or even perhaps a civilization, and that
education, not conflict, is our passport to the future.
For tomorrow belongs to our children, who need to be
prepared for it today.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Ms. Rizk (Egypt): We congratulate you, Sir, on
your country’s assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month, and we thank the
United Kingdom for organizing this important annual
open debate. We also thank the briefers for their
interventions, while we appreciate the focus that has
38/45

05/07/2023

been placed on the situation of children in the occupied
Palestinian territory, which is quite pertinent in this
context and at this particular juncture.
We are deeply concerned about the marked increase
in 2022, as cited in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2023/363), in the number of children affected by
grave violations as compared to 2021. We stress the
need to enhance international cooperation to strengthen
respect for and the implementation of obligations
under international humanitarian law and international
human rights law regarding the protection of children
in armed conflict. We are particularly concerned about
the rise in the number of deaths of Palestinian children
in the occupied Palestinian territory, in violation of
international humanitarian law. Egypt supports all
efforts to strengthen the protection of children and put
an end to violations committed during armed conflicts,
especially by terrorist organizations. We further
reiterate Egypt’s willingness to cooperate in ensuring
the delivery of much-needed humanitarian assistance
in this area.
We
particularly
welcome
the
report’s
recommendation of the inclusion of child-protection
provisions and capacity in all the relevant mandates of
United Nations peacekeeping operations. We further
believe that obligations to ensure the protection of
children in armed conflicts should be mainstreamed
and integrated across all operational decisions,
activities and processes of United Nations peacekeeping
operations. As a State party to the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict, Egypt
has enacted national legislation that reflects the
obligations contained in the Protocol. Furthermore, our
educational curricula and training provided to military
personnel include material on respect for international
humanitarian law, including the protection of children
in armed conflict, with particular attention to personnel
designated to participate in peacekeeping operations.
The content is prepared in collaboration with the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the
National Council for Motherhood and Childhood and is
mainly designed by our Ministry of Defence.
In conclusion, let me reiterate Egypt’s commitment
to continuing to back every effort at every level,
including through regional organizations, to protect
children and to end and prevent violations against them
in situations of armed conflict.
23-19585

05/07/2023

Children and armed conflict

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Andorra.
Mrs. Vives Balmaña (Andorra) (spoke in French):
Andorra thanks the United Kingdom presidency of
the Security Council for convening this open debate.
We thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and UNICEF’s Deputy Executive Director for
Programmes for their briefings and Ms. Violeta for her
eloquent and poignant first-hand account.
My country aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group
of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict, and I would
like to add a few points in my national capacity.
Since its establishment 27 years ago, the mandate
on children and armed conflict has led to the release of
almost 190,000 children. It is therefore a critical tool
for our Organization in building peace and security.
We commend the progress made in the implementation
of the 21 action plans under way and the more than
40 commitments undertaken by parties, which are
essential in making headway in peacebuilding — a
non-negotiable sine qua non for the safety of children.
Nonetheless, the report of the Secretary-General
is damning, with 27,180 grave violations verified
in 2022. The issue is all the more disconcerting
because, as of now, the situations covered by the
mandate have increased to 26 and new and emerging
trends indicate that Government forces are those now
mainly responsible.
Such violations require a sound, consistent and
unified response to change the situation. We welcome
the commitment and perseverance of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mrs. Gamba
de Potgieter, and her Office in the implementation of its
mandate. In 2022, 12,460 children received protection
and support for their reintegration after falling victim to
armed groups and armed forces. We must support and
strengthen reintegration mechanisms, which are still
falling short today, to ensure that they have the human
resources required on the ground to continue their
prevention, verification and reintegration activities. We
are committed to strengthening our voice and actions
to encourage all parties involved to ensure prevention,
expand the visibility of the efforts of the Office and
support protection value systems.
Andorra will continue its cooperation with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General by
contributing this year to the financing of the publication

S/PV.9366 (Resumption 1)

of the report on climate change and children and
armed conflict. As every year, this debate evokes
avid interest. Beyond the human cost, the destruction
of infrastructure and the disruption of economic
growth, armed conflict has a devastating impact on the
education of entire generations. In that regard, Andorra
thanks all teams on the ground that are committed to
peace and security. We reiterate our staunch support
for the Office under all circumstances and for the rights
of the children it works to protect. We will continue
our political commitment to education for peace. The
future of our planet hinges on our ability to put these
values into effect.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lebanon.
Ms. Mrad (Lebanon): At the outset, allow me to
congratulate the United Kingdom on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month and
for organizing today’s timely debate. I also seize this
opportunity to congratulate the United Arab Emirates
on its successful presidency of the Council last month.
We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Mrs. Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, UNICEF Deputy
Executive Director for Programmes Omar Abdi and
Ms. Violeta for their respective briefings.
The most recent report of the Secretary-General
on children and armed conflict (S/2023/363) confirms
that the United Nations verified 27,180 grave violations
against children in 2022. Those figures, which are
perhaps much higher since they do not encompass the
unverified cases of violations against children, are not
only numbers. As the UNICEF Executive Director put
it during the Oslo Conference on Protecting Children in
Armed Conflict last month,
“Behind each of these numbers is a story of
unimaginable child suffering … of rights violated
and rights denied”.
Children continue to be disproportionately
affected by armed conflict, and violations against
them continue unabated. As per UNICEF, a staggering
315,000 grave violations against children in conflict
were verified by the United Nations between 2005 and
2022. Unfortunately, in recent days, we have witnessed
Israeli attacks on the Jenin refugee camp. In that
regard, we refer to the statement issued by UNICEF’s
Middle East and North Africa Regional Director, in
which she stressed that at least three children were

23-1958539/45

S/PV.9366 (Resumption 1)

Children and armed conflict

killed on 3 July, and many others were injured. We
condemn those attacks and deplore all acts of violence
against children.
Looking at “the list of shame”, published in the
annex to the report, we cannot but realize that not
every abuser and killer of children is on the list as they
should be. While the Secretary-General addresses the
situation of Palestinian children, documenting 3,133
grave violations against 1,139 Palestinian children,
Israel was omitted from the list. In that regard, an
article entitled, “Why Does the UN Chief Value Some
Children More Than Others?”, published a couple of
days ago by Human Rights Watch, caught our eye.
The “business as usual” approach cannot continue
to be our guiding line. Children should be off limits, no
matter who they are or where they come from. The lives
of all children matter.
As for Lebanon, we have already initiated our talks
with the Office of Special Representative Gamba de
Potgieter to explore avenues of cooperation, with the
aim of crafting a strategic framework programme at the
national level for children and armed conflict. We look
forward to accelerating the process of laying the first
stone of that initiative, together with Mrs. Gamba de
Potgieter and her able team.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Passmoor (South Africa): I wish to begin by
acknowledging the importance of this annual debate
and, importantly, the Secretary-General’s annual
report (S/2023/363), which sheds light on the continued
high level of violations affecting children caught up in
armed conflict.
We align ourselves with the statement delivered by
the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends on Children and Armed Conflict.
It is disconcerting that children, as the most
vulnerable members of society, bear the brunt of
violence, displacement and loss during times of
conflict. We have noted and are deeply concerned that
grave violations have increased in Colombia, Palestine,
Mali, Libya and the Sudan, to name but a few places.
As Member States of this organ, it is imperative that
efforts be concentrated to protect the most vulnerable
from the serious consequences of conflict.
40/45

05/07/2023

The international community, through various
frameworks and conventions, has recognized the
rights of children, including their protection, during
armed conflicts. South Africa therefore remains
deeply concerned that, despite those frameworks
and conventions, perpetrators continue to disregard
international humanitarian law and international human
rights law. The report with which we are interacting
today is a consequence of those measures and serves as
another means to encourage accountability for States
to work with the United Nations to protect children in
armed conflict, especially from grave violations.
It goes without saying that the best course of action
to protect children is to pursue peace and prevent
situations of armed conflict. Yet until that ideal is
achieved, we must be pragmatic in ensuring that the
most vulnerable are not exposed to the consequences
of armed conflict. Therefore, South Africa emphasizes
the critical importance of the United Nations as a
facilitator in protecting children in such situations.
We encourage parties involved in conflict, State and
non-State actors alike, to work with the United Nations
and its agencies to provide the necessary humanitarian
support and implement action plans to protect children.
We also strongly reject any actions that contribute
to grave violations and are particularly concerned
about the assertion in the report that State actors are
responsible for the majority of the killing and maiming
of children, attacks on schools and hospitals and the
denial of humanitarian access, especially when they
bear the primary responsibility for protecting children.
South Africa continues to see merit in further
initiatives to protect children during and in armed
conflict. We continue to support the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict and the critical report produced by
her as an apolitical tool that seeks to protect society’s
most precious and most vulnerable asset. We have
also supported, and will continue to support, various
campaigns, aimed at protecting children, such as the
UNICEF-led “Children, not Soldiers” campaign and,
more recently, “Act to Protect Children Affected by
Conflict”. We also support the Security Council’s own
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
South Africa has advocated and will continue
to advocate for the inclusion of child-protection
provisions in peace processes and peace agreements.
Similarly, we also promote the integration of child23-19585

05/07/2023

Children and armed conflict

protection measures into the mandates of peacekeeping
missions, which often involve child-protection efforts
in conflict-affected areas. Importantly, we also place
significant emphasis on initiatives that focus on
demobilizing child soldiers, providing psychosocial
support and rehabilitation for the children affected and
reintegrating them into their communities. We were
particularly pleased to note the rehabilitation of former
child soldiers in many conflict areas.
States must uphold their responsibility to protect
children both within their borders and in conflictaffected areas. It is crucial to strengthen legal
frameworks, enhance child-protection mechanisms and
invest in the rehabilitation and reintegration of children
who have been affected by armed conflict. South Africa
will continue to advocate for strong international
mechanisms and adherence to them through active
dialogues and partnerships in order to address the
issue effectively. By working collaboratively with other
nations, international organizations and civil society,
we seek to ensure that children caught up in armed
conflict are provided with the necessary support, care
and protection they deserve.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ethiopia.
Mr. Sabo (Ethiopia): I congratulate you, Sir, on the
United Kingdom’s assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of July. We have taken
note of the report of the Secretary-General on children
and armed conflict (S/2023/363), and we thank the
briefers for their briefings this morning.
Children are the first to suffer in any conflict.
They also suffer the most and must bear the devastating
consequences. Of the various legal instruments in
force for the protection of children in armed conflict,
Ethiopia is a State party to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and its two Optional Protocols and
to the African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the
Child. Our domestic laws and policies are aligned with
those treaties.
During the conflict in the north of our country,
Ethiopia has been faced with extraordinary security
challenges. Despite the challenges, our Government
has made concerted efforts to ensure unhindered
humanitarian assistance, with a special focus on children
and other vulnerable groups. In November 2022, under
the leadership of the African Union, we signed a peace
agreement that ushered in a series of measures, including

S/PV.9366 (Resumption 1)

on the disarmament and demobilization of forces and
on enabling the intensified provision of humanitarian
aid. We have embarked on reconstruction and recovery
programmes, giving priority to sectors that address the
needs of children, including in the areas of education
and health.
We have also charted a clear path for accountability
for alleged human rights violations. A crosssectoral ministerial task force is implementing the
recommendations we have accepted that are contained
in the report of the joint investigation by the Ethiopian
Human Rights Commission and the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights. We are conducting
nationwide consultations on options for a transitional
justice policy, which is expected to take its final form
around the end of August, with implementation starting
in September.
Last month, we received a visit from the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mrs. Virginia
Gamba de Potgieter, whom we thank for her productive
engagement with Government officials from various
sectors. We also thank the Special Representative for
her participatory working methods, which allowed us
to react to the draft report prior to its finalization. It
is regrettable, however, that despite our engagement,
the report is full of factual errors and was not crosschecked with nationally researched data that would
have enhanced its validity. It fails to address our serious
concerns. That being said, I would like to reiterate
Ethiopia’s unwavering commitment to the protection
and well-being of children.
Moving forward, our national institutions involved
in the area will further scrutinize the report with
a view to addressing all the relevant aspects of its
recommendations. The protection of children is a shared
objective that must be nurtured through constructive
engagement based on facts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mr. Sharma (India): We thank the delegation of the
United Kingdom for organizing this open debate. We
note with appreciation the briefings by Mrs. Virginia
Gamba de Potgieter, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
and Mr. Omar Abdi, Deputy Executive Director for
Programmes at UNICEF. We also thank Ms. Violeta for
sharing her insights with us today.

23-1958541/45

S/PV.9366 (Resumption 1)

Children and armed conflict

Children may constitute only one third of
humankind, but they are its future. It is our common and
primary responsibility to protect them, as they continue
to be the members of society most susceptible to
suffering and vulnerable to volatility. The international
community shall ensure a peaceful, protective and
progressive learning environment for children. As
Mahatma Gandhi said,
“If we are to reach real peace in this world, and if
we are to carry on a real war against war, we shall
have to begin with children”.
Over the past two decades, the Security Council has
actively engaged in that pursuit and significant progress
has been made in protecting children in situations of
armed conflict. However, as conflicts continue to flare
up in various parts of the world, children continue to
suffer. It is clear that significant challenges remain to
the effective implementation of that mandate.
National Governments have the primary
responsibility to protect the rights of children, as
mandated by the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
Member States should adopt effective legal frameworks
for the protection and promotion of children’s rights.
The aim should be not merely to protect children
from child-related crimes but to provide them with
holistic development opportunities, including free and
compulsory primary education. We call for ending
impunity for all actors responsible for inciting and
perpetrating grave violations against children. There
must be greater accountability and sincere efforts to
bring the perpetrators to justice by the Governments
from whose territory such entities operate.
Member States should adopt an inclusive approach
to providing protection to child victims during the rehabilitation and reintegration process in post-conflict
situations. Assistance to national Governments for capacity-building and strengthening legal and operational
tools for child protection is vital. We note the engagement with parties to armed conflict of the United Nations, particularly the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, in line with its mandate. That led to support
last year for the protection or reintegration of more
than 12,460 children formerly associated with armed
forces or groups, a positive trend that should continue.
We are witnessing a dangerous and worrisome
trend in global terrorism, which is an increase in the
number of children being recruited and involved in
42/45

05/07/2023

terrorism-related activities. We need a coordinated
approach to the child-protection agenda and counterterrorism. Member States should demonstrate greater
political will to hold the perpetrators of terrorism
and their sponsors to account in order to fulfil the
Council’s child-protection obligations. We recognize
the importance of having sufficient resources and
the requisite number of child-protection advisers in
peacekeeping missions for the effective implementation
of child-protection programmes. The Council should
consider incorporating adequate child-protection
provisions and capacity into all the relevant mandates
of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Before I conclude, I also want to respond to the
politically motivated and frivolous remarks made by
one delegation against my country. I will not dignify
the venomous comments about India with a response,
as those who are soaked in bigotry will find it hard
to understand a pluralistic society. We dismiss and
condemn those frivolous remarks with the contempt
they deserve. It is nothing but an attempt to divert the
Council’s attention from the grave violations against
children that continue to be committed in Pakistan,
as highlighted in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2023/363). The entire union territories of Jammu and
Kashmir and Ladakh are and always will be an integral
and inalienable part of India, irrespective of what the
representative of Pakistan believes or wishes.
Let me conclude by reiterating India’s firm
commitment to supporting the United Nations in
its endeavours to protect children in situations of
armed conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia.
Mr. Abesadze (Georgia): At the outset, I would
like to express our appreciation to the presidency of the
United Kingdom for putting this important topic at the
forefront of today’s discussion and to thank the briefers
for their presentations. Let me take this occasion to wish
the best of success to the United Kingdom presidency.
I would like to express special gratitude to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict for the presentation of the
report (S/2023/363). We are deeply concerned about the
report’s findings, particularly the continuing practice
of grave violations, which include killing and maiming;
the recruitment, use and abduction of children; the
commission of sexual violence against them and
23-19585

05/07/2023

Children and armed conflict

attacks against schools or hospitals. We support the
mandate of the Special Representative and underline
that upholding our commitments under international
law and redoubling national and international efforts
are key for effectively addressing grave violations
committed against children.
In that context, we welcome the international
conference entitled “Protecting Children in Armed
Conflict — Our Common Future”, held recently in Oslo,
as well as the pledges and commitments it mobilized to
better protect children in armed conflict.
Georgia continues to strengthen its commitment
to relevant international legal instruments, including
the fulfilment of the obligations under the Convention
on the Rights of the Child and its corresponding
Optional Protocol. We also underline the importance
of joint international initiatives, such as the Safe
Schools Declaration and the Vancouver Principles on
Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment and
Use of Child Soldiers. We also stress the key importance
of the implementation of resolution 2601 (2021) for the
protection of education in conflict. Georgia is a party to
and strong supporter of all these initiatives.
We are deeply concerned about the impact Russia’s
illegal war of aggression against Ukraine has been
having on children, who have been disproportionately
affected by the conflict. In that regard, we fully share the
views expressed by the observer of the European Union
earlier today and align ourselves with his statement.
Unfortunately, the consequences of Russia’s
aggression and illegal occupation are well known to
my country, Georgia. The fundamental rights of the
conflict-affected children in the Russian-occupied
Abkhazia and Tskhinvali regions of Georgia continue
to be violated by the occupying Power. Among the
major concerns are restrictions on the freedom of
movement, access to health care and the prohibition
of education in the native Georgian language in both
Russia-occupied regions. Instruction in Russian
language has been imposed in all Georgian schools and
kindergartens, which deprives thousands of children
of the right to education, since neither teachers nor
children speak Russian.
In that regard, let me stress that the Russian
Federation — the Power exercising effective control on
the ground — bears full responsibility for violations of
human rights and fundamental freedoms in both Russiaoccupied regions of Georgia, as clearly attested by the

S/PV.9366 (Resumption 1)

21 January 2021 landmark judgment of the European
Court of Human Rights. This once again clearly
demonstrates the urgent need of international and
regional human rights monitoring mechanisms to have
access to both Russian-occupied regions of Georgia.
Against that background, while we reiterate our
commitment to the protection of children’s rights, we
call on the international community to urge Russia
to cease its provocative and destructive actions in
the illegally occupied regions of Georgia and start to
fulfil its international obligations, first and foremost,
the European Union-mediated 12 August 2008
ceasefire agreement.
In conclusion, let me stress the critical significance
of the consistent and firm stance of the international
community for safeguarding children’s rights in
conflict-affected areas everywhere, including the
illegally occupied regions of Georgia and Ukraine, so
as to ensure that no one is left behind. Georgia reiterates
its readiness to contribute to international endeavours
to prioritize child protection in conflict-affected areas.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Ms. Squeff (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We
appreciate the convening of this important open debate,
as well as the briefings by Special Representative
Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, UNICEF Deputy
Executive Director Omar Abdi and Ms. Violeta, a civil
society representative.
We also express our appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for the preparation of the latest report
(S/2023/363). In that regard, we share the serious
concern that the number of children affected by grave
violations increased in 2022, compared to 2021. It is
also alarming that there was a 112 per cent increase in
attacks on schools and hospitals.
We strongly call for an immediate end to grave
violations against children. We urge the implementation
of all necessary actions to prevent them and stress
the need of providing children with humanitarian
assistance commensurate with their needs, based on a
human rights-based approach centred on the child as
victim of these grave violations, and of ensuring the
adequate accountability of perpetrators.
Grave violations against children must stop
immediately. The six grave violations against children
identified in the Council resolutions flout the limits set

23-1958543/45

S/PV.9366 (Resumption 1)

Children and armed conflict

in international humanitarian law and defy the essence
of human conscience. The international community
must urge all countries to ratify and implement
the Convention on the Rights of the Child and to
increase financial and technical support in order to
help the countries concerned improve their ability to
protect children.
The military use of schools by parties to conflicts
can have a devastating impact on children and can make
schools targets for opposing forces. When a school is
destroyed during an attack, it can take years to rebuild.
In the meantime, hundreds of students may be deprived
of their right to education.
To better protect schools, students and educators,
States must support and implement the Safe
Schools Declaration, an intergovernmental political
commitment to protect education during conflict,
to which Argentina, along with more than 100 other
countries, is a party.
The United Nations agenda on children and armed
conflict has a multitude of robust tools and initiatives
developed at different levels to protect children from
grave violations. One of the strengths of that agenda has
been dialogue with parties to conflict, with hundreds
of commitments, including action plans established by
parties to conflict to better protect children.
We reiterate our strong support for the work
carried out by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mrs. Virginia Gamba de Potgieter,
in the exercise of her mandate, while highlighting the
important work carried out by the Monitoring and
Reporting Mechanism for grave violations, whose
actions on the ground are crucial for the protection of
children in armed conflict.
Achieving peace is the best protection for children.
If war continues, it will result only in more violence
against children. The Security Council can and must do
more to protect children around the world. The Council
must continue to seek political solutions to ongoing
conflicts and promote the protection of children during
conflict prevention and resolution. In addition, it is
important that the Council speak with one voice in order
to improve compliance with international humanitarian
law, respect for human rights and accountability for all
violations and abuses against children.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bahrain.
44/45

05/07/2023

Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank the delegation of
the United Arab Emirates for its presidency of the
Security Council over the past month. I would also like
to congratulate the delegation of the friendly United
Kingdom for presiding over the work of the Council
for the month of July. We wish the delegation every
success. We would also like to thank Mrs. Virginia
Gamba de Potgieter, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
and Mr. Omar Abdi, Deputy Executive Director for
Programmes of UNICEF, for their valuable briefings.
In his report on children and armed conflict
(S/2023/363),
the
Secretary-General
welcomed
the cooperation between the Coalition to Support
Legitimacy in Yemen with Mrs. Gamba de Potgieter and
the progress achieved in implementing the programme
of the time bound activities that was adopted in
January 2020.
Over the past year and until this very day, children
have been subjected to gross violations in areas of
conflict. The number of children who were subjected
to such verified violations actually increased in
comparison to 2021, as the Secretary-General stated in
his report. The increasing number of conflicts, armed
groups and hostile acts reaching new areas have directly
led to increased gross violations against children, such
as killing, maiming, abduction and recruitment, in
addition to other heinous crimes against children, as
well as increased attacks against schools, hospitals
and infrastructure.
In that regard, we stress the need for all parties to
conflict to respect international law and international
humanitarian law. They must respect and implement
relevant international treaties on children’s rights,
including the Convention on the Rights of the
Child. All parties to conflict must ensure access to
humanitarian assistance for children, their families
and their caregivers, and they must provide children
with health care, education and protection. We must
also investigate any violation of the rights of the child,
and we must prevent such violations and hold their
perpetrators accountable.
The Kingdom of Bahrain, which is eager to
implement all measures to ensure the protection of
children and to promote their rights, acceded to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child in 1991 and
ratified it without any reservations on 13 February
23-19585

05/07/2023

Children and armed conflict

1992. The Kingdom of Bahrain has also acceded to
the Optional Protocols to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict and on the sale and exploitation of children.
Accordingly, we stress the importance of including
all States Members of the United Nations in efforts to
promote the protection of children and spare them the
scourge of conflict worldwide in addition to supporting
the rehabilitation and reintegration of affected children.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of Bahrain will
continue to support all efforts to protect children and
prevent their abuse in any form. We will cooperate
with the international community to ensure peace and
security all over the world so that everyone, particularly
children, can enjoy all their rights, foremost of which is
living in safe and prosperous nations.
The President: The representative of Pakistan has
asked for the floor to make a further statement. I now
give her the floor.
Mrs. Ijaz (Pakistan): I take the floor to respond
to the remarks made by the delegation of India against
my country. It is unfortunate that the remarks made by
the representative of India are emblematic of the malice
that the Indian State practices as a virtue. India cannot
hide behind false accusations and divert the attention of
the Security Council from the real issue.
I would like to take the Indian delegation back to
our statement, in which we quoted the annual report
of Secretary-General on children and armed conflict,
where he categorically urged India to implement the
measures, including on
“the prohibition of the use of lethal and non-lethal
force on children, including by ending the use of
pellet guns, ensuring that children are detained
as a last resort and … to prevent all forms of illtreatment in detention, [ensure juvenile justice and
the protection of children from sexual offences]”
(S/2023/363 para. 348).
We urge the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General to keep on reporting on the situation
of children in Indian-occupied Kashmir to prevent

S/PV.9366 (Resumption 1)

grave violations against Kashmiri children from the
900,000-strong Indian occupation army.
While Indian occupying forces have been
responsible for grave violations against children
in Indian illegally occupied Jammu and Kashmir,
Tehrik-e-Taliban Pakistan (TTP) and Baloch Liberation
Authority (BLA) have been behind the terrorist attacks
against children in Pakistan, including the cowardly
and gut-wrenching terrorist attack against the Army
public school in 2014, which resulted in the loss of more
than 130 innocent children.
We have shared concrete evidence that the TTP
and BLA have been financed and sponsored by Indian
agencies. Captured Indian spy and intelligence officer,
Commander Kulbhushan Jadhav, confessed to India’s
support to such terrorist and subversive activities.
Moreover, India has sponsored and perpetrated
terrorism and aggression against all its neighbours,
creating terrorist groups, destabilizing and blockading
neighbours so they would do its strategic bidding, and
sponsoring subversion sabotage in terrorism in various
parts of Pakistan.
The greatest falsehood that India keeps on
repeating is that Kashmir is a part of India. This is a
legal fiction. In all its resolutions on the subject, the
Security Council has decided that the final disposition
of Kashmir will be determined by its people through
a United Nations-supervised plebiscite. India has
accepted this decision and is bound to comply with it, in
accordance with Article 25 of the Charter of the United
Nations. All United Nations maps show Kashmir as a
disputed territory.
If India has nothing to hide and wishes the world to
believe otherwise, it should accept and give the United
Nations Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan
unhindered access to its side of the line of control, and
if India has any respect for international law and moral
courage, it should also end its reign of terror, withdraw
its troops and let the Kashmiris freely decide their future
in accordance with the Security Council resolutions.
The meeting rose at 6.55 p.m.

23-1958545/45
