S/PV.8211

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8211th meeting

Wednesday, 21 March 2018, 10.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Netherlands)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Lie Cheng
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Tenya
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Mr. Allen
Mr. Miller

Agenda
The situation in Libya
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (S/2018/140)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-07885 (E)
*1807885*

S/PV.8211

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
Report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (S/2018/140)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Libya to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Ghassan
Salamé, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya, to participate in this meeting.
Mr. Salamé is joining today’s meeting via videoteleconference from Tripoli.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/140, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Salamé and Ambassador Carl Orrenius
Skau, Chargé d’affaires ad interim of Sweden, on
behalf of the Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011)
concerning Libya.
Recalling the Security Council’s latest note 507 on
its working methods (S/2017/507), I wish to encourage
all participants, both members and non-members of the
Council, to deliver their statements in five minutes or
less. Note 507 also encourages briefers to be succinct and
to focus on key issues. Briefers are further encouraged
to limit initial remarks to 15 minutes or less.
I now give the floor to Mr. Salamé.
Mr. Salamé: Let me, at the outset, congratulate
the Kingdom of the Netherlands on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council.
I am briefing the Council from Tripoli, where I now
live, as do an increasing number of my colleagues. For
2/11

21/03/2018

the United Nations to best support Libya, we must be
in Libya. I am proud to announce that we have truly
returned to the country. But we are here for the whole of
Libya, and not for any one region or city. Accordingly,
we are now looking to reopen our office in Benghazi.
Once conditions permit, we will also seek to reopen
in the south. The United Nations has visited cities and
towns across the country in which it has not stepped foot
for years, and it shall continue to do so. It is essential
that we hear from all Libyans and, whenever possible,
from where they live.
In early March, I spent three days in Benghazi.
I saw a city devastated by three years of conflict. Its
downtown is in ruins. Signs of the recent fighting are
ubiquitous. I heard strong concerns over the economic
and political situation in the country. But, behind the
heated speech, there was a widespread willingness to
make a fresh start and a sense of optimism. Citizens are
mobilizing to rebuild their city. One of many examples
is the Benghazi University faculty, who have taken the
rebuilding of their university into their own hands. That
spirit provides new hope — a hope we must nurture.
Libya was once a country known for its great
demographic fluidity. Citizens were willing to speak to
one another, traverse the land to meet, marry and trade
with one another, or settle in cities far from their place
of birth, all the while carrying their personal identity.
Since 2011, this demographic fluidity has been
constrained, if not altogether strangled. That has
produced more than 300,000 internally displaced
persons, who are unable to go back to their homes
and often live in miserable conditions. Others have
been forced to flee the country altogether. Groups
have refused to live with one another. Ideological or
identity cleavages have led to widespread ostracism. A
discourse of hatred has replaced peaceful interaction.
This has been demonstrated most recently by the
people of Tawergha, whose return was blocked and
many of whom now live in temporary shelters. We
have conveyed a plan to expedite the overcoming of
this impasse.
More generally, we are committed to reversing
mutual exclusion and sterile seclusion. Unless Libyans
from all stripes and segments can come together to
speak, they will be unable to agree. And unless they
agree, the political process cannot progress. Through
our own efforts or working with our partners, we
have made progress in reversing this situation. We
18-07885

21/03/2018

The situation in Libya

have reached out to constituencies that had been
marginalized, including partisans of the former regime.
We have convinced ethnic groups, rival cities and
political parties that have not spoken to one another for
several years to come together.
My mission is not to slice the cake between
competing greeds. First and foremost, it is to bring
Libyans together around a common national narrative.
That common narrative is crucial. We have seen a range
of initiatives — some supported by the United Nations
and its partners, many instigated by the Libyans
themselves — to rewrite it. Mayors from all across
Libya have met together, first in Tunisia and then in
Libya, to discuss vital issues of service delivery. They
were hosted in the homes of the people of Shahat, in
the east, and met again just few days ago in Tripoli,
in the west. Popular movements are starting across the
country, demanding change and an end to plundering.
Members of the House of Representatives and the
High State Council have engaged with each other
to maintain ties and alleviate divisions. The United
Nations has supported local communities in conflict
to forge reconciliation agreements. Armed groups that
were fighting each other just months ago have accepted
to sit around the same table. Facilitating some of these
discussions, the United Nations has helped successfully
prevent clashes, sometimes at the very last minute.
These many activities and efforts are part and parcel
of the process of the national conference, which will
ultimately gather after the holy month of Ramadan.

S/PV. 8211

participation is a clear message to all. The Libyan
people want their voices heard though elections.
At the International Women’s Day event, I called
on women to translate their higher participation as
registrants into higher participation as candidates.
The United Nations will continue to support the High
Commission for National Elections in preparing for
elections and will spare no effort in addressing the
other preconditions for successful elections. Laws
are required for any election to take place, and they
must be drafted in a consensual manner. Efforts to
adopt a permanent national constitution continue.
A draft was approved by the Constitution Drafting
Assembly on 29 July 2017. It went through a judicial
challenge and, on 14 February 2018, the Supreme Court
recognized the validity of the Assembly’s vote on the
draft. However, hurdles remain to the conduct of a
constitutional referendum. The question of referendum
legislation remains very controversial, while some
factions are clearly not satisfied with the content of
the draft Constitution. However, the political process
must continue, as the status quo is untenable. I ask the
Council to make the message on the unsustainability of
the status quo clear to all leaders of the country.

Libyans insistently remind us of their wish for a new
period of stability and certainty built on accountable
and unified institutions. The present institutions are
based on shallow legitimacy. They are built on tenuous
mandates or are divided into competing bodies. To lead
and unify the people and take difficult decisions for
their own good, the Government must come from the
people. That means that elections must be held.

While there is reason for optimism in the political
process, there is also cause for concern. A backdrop
of continued violence and localized conflicts persists.
Extremists, including the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant and Al-Qaida, continue to maintain a
presence in Libya and recently have carried out attacks.
Armed groups, including those formerly integrated
into State structures, continue to operate outside of
the law, including perpetrating human rights abuses.
Bodies bearing signs of torture have turned up in
many locations. Libyan men, women and children are
increasingly kidnapped for profit, even in the heart of
the capital. Citizens are arbitrarily arrested by shadowy
security forces. People are held and abused in unofficial,
official or quasi-official detention prisons.

For the United Nations, working for the conduct
of fair, free and credible elections before the end of
the year is at the top of our priorities. It is vital that,
before elections take place, we are certain that they
will be inclusive and their results accepted. It is for
that reason I am pleased that voter registration, which
ended 10 days ago, was very successful. With 1 million
new registrants, 2.5 million Libyans are now eligible
to vote. There was strong participation by women and
youth in the voter registration update. Such remarkable

In the south, the situation in Sabha is currently of
serious concern. There have been a number of fatalities,
including civilians. The complex network of local
animosities, the ongoing jostling by national political
and military players and the growing presence of
foreign mercenaries seriously complicate the situation.
The conflict risks taking on a transnational dimension
that could further destabilize Libya. To prevent further
escalation, I have expressed the willingness of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) to

18-078853/11

S/PV.8211

The situation in Libya

mediate should the parties request it. I call on Member
States to support Libya’s fragile transition by urging
their partners there to embrace the political process and
not arms. There is space for all in civilian life. It is
abundantly clear that no military faction can hope to
conquer the country.
The provision of security in Libya should be
a matter for national institutions, and not for the
numerous armed groups. UNSMIL has embarked on
a broad conversation with the leaders of those groups
to better understand their perspectives. Too many
young men earn a living by carrying weapons. They
should instead be reintegrated into civilian life. Before
May, we expect to unveil a strategy to do so. However,
we must be realistic. In a country awash with arms,
disarmament will require time and much stronger
national institutions. Furthermore, the arrival of more
arms in Libya will only hamper such efforts and damage
the political process. Unfortunately, more weapons are
indeed being imported. I urge the Council to exert its
utmost influence to stop arms from entering Libya.
At the heart of Libya’s problems is an economic
system of predation that degrades the lives of ordinary
Libyans and serves the interests of the powerful. It is
the main obstacle to the political process and cements
the status quo. I was concerned about it when I first
arrived; now I am truly disturbed. That system must
be shattered. Resources must flow into building a
strong, equitable State for all, and not into the pockets
of the few. We have built knowledge and expertise on
the matter. I am grateful to the Panel of Experts for
their contribution. The United Nations and partner
institutions must comprehensively address economic
plundering as a key pillar of our engagement.
Human trafficking is but one of the elements of
the perverted economy. It is also the most morally
reprehensible. Such trade has become the main source of
income for some people, leaving them numb to the sight
of humans being traded as commodities or of migrants
being left to die as they fall off packed pick-up trucks.
Libya is a destination, a transit country and a source
of migration. Such an important issue, which affects
the lives of hundreds of thousands, must be addressed
strategically and across borders. I thank our partners in
the African Union, the European Union and the League
of Arab States for their excellent cooperation on the
issue and on the political process in Libya.
4/11

21/03/2018

Libya’s finances remain precarious. Despite the
country now producing well over 1 million barrels of oil
a day and generating rosy macroeconomic indicators, it
does not enjoy true economic recovery. Instead, Libyan
people become poorer every year. Women from the once
wealthy Tripoli bourgeoisie confess to putting their
teenage children to work. Elders from the east lament
that their own internal tribal emergency welfare funds
are now depleted. Basic health and education services
decay, while frustrated citizens cannot understand why
the surge in oil production translates into a further
decline in living standards. To address the needs of the
most vulnerable and of internally displaced persons, on
25 January we launched a new humanitarian response
plan to provide life-saving assistance to almost 1 million
people a year. There are signs of a looming monetary
and fiscal crisis. Although now high, oil revenues are
vulnerable to underinvestment and sabotage. Financial
institutions are divided. Government expenditure is
bloated and continues to increase, but thus far increased
spending has not led to improved services.
Overall, the State’s inability to provide services
and implement the reforms needed creates a dangerous
vicious cycle. It strengthens the self-righteous
arguments of others who claim they are stepping in to
fill the vacuum left by the absence of the State. In turn,
the activities of those individuals and groups undermine
the ability of the State itself to fulfil its obligations. For
many Libyans that abnormal state of affairs has become
the new normal. The vicious cycle must stop.
One aspect of the action plan was the amendment
to the Libyan Political Agreement. When I joined the
Mission, almost all stakeholders I met requested that the
matter be included in the action plan. The appointment
of a new executive would have been useful, but only
if chosen in an open manner that promoted national
unification and strengthened the Government’s ability
to serve the country for the limited transition. I now
believe that they have little chance of being passed.
The action plan does not depend on these amendments,
and certainly the closer Libya is to elections, the less
relevant these amendments become. However, starting
tomorrow, I shall commence a new and possibly final
attempt to realize these amendments.
In my first briefing from Tripoli, I reported that
there was a consistent staccato of bullets overhead. The
bullets are still flying. The other day I was told that this
was just normal. For the sake of the Libyan people, for
18-07885

21/03/2018

The situation in Libya

whom we in the United Nations work, we must refuse
to accept this normality.
The President: I thank Mr. Salamé for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Orrenius Skau.
Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): In accordance with
paragraph 24(e) of resolution 1970 (2011), of 26 February
2011, I have the honour to report to the Security Council
on the work of the Committee established by the same
resolution. The report covers the period from 18 January
to 21 March 2018, during which time the Committee
met once in informal consultations and conducted
additional work via the written silence procedure.
During the informal consultations held on
9 February, the Committee heard a presentation by the
Coordinator of the Panel of Experts on the interim report
of the Panel, prepared in accordance with resolution
2362 (2017), and discussed the recommendations
contained therein.
The interim report addressed, inter alia, securityrelated designation criteria, the implementation of
the arms embargo, the unity of State institutions
and misappropriation of State funds, the prevention
of illicit exports of petroleum, the implementation
of the asset freeze and the travel ban. Of the eight
recommendations addressed to the Committee, it
agreed to take follow-up action on six and took note
of one. Two recommendations are addressed to the
Council. On 13 February, the Committee issued a press
release on the informal consultations.
Also in connection with the Panel’s interim report,
which is a confidential and unpublished document, the
Committee received a letter from the Coordinator of
the Panel of Experts on 7 March, expressing the Panel’s
extreme concern regarding media reports citing, often
inaccurately and out of context, excerpts from the report,
as well as reproducing the content of the entire report.
The Committee shares this concern. In a press release
issued on 9 March, the Committee stressed the need to
ensure the safety of Panel members, in accordance with
paragraph 16 of resolution 2362 (2017). The Committee
also reiterated its full support and appreciation for the
work of the Panel and underlined the importance of
that work being carried out in an unhindered manner.
Upon the proposal of a Committee member, I intend to
call a meeting of the Committee on this matter in the
near future.

S/PV. 8211

During the period under review, with respect to the
arms embargo, the Committee approved one request
for exemption from the arms embargo submitted
under paragraph 9(c) of resolution 1970 (2011). The
Committee also received a post-delivery notification
from the United Nations Support Mission in Libya for
previously exempted items.
Furthermore, on 16 January, the Committee
received a letter from Turkey providing certain
information concerning the vessel Andromeda,
which had been seized by Greece. On 29 January, the
Committee received an inspection report of the cargo
from Greece, in line with paragraph 21 of resolution
2213 (2015). Containers of explosives, detonators and
related materiel, as well as empty gas tanks, were
found on board this vessel, which was flying the flag
of Tanzania. The Committee has notified Libya of
the inspection and has written to the relevant States
seeking clarifications from them on the matter. Greece
subsequently informed the Committee that the Panel of
Experts had inspected the seized items.
In connection with the measures imposed on two
vessels, the Nadine and the Lynn S, for illicitly exporting
gas oil from Libya, the Committee renewed those
measures for a further period of 90 days for each, based
on requests received from Libya. The Committee also
updated the sanctions list entry details for those vessels
based on updates provided by the Panel of Experts.
It further wrote a letter to the relevant States on the
matter. Recently, the Committee received, through the
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014), an inspection report
from the United Nations Verification and Inspection
Mechanism for Yemen dated 4 January 2018, on the
vessel Lynn S.
Concerning the travel ban, the Committee approved
an extension to the exemption request submitted on
behalf of Mr. Sayyid Mohammed Qadhaf Al-Dam,
who had been authorized to travel from Libya to
Egypt on the grounds of humanitarian need. However,
the Committee did not approve a request submitted
on behalf of Mrs. Safia Farkash Al-Barassi that she
no longer be subject to this measure. Accordingly,
she remains subject to both the travel ban and the
asset freeze.
The President: I thank Ambassador Orrenius Skau
for his briefing.

18-078855/11

S/PV.8211

The situation in Libya

I now give the floor to those Council members
wishing to make statements.
Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome
the convening of this meeting and the briefings we
have just heard from Mr. Ghassan Salamé, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL),
and Ambassador Carl Orrenius Skau, Chargé d’affaires
ad interim of Sweden, on behalf of the Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.
Peru is closely following the political and security
situation in Libya. We are particularly concerned at the
ongoing reports of violence in Tripoli and Benghazi and
other areas of Libya, as well as the presence of terrorist
groups there. We must therefore ensure the promotion
of respect for human rights throughout the country,
especially as concerns particularly vulnerable groups
such as refugees, women and children.
Given this situation, Peru supports the efforts
to implement the Libyan Political Agreement and
the United Nations action plan. We believe that
dialogue and commitment among the various Libyan
stakeholders, supported by the mediation efforts of
the Special Representative, are the only way to move
towards a national transition and achieve sustainable
peace. We would therefore highlight the progress made
in the talks between the High Council of State and the
House of Representatives, as well as the good offices of
UNSMIL throughout the process. Good faith and a the
spirit of understanding and cooperation must prevail
among the parties.
Furthermore, we commend the Libyan people for
their enthusiasm with respect to holding elections this
year. More than 2 million voters had been registered
by the end of January, including more than a million
women, as the Special Representative stressed. We
also wish to highlight the importance of the town hall
meetings, open to all citizens, that have been held with
the support of UNSMIL and the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General.
It is our view that these efforts must serve to
ensure that citizens are involved in and take ownership
of the political process leading to the election of
new national authorities, the convening of a national
conference and the drafting of a new constitution. We
deem important the participation of the entire Libyan
political spectrum and civil society, as well as the
6/11

21/03/2018

support of the international community in this. Peru
encourages greater participation on the part of women
and young people at all levels of this process, and here
we wish to commend the inclusion of women in the
joint drafting committee and the establishment of a
forum to review draft constitutional proposals from a
gender perspective.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): First of all, our delegation commends
the presidency of the Netherlands for placing this
important topic on this morning’s agenda. Moreover,
we thank Mr. Ghassan Salamé, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya, for providing the
Security Council with an excellent briefing on the
situation in Libya and the progress being made in the
implementation process of the United Nations action
plan for Libya. We wish Mr. Salamé every success in
carrying out the functions conferred upon him. We also
extend our thanks to Sweden as Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011), concerning Libya, for the important and
substantive information provided at this meeting. My
delegation also thanks the Secretary-General for his
12 February report (S/2018/140) on the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya.
Equatorial Guinea deeply regrets the current
situation that the Libyan people are undergoing. On
behalf of Equatorial Guinea, we convey our most
sincere support and solidarity for them and our desire to
see that country’s ordeal come to an end. The Republic
of Equatorial Guinea emphatically condemns all armed
conflicts and any violation of international human
rights law and international humanitarian law, and
demands that priority be given to protecting the most
vulnerable civilians as well as all personnel providing
humanitarian and health assistance in the area.
Equatorial Guinea has always advocated for
dialogue as the primary means for settling conflicts
with the goal of ensuring bringing about peace. We
therefore acknowledge, commend and enthusiastically
support the role of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya in its work as mediator and in advancing
reconciliation at all levels through dialogue. We believe
that that is the way to achieve the political transition
for which the Libyan people have been yearning for
more than seven years, during which they have been
embroiled in a conflict that has resulted in the loss
of many lives, including among women and children.
18-07885

21/03/2018

The situation in Libya

We also underline the role of various regional and
international actors, such as the African Union, the
League of Arab States and the European Union, among
others, for their work to reach political solutions to end
the situation in Libya. Given the plight of the Libyan
people, we call on the parties involved to reach an
understanding and pool their efforts so as to make
the Libyan Political Agreement a reality and end the
protracted political transition, thereby allowing for
the holding of legislative elections, which would
lead to the re-establishment of peace and security in
Libya — a process that we want to see take place safely,
transparently, freely and democratically without any
interference from external third parties.
In conclusion, we are deeply concerned about a
situation marked by anarchy and insecurity and the
deterioration in the humanitarian situation caused by
persistent clashes among armed groups. We have also
seen abductions, assassinations, the rape of women and
children, arbitrary detention and torture — as has been
indicated in the report of the Secretary-General — as
well as the situation concerning refugees and migrants,
who, according to the report (see S/2017/466) of the
Panel of Experts established pursuant to resolution
1973 (2011), concerning Libya, continue to be subjected
to degrading treatment, abuse, human trafficking and
other barbaric indignities. Faced with such unrelenting
facts, we therefore urge all Council members and the
entire international community to redouble their efforts
to end the situation on the ground, which does not seem
to have a clear end in sight.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): We thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Salamé and
Ambassador Orrenius Skau for their comprehensive
updates on the situation in Libya and the activities of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011), concerning Libya, respectively. We fully support
the view that the solution to the situation in Libya must
be solely a peaceful one and that the Libyans themselves
must have ownership over the political process. The
Libyan Political Agreement remains the only viable
framework throughout the transitional period to end the
protracted political crisis. However, we need to move
from the transitional phase to permanent stability in
Libya, and we believe that the following steps should
be undertaken.
First, a referendum should be held to approve a new
constitution, as the Supreme Court of Libya ruled in

S/PV. 8211

favour of the draft constitution on 14 February, thereby
removing all legal obstacles.
Secondly, free and fair parliamentary and
presidential elections should be held, which would mark
the end of the transitional period. We fully support the
observations made by the Secretary-General in his
latest report on Libya (S/2019/140) that it is essential to
enjoy broad political consensus concerning the elections
and to encourage both participation and acceptance of
the results. It is also critical that the appropriate legal
framework be in place.
Thirdly, priority should be placed on the development
agenda. We commend the efforts of the of the United
Nations development system in drafting a strategic
framework for Libya for the period from 2019 to 2020
with the active participation of humanitarian agencies,
Libyan officials and civil society representatives.
Fourthly, issues concerning impunity related
to migrants, the violation of their human rights and
their humanitarian plight and dire situation should be
addressed properly.
Moreover, we believe that international initiatives
to advance political reconciliation in Libya should be
consolidated under the leadership of United Nationsled efforts. It is important that the Security Council
maintain unity and support the work of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Salamé and
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya. In that
regard, Kazakhstan commends the active efforts of
the Special Representative and encourages him to
continue his engagement with a wide range of actors
so as to broaden support and their commitments to the
political process.
Lastly, concerning the sanctions regime, it is
vital that Libya’s oil resources be used for the benefit
of Libyans. The smuggling of fuel continues to be a
prosperous activity and generates a significant flow of
income to boost local armed groups and cross-border
criminal networks. In that regard, strict compliance
with the embargo on the supply of arms to Libya must
be reinforced.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We express our gratitude
for the briefing by Mr. Ghassan Salamé, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya, and take
this opportunity to reiterate our unwavering support

18-078857/11

S/PV.8211

The situation in Libya

for the work that he continues to do. Likewise, we are
grateful for the briefing by Ambassador Orrenius Skau,
Chargé d’affaires ad interim of Sweden, on behalf of the
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya,
on the Committee’s work.
It has been almost eight years since the conflict
began in Libya and, given the inconceivable suffering
that the Libyan people have been subjected to, the
comprehensive implementation of the Libyan Political
Agreement is crucially needed to definitively conclude
the transition period. Accordingly, my delegation
underscores the willingness to engage in dialogue and the
commitment shown by the parties during the meetings
of the joint drafting committee to find common ground
to facilitate its effective implementation as well as to
comply with the proposals set out in the United Nations
action plan advanced by the Special Representative.
That same notable willingness must be maintained
and lead to a participatory process led by and for the
Libyan people.
It is therefore necessary to promote and move
forward the holding of a referendum on a new
constitution that clearly defines the elements needed
for electoral processes that will consolidate and bring
to term the transition period and, above all, will
establish the guidelines to develop the entire normative
structure enabling the establishment of reliable and
competent institutions upon which the State will be
anchored. To that end, we believe that the progress
made by the Libyan High Commission for National
Elections in voter registration has been a fundamental
step, with 2.5 million people registered, of whom
almost half are women, at the time of the writing of
the latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/140).
In that understanding, we believe it essential to ensure
the active participation of women, young people and
all sectors of society in this process. We appreciate and
highlight the ongoing efforts of various subregional and
regional organizations, such as the African Union, and
countries such as Egypt, Algeria and Tunisia, among
others, to strengthen, support and advance the Libyan
political process and the action plan.
Despite these positive actions, we deplore the
worrying increase in violence and confrontations
between the parties during the reporting period, which,
according to the report of the Secretary-General,
have resulted in more than 160 deaths. Likewise, the
continuous reports of abductions, torture, arbitrary
8/11

21/03/2018

detentions and summary executions are disturbing,
particularly in the cities of Derna and Benghazi, where
clashes have also occurred and where public spaces and
civil services have been identified as military targets,
in clear violation of international humanitarian law. In
this regard, we reiterate our call on the parties and local
actors to lay down their arms and avoid any rhetoric that
calls for violence as a means of achieving any objective,
since these attitudes not only threaten the lives of
hundreds of innocent people, but also setback and
undermine the progress made so far in implementing
the Libyan Political Agreement.
It is also alarming that, according to the report
of the Secretary-General, irregular combatants and
foreign armed groups from the Sudan and Chad are
present in Libyan territory and that their activities and
involvement in armed clashes in the south of the country
only exacerbate the internal conflict to the detriment of
the efforts being made by the Libyan people to stabilize
their country. Furthermore, the threat posed by the
movement of foreign terrorist fighters from Da’esh to
Libya, following their defeat and expulsion from Iraq
and Syria, is an imminent threat that endangers the
security not only of Libya, but of the entire region,
since, despite their defeat, they would still be able to
coordinate attacks through covert cells and engage in
arms trafficking despite the current embargo.
The situation of migrants and refugees has not
improved. According to the report of the International
Organization for Migration of 28 February, during
that month alone 34 people were killed in attempts to
cross the Mediterranean Sea, mainly from the ports
of Zuwara, Tripoli and Azawiya. Unfortunately, these
victims are among the more than 316 fatalities recorded
so far this year. We note with concern repeated reports
of violations of the rights of migrants, who are detained
indefinitely in detention centres under reprehensible
conditions, subjected to degrading treatment, torture,
forced labour, denial of medical assistance and sexual
violence. We call on the parties to prevent abuses
and violations of the human rights of migrants in the
centres under their control, and we recall that they must
comply with their obligations under international law
and guarantee respect for the rights of these persons.
We reiterate once again to the Libyan authorities that
they must initiate appropriate investigations to identify
those responsible for these violations so that these acts
do not remain unpunished.
18-07885

21/03/2018

The situation in Libya

In conclusion, we call on all parties to join in the
ongoing efforts to maintain a continuous dialogue that
will allow for a peaceful, orderly and inclusive political
transition that responds to the interests of the Libyan
people and allows them to freely and consensually define
their future within the framework of their sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity, since there is no
military solution to this conflict. We recall that the only
option for resolving this conflict is through compliance
with the Libyan Political Agreement, recognized
by resolution 2259 (2015), and reaffirm that it must
be implemented, as stated in presidential statement
S/PRST/2017/26, of 14 December 2017.
The President: I wish to again remind all
speakers to limit their statements to no more than five
minutes in order to enable the Council to carry out its
work expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, it is my pleasure to congratulate you, Madam
President, on your delegation’s assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2018/140) on the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL). I would further like to
express our thanks and appreciation to his Excellency
Mr. Ghassan Salamé, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Libya and Head of UNSMIL,
for his important briefing on the latest developments in
Libya and the extensive efforts being made to resolve
the political crisis in the country. We also thank the
representative of Sweden for his briefing as Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya, in which
he addressed the latest developments on the sanctions
in Libya.
The international community has stressed its firm
commitment to resolving the crisis in Libya through
an inclusive political settlement embodied in the
United Nations action plan adopted at the high-level
meeting held in New York on 20 September 2017. The
action plan is primarily based on the Libyan Political
Agreement signed on 17 December 2015, which
remains the sole framework for ending the conflict
between Libyan parties, free from menacing rhetoric
and use of force. All Libyan parties engaging in the
political dialogue have committed to the Agreement,
which is aimed at concluding the transitional stage and

S/PV. 8211

all other stages included in the United Nations action
plan, and establish a strong and resilient Government
to lead the country to safety and security. We highly
appreciate the great efforts of Mr. Ghassan Salamé in
reaching out to all parties, and underscore the vital
role of the United Nations in facilitating the Libyan
dialogue. We also appreciate the regional efforts that
have been coordinated with those of the United Nations,
especially those of the League of Arab States and the
African Union towards resolving the Libyan crisis.
We warn against any intervention or unilateral
initiative that could only thwart United Nations
efforts and fail to resolve the Libyan crisis. We note
the statement made by the President of the Presidency
Council of the Government of National Accord on
17 February 2018, addressed to the Libyan people on
the seventh anniversary of the revolution, with respect
to the negative effect of foreign interventions in the
Libyan crisis.
As for recent positive developments in the political
process in Libya, and thanks to the support of the
Government of National Accord and UNSMIL, the
High Commission for National Elections has started
registering citizens living in the country. The number
of registered people is more than half of those qualified
to participate in the elections. The High Commission
has also started to register citizens residing in foreign
countries. This is a process that remains ongoing. We
hope that the House of Representatives will soon adopt
an electoral law allowing the High Commission to finish
the procedural work and set a date for the elections, in
coordination with the House, the Presidency Council
and the High Council of States. If a date is set, we
hope to see all political parties accepting the results of
the elections, which could lead to the reconstruction
of the State and the unification and reactivation of
its institutions, and to alleviating the suffering of the
Libyan people.
Undoubtedly, insecurity and the proliferation
of weapons are among the main challenges that
the international community must address to help
Libya, especially at this sensitive time. Although the
security situation has improved in the capital Tripoli
and its surrounding areas, thanks to the efforts of the
Government of National Accord, security incidents
involving the terrorizing of civilians continue to
occur from time to time because of some rogue armed
groups. In this regard, we stress the need to unify all
military, security and law enforcement institutions.

18-078859/11

S/PV.8211

The situation in Libya

These institutions must respect the principle of military
leadership and control, pursuant to the military law,
and must work under civilian leadership and proceed
to the dissolution of armed groups and the collection
of weapons.
It has become urgent to improve the security
situation in Libya and a prerequisite for the success of
any political process and for addressing all challenges,
including the fight against terrorism, illicit migration
and the protection of human rights. If weapons and
tyrannical armed groups continue to proliferate, then
security and stability in the country and the democratic
civil State will not be achieved and no political solution
will succeed. In this regard, there is hope that the
efforts of the sisterly Arab Republic of Egypt to unify
the Libyan National Army will succeed. Six rounds of
meetings have been held so far between the military
leadership and high-ranking officers in western,
eastern and southern Libya.
With respect to the economic situation, there has
been a tangible increase in oil exports, which have
almost reached the goal of 1.5 million barrels per day.
If it were not for the security situation, the National Oil
Corporation would have been able to achieve that goal
by now, thereby increasing the revenue of the State,
which would in turn have alleviated the economic
distress and civilian suffering. However, the ongoing
political schism and the presence of parallel institutions,
in addition to the deterioration of the security situation
as a result of fighting over resources by some greedy
parties with the aim of achieving individual gains at
the expense of citizens’ livelihood, have contributed to
the continued deterioration of the economic situation
and the suffering of citizens. We stress again that
all economic problems can be solved only through a
unified Government of National Accord and unified
sovereign institutions.
As members of the Council know, the oil and
financial wealth of Libya is being looted at the national
and foreign levels. Locally, oil continues to be smuggled
by criminal gangs, which established that illicit trade
with the aim of obtaining revenues in the millions of
dollars. That is a waste of the wealth of the country and
the Libyan people. We therefore commend the efforts
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011) concerning Libya and its Panel of Experts,
especially in terms of the implementation of relevant
Council resolutions.
10/11

21/03/2018

Regarding the financial wealth, all Libyans must
first and foremost surmount their differences and work
together to serve the interests of the country. They
must agree to unify their main institutions, such as the
Libyan Central Bank, the National Oil Corporation and
the Libyan Investment Authority, to protect the wealth
of the Libyan people and future generations. Those
institutions must discharge their duties as required,
free of all political polarization. Ongoing disputes over
these institutions could lead to a terrible disaster, the
primary victim of which will be the Libyan people. We
call on all parties to reach an agreement and put the
interest of Libya and the Libyans first.
In conclusion, I would like to express our deep
trust in the work of the Libyan sanctions committee
and its Panel of Experts, in addition to their role in
the protection of the wealth of the Libyan people. We
also place our confidence in the efforts of the United
Nations to achieve security and stability in Libya.
The President: The representative of the Russian
Federation has asked to make a statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I will be very brief. I would just like to inform
the Council that we will be circulating something related
to an item on our agenda. It is a documentary film on
what is currently going on in eastern Ghouta. On the
same subject, I would like to conclude my statement by
reading two paragraphs from today’s press.
(spoke in English)
“A Russian-brokered deal has been reached
to evacuate a Syrian rebel group from a town in
eastern Ghouta to opposition-held north-western
Syria in the first such deal in the last remaining
rebel bastion near the capital, two opposition
sources said on Wednesday. They said fighters from
the Ahrar Al-Sham rebel group in control of the
besieged town of Harasta had agreed to lay down
their arms in return for safe passage to insurgentcontrolled areas and an offer to be pardoned under
local reconciliation terms with the authorities for
those who want to stay.”
This is not a Russian statement, but from Reuters.
The second relevant short paragraph, from The
Independent, in the United Kingdom, says that
“rockets fired on a market in a Governmentcontrolled area of Damascus killed 35 people and
wounded more than 20 others, Syrian State-run
18-07885

21/03/2018

The situation in Libya

media has said. This marks one of the highest death
tolls in a single attack targeting the capital.”
(spoke in Russian)
That all relates to how resolution 2401 (2018)
is being implemented — its implementation, or
non-implementation, being something that many
Council members here like to talk about. The film I
mentioned is a documentary. It has no embellishments

S/PV. 8211

whatsoever. It is not a feature film, but gives us a
realistic picture of what has been going on in the past
few days in this enclave on the outskirts of Damascus. I
hope that Council members can find the time to watch it.
The President: I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.10 a.m.

18-0788511/11
