VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Taking into account Economic and Social Council
resolution 1979/36 of 10 May 1979,
1. Takes note with satisfaction of the report on the
work relating to the over-all analysis of the United Nations approach to human rights 45 submitted to the General Assembly by the Commission on Human Rights,
through the Economic and Social Council, in accordance
with paragraph 2 (a) of General Assembly resolution
32/130;
2. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
continue at its thirty-sixth session its ongoing work on
the over-all analysis with a view to further promoting
and improving human rights and fundamental freedoms,
including the question of the Commission's programme
and working methods, and on the over-all analysis of the
alternative approaches and ways and means for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms, in accordance with the provisions and
concepts of resolution 32/130;
3. Reiterates its profound conviction that all human
rights and fundamental freedoms are indivisible and interdependent, and that equal attention and urgent consideration should be given to the implementation, promotion and protection of both civil and political, and
economic, social and cultural rights;
4. Reaffirms the absolute necessity, under all circumstances, of eliminating massive and flagrant violations of human rights and of the rights of peoples and
individuals affected by situations such as those enumerated in paragraph 1 (e) of resolution 32/130;
5. Reaffirms also that it is of paramount importance
for the promotion of human rights and fundamental
freedoms that Member States should undertake specific
obligations through accession to or ratification of international instruments in this field and that, consequently,
the standard-setting work within the United Nations system in the field of human rights and the universal acceptance and implementation of the relevant international
instruments should be encouraged;
6. Emphasizes the need to create conditions at the
national and international levels for the full promotion
and protection of the human rights of individuals and
peoples;
1. Recognizes that, in order fully to guarantee human rights and complete personal dignity, it is necessary to guarantee the right to work, participation of
workers in management, and the right to education,
health and proper nourishment, through the adoption of
measures at the national and international levels, including the establishment of the new international economic order;
8. Emphasizes that the right to development is a human right and that equality of opportunity for development is as much a prerogative of nations as of individuals within nations;
9. Requests the Commission on Human Rights, at
its thirty-sixth session, to consider the ~xisting human
and other resources that the Division of Human Rights
of the Secretariat has at its disposal for the implementation of General Assembly resolutions, on the basis of
complete data which the Secretary-General is requested
to provide to it, and thereafter to make recommendations, through the Economic and Social Council, to the
Assembly at its thirty-fifth session, with a view to further improving the working of the Division;
4
G See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
1979, Supplement No. 6 (E/1979/36), chap. IX, sect. A.

171

10. Requests the Secretary-General to give, through
the programme of advisory services in the field of human rights, priority to the holding in 1980 of a seminar,
as already decided by the Economic and Social Council
in its decision 1979/30, on the effect of the present unjust international economic order on the economies of
developing countries and the obstacle that this constitutes for the implementation of human rights and fundamental freedoms, in particular for the right to enjoy an
adequate standard of living as stated in article 25 of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights;
11. Requests the Secretary-General and concerned
organs and bodies of the United Nations system to implement fully the recommendations contained in Economic and Social Council resolution 1979 /36;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare, taking into account relevant information already available
within the United Nations, and to submit to the General
Assembly at its thirty-sixth session a study on the nature
and extent to which the realization of human rights and
fundamental freedoms is affected by present international conditions, with particular reference to situations
resulting from apartheid, from all forms of racial discrimination, from colonialism, neo-colonialism and imperialism, from policies tending to divide the world into
spheres of influence, from the arms race, from foreign
domination and occupation, from aggression and threats
against national sovereignty, national unity and territorial integrity, from refusal to recognize the fundamental rights of peoples to self-determination and of every
nation to the exercise of full sovereignty over its wealth
and natural resources, from intervention and interference in the internal affairs of States, particularly with
reference to developing countries, as well as from the
existence of the unjust system of international economic
relations, taking also into account the conclusions of the
seminar mentioned in paragraph 10 above;
13. Also requests the Secretary-General to transmit
the present resolution to the specialized agencies concerned and to all United Nations bodies that deal with
human rights;
14. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session a
progress report on the implementation of the present
resolution;
15. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fifth session the item entitled "Alternative approaches and ways and means within the United Nations
system for improving the effective enjoyment of human
rights and fundamental freedoms".
76th plenary meeting
23 November 1979
34 / 4 7.

Services of the Secretariat concerned with
human rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling the determination of the peoples of the
United Nations to reaffirm faith in fundamental human
rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person and
in the equal rights of men and women and of nations
large and small,
Recalling especially that one of the most important
purposes of the United Nations is to achieve international co-operation in solving international problems of
an economic, social, cultural or humanitarian character,

172

General Assembly-Thirty-fourth Session

---------------------- ·--=--------------------and in promoting and encouraging respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion,
Mindful of the important contribution which the Division of Human Rights of the Secretariat has made to
United Nations activities for the promotion and
protection of human rights since the inception of
the Organization,
Believing, however, that the activities of the human
rights sector of the Secretariat should be enhanced so
as petter to enable it to meet the needs of the Organization and the international community, particularly after
the entry into force of the International Covenants on
Human Rights 46 and the International Convention on
the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid, 47 and bearing in mind policy-making decisions of
the General Assembly such as resolution 32/130 of 16
December 1977,
Recalling the report of the Secretary-General on organizational nomenclature in the Secretariat, 48 the general direction of which was endorsed by the General
Assembly in its resolution 32/204 of 21 December
1977,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to consider the
redesignation of the Division of Human Rights as a Centre for Human Rights, in the light of the views expressed
on the proposed redesignation at the thirty-fifth session
of the Commission on Human Rights;
2. Invites the Secretary-General to ensure that adequate financial and other resources are allocated to the
sector of the Secretariat concerned with human rights,
so as to enable it to discharge its functions, in the light
of the resu!ts. of the relevant study to be conducted by
the Comm1ss1on on Human Rights at its thirty-sixth
session in accordance with paragraph 9 of General Assembly resolution 34/ 46 of 23 November 1979;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session on the implementation of the present resolution.

76th plenary meeting
23 November 1979
34/ 48.

Alternative approaches and ways and means
within the United Nations system for the improvement of the effective enjoyment of human
rights and fundamental freedoms

The General Assembly,
Recalling that one of the purposes of the United
Nations under Article 1 of the Charter is to promote
and encourage respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms as embodied in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 10
Bearing in mind its resolution 33/105 of 16 December 1978, in which it requested the Commission on
Human Rights to take into account, in continuing its
work on the over-all analysis of the United Nations
approach to human rights, the views expressed on the
various proposals during the general debate on the item
at the thirty-second and thirty-third sessions of the General Assembly, including a post of United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights,
4 6 Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
4 1 Resolution 3068 (XXVIII), annex.
48 A/C.5/32/17.
49

Resolution 217 A (Ill).

Considering that the Working Group of the Commission on Human Rights was nevertheless unable, in its
consideration of the over-all analysis/ 0 to make a thorough evaluation of the proposal to create a post of
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Decides to consider at its thirty-fifth session the question of the creation of a post of United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights under the item entitled "Alternative approaches and ways and means
within the United Nations system for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms".
76th plenary meeting
23 November 1979

34 / 49.

National institutions for the promotion and
protection of human rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 32/ 123 of 16 December
1977 and 33/46 of 14 December 1978, as well as
Commission on Human Rights resolutions 23 (XXXIV)
of 8 March 1978 51 and 24 (XXXV) of 14 March
1979,°" concerning national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights,
Recalling also that, in its resolution 34/46 of 23
November 1979, it emphasized the need to create conditions at the national and international levels for the
full promotion and protection of the human rights of
individuals and peoples,
Mindful of the guidelines on the structure and functioning of national and local institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights adopted by the
Seminar on National and Local Institutions for the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights, held at Geneva
from 18 to 29 September 1978, 53 and endorsed by the
General Assembly in its resolution 33/46,
Mindful also of the conclusions of the Seminar on
Recourse Procedures Available to Victims of Racial
Discrimination and Activities to be Undertaken at the
Regional Level, held at Geneva from 9 to 20 July 1979,54
I. Invites all Member States to take appropriate
steps for the establishment of national institutions for
the promotion and protection of human rights, bearing
in mind the guidelines referred to above;
. 2. Emphasizes the importance of the integrity and
mdependence of such national institutions, in accordance with national legislation;
3. Draws attention to the constructive role which
national non-governmental organizations can play in the
work of national institutions;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, in submitting to
the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session the report requested in paragraph 6 of Commission on Human Rights resolution 24 (XXXV), to draw also upon
other relevant sources, such as the reports and documents of the Seminar on National and Local Institutions for the Promotion and Protection of Human
50 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
1979, Supplement No. 6 (E/1979/36), chap. IX, sect. A.
51 lbid., 1978, Supplement No. 4 (E/1978/34), chap. XXVI,
sect. A.
62 Ibid., 1979, Supplement No. 6 (E/1979/36), chap. XXIV,
sect. A.
53 See ST /HR/SER.A/2 and Add.1.
54 See ST/HR/SER.A/3.
