S/PV.8492

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8492

nd meeting
Wednesday, 27 March 2019, 9.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Delattre. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Van Vlierberge
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Trullols Yabra
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Duclos
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. Sabelo
Mr. Hickey
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Security Council mission
Briefing by Security Council mission to the Sahel (21 to 25 March 2019)

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-08679 (E)
*1908679*

S/PV.8492

Security Council mission

The meeting was called to order at 9.45 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council mission
Briefing by Security Council mission to the
Sahel (21 to 25 March 2019)
The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by the representatives of the three co-leads
of the Security Council mission to the Sahel from 21 to
25 March, that is, Côte d’Ivoire, France and Germany.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of France.
The Security Council undertook a mission to
Mali and Burkina Faso from 21 to 25 March. It was
co-led by the representatives of Côte d’Ivoire, France
and Germany. The trip focused on support for the
implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali, standing up the Group of Five
for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) Joint Force and following up
on the situation in Burkina Faso. The terrible massacre
at Ogossagou, which took place during our trip, deeply
affected us all. Along with all of our interlocutors, we
condemned that unspeakable attack in the strongest
possible terms and expressed our full solidarity with all
the people of Mali in connection with that very painful
event.
We were accompanied by the Chair of the European
Union Political and Security Committee, who had been
invited to observe the visit as part of the cooperation
between the Security Council and the relevant regional
organizations involved in supporting the countries of
the Sahel. The Chair of the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union, who had been similarly invited
was unfortunately unable to participate because of
conflicting commitments. In line with the arrangements
on the ground, I shall focus in particular on the visit
to Mali before giving the floor to my colleagues
from Germany and Côte d’Ivoire, who will address,
respectively, the Burkina Faso and G-5 Sahel segments.
The goal of our visit to Mali was to take stock of
the state of the implementation of the priority measures
2/6

27/03/2019

identified in the most recent mandate of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) against the backdrop of
the Security Council’s ministerial-level meeting to be
held on 29 March, which will be an opportunity to take
important decisions on future international support
for the peace process in Mali as well as the future of
MINUSMA itself.
The Council met with President Keita, the
Prime Minister and other Government officials,
representatives of the opposition and members of civil
society, notably women’s groups. We also took part in
a meeting of the Agreement Monitoring Committee,
which brought together the Malian parties and members
of the international mediation effort. A meeting was also
held with the various security presences in Mali and
the Sahel referred to in resolution 2423 (2018). Lastly,
a ceremony in tribute to the almost 200 MINUSMA
peacekeepers who died carrying out their duty was held
at the MINUSMA memorial in Bamako.
In the course of those meetings we took note
of the significant progress made since the latest
MINUSMA mandate renewal last June, namely, the
holding of the presidential elections with the support
of groups in the north of the country, the continuation
of the decentralization process, the launching of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process
and the issuance of the decree on integration criteria
with regard to the future reconstituted army. We noted
that that initial progress was the outcome of the renewed
commitment on the part of the Malian parties following
the signing of the Pact for Peace, the daily efforts made
by the Prime Minister and Minister Bouaré, among
others, and the establishment of a robust international
framework for supporting the peace process centred
around such tools as the benchmarks set out in 2423
(2018), as well as an independent observer and the
sanctions regime. All interlocutors stressed the
central role played by MINUSMA in their support for
these efforts.
We also emphasized our own firm expectations
in recalling, for example, that the Security Council
sees the continuation of the international community’s
exceptional commitment to Mali only within the
framework of a true implementation of the peace
agreement. We therefore regretted that several priority
measures set out in resolution 2423 (2018) were not
implemented by the March deadline, in particular with
respect to the effective integration of 1,000 combatants
19-08679

27/03/2019

Security Council mission

into the Malian armed forces, the operationalization of
interim authorities and building a special development
area in the north.
We insisted on the need to accelerate and prioritize
the implementation of the agreement. We stressed the
priority goals of the constitutional review process,
defining a comprehensive plan and a clear timeline for
the redeployment of the Malian armed forces to the
north of the country, and creating a special development
area for the North End. In that spirit, we encouraged the
Malian actors to present as soon as possible a new road
map that is realistic, binding and focused on a limited
number of priorities.
Of course, the situation in the centre of the country
following the attacks in the Bankass district was also
at the heart of our discussions with all actors we met,
including civil society representatives. We all agreed
that there was an absolute need to do everything
possible to break the terrible cycle of violence that
has prevailed in the centre for several months, with
tragic consequences for the local populations. We
encouraged MINUSMA to maintain its protection-ofcivilians mission there and its support for Government
efforts, which should probably be strengthened. We
also urged that everything possible be done to ensure
that the perpetrators of those heinous crimes do not
go unpunished.
Lastly, before yielding the floor I should like to say
a word about the G-5 Sahel. I simply wish to say that
the goal of our mission in that regard was to take stock
of the operationalization of the Joint Force and discuss
ways to strengthen the effectiveness of the tools the
Council has put together to support it. The G-5 Sahel
leaders with whom we met underscored in particular
the idea of adapting the modalities of the technical
agreement without calling into question the heart of its
functions, in order to harmonize it with the needs of
the Joint Force. Tomorrow’s ministerial-level meeting
on the Joint Force that is to be led by our Minister for
Foreign Affairs will be an opportunity to pursue our
thinking on this, in the prevailing cooperative spirit, in
the run-up to the preparations for the next report of the
Secretary-General and the upcoming Security Council
deadlines on this issue.
I should like, on behalf of us all, to offer our heartfelt
thanks to all the members of the Secretariat who worked,
in New York and on the ground, to organize and carry
out the mission. I refer in particular to the members of

S/PV. 8492

the Security Council Affairs Division, the interpreters,
the security officers, the teams from the Department
of Peace Operations, the Department of Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, MINUSMA and the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel, the
country team in Burkina Faso and all the teams that did
such excellent work. Their work and commitment were
exemplary and played a fundamental role in ensuring
the mission’s success. I thank them from the bottom of
my heart on behalf of us all.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to Ambassador Heusgen.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany) (spoke in French): At the
outset, Sir, I should like to echo what you said towards
the end of your briefing in thanking the entire team,
and especially the members of the Security Council
Affairs Division, who did outstanding work. With
your permission, I also wish in particular to thank the
interpreters. What they did was incredible. Two people
were on their feet for three days, from morning till
night, trying to interpret. I must admit that my own
French is not always perfect, so their performance was
especially remarkable. I also thank the members of the
security team.
I also thank France and Côte d’Ivoire. This was a
very enjoyable experience for me. It was also a first
to have three countries co-lead such a mission. The
cooperation among members who undertook the trip
was most gratifying. At some moments it brought back
memories of journeys I took with my friends in high
school. On the other hands, it was also very tiring.
There were two colleagues, whom I shall not name,
who remained behind in Paris for a few days before
returning to New York.
As to Burkina Faso, I believe that our visit there
was most timely. The country has gone through a
very difficult time. The members of the Security
Council conveyed a message of support, friendship
and solidarity, which I believe was understood by all
of our interlocutors. We were very well received in all
of our exchanges. The programme extended a full day,
from our arrival in the morning until our departure
in the evening. We had a very busy agenda — almost
crazy — but a very interesting one. We met with the
entire United Nations team there, as well as with
representatives of civil society, including mayors. I
must say that, like in Mali, we were all very impressed

19-086793/6

S/PV.8492

Security Council mission

by the competence, energy and commitment of civil
society representatives. We held a lengthy meeting with
key Cabinet ministers and representatives of the Group
of Five for the Sahel, on which our colleague from
Côte d’Ivoire will elaborate later. We were received by
President Kaboré, who held a long and very collegial
meeting with us.
I wish to make three important points.
First, while Burkina Faso has no equivalent to
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, there is a strong United
Nations team. Mr. Chambas, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel, is very involved
in developing a strengthened United Nations strategy
on the ground. We met with Resident Coordinator Metsi
Makhetkha, who made a very favourable impression on
us. She is deeply committed. We also felt that she has
brought the entire United Nations team together to work
as one, which is critically important. Prior to that, the
members of the Security Council held a meeting with
the Peacebuilding Commission. We saw on the ground
the important role being played by the Peacebuilding
Fund, as noted by our interlocutors. In other words,
there is a good United Nations team on the ground.
Secondly, we must address the challenges. As I
said at the outset, the country has gone through a very
difficult time. The security situation is fragile, not
only along the borders with Mali and the Niger, but in
other regions as well, which is truly worrying. There is
intercommunal tension, like in Mali. The socioeconomic
situation is also very fragile. In Burkina Faso, too,
schools and health centres are closed. There are 140,000
displaced persons. Many have also mentioned climate
change, which has tragic consequences on the security
situation on the ground.
Thirdly, with regard to the domestic situation,
we encouraged the Government to pursue the path of
democratic reforms within the country. Those reforms
began three years ago, and we have encouraged the
Government to continue reforming the Constitution,
organize elections and reform the education system.
We have also urged them to implement laws that have
been adopted on combatting corruption, stressing the
necessity of zero tolerance for corruption. We also
stressed the importance of reopening schools and health
centres, as well as of building new housing, given the
demographics of the country. Finally, we emphasized
4/6

27/03/2019

the need to work to ease the tensions among the various
ethnic communities.
With regard to human rights, we mentioned
several times that there have been damning reports of
summary executions of civilians by security forces. We
have called for impartial judicial investigations to bring
those responsible to justice. The message we conveyed
is that the fight against terrorism must be carried out in
respect for human rights.
The last important message relates to women and
children, who have suffered most in the crisis. We
must protect them and strengthen the participation of
women in Parliament and in administration. In the light
of the demographics, their support is also needed for
family planning.
Finally, after long discussions with the Government,
we got the impression that the Government is truly
committed to doing what must be done. We must
recognize the difficult budgetary and security situation,
but the Government is willing to take action on human
rights. Even before we raised the point of ensuring a
strong justice system, they mentioned the importance
of respecting human rights.
As I said before, this was a good visit. I will
conclude by saying that we need to continue to improve
the situation and to see it through the lens of conflict
prevention. I think the visit was key, but we must
continue to engage with the country and the region.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to convey Ambassador Adom’s
apologies to you, Sir, and the other members of the
Council that he could not participate in this important
meeting on the return of the Council mission to
the Sahel.
I thank you for giving me the opportunity to present,
on behalf of the Permanent Representative of Côte
d’Ivoire, His Excellency Mr. Léon Adom, a summary
of the discussions on the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel) during the Security Council’s visit to the
Sahel from 22 to 24 March.
The Security Council delegation held a working
breakfast on 23 March, from 8 a.m. to 9.30 a.m., with
the security forces mentioned in resolution 2423 (2018),
namely, the Malian armed forces, the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), Operation
Barkhane, the European Union Training Mission
19-08679

27/03/2019

Security Council mission

in Mali and the European Union capacity-building
mission in the Sahel. These discussions focused on
cooperation among those different forces, including
efforts to coordinate the fight against armed terrorist
groups in the Sahel. They highlighted the importance
of coordination and information exchange among those
forces, as well as their complementarity, despite the
fact that they operate under different mandates and
with persistent challenges.
The Security Council delegation also held a
working session with representatives of the Joint
Force on the security aspects of the activities of the
G-5 Sahel, in which Brigadier General Hanena Ould
Sidi, Force Commander of the Joint Force; Mr. Maman
Sidikou, the Permanent Secretary of the G-5 Sahel;
as well as the Foreign Ministers of Burkina Faso and
Mali took part. They informed the members of the
Council of the efforts made to operationalize the Joint
Force and ensure compliance with the human rights
compliance framework. Brigadier General Hanena
Ould Sidi pointed out that the Joint Force had been able
to conduct three operations since the beginning of 2019,
despite delays due to the terrorist attack on G-5 Sahel
headquarters in Sévaré in June 2018.
While the exchanges highlighted the progress
made over the past six months in the operationalization
of the Joint Force, they also underlined the difficulties
associated with the provisions of the technical
agreement. These include, for example, the territorial
constraints on the support that MINUSMA can provide
to the Joint Force, pursuant to resolution 2391 (2017).
As a result, only two of the seven battalions of the Joint
Force operating on Malian territory can benefit from
that support. The difficulties encountered therefore
require a revision of the technical agreement in order to
better adapt it to the realities on the ground and enhance
the effectiveness of the Joint Force.
Responding to the concerns expressed by several
members of the Council, the Commander of the
Joint Force reassured them of the efforts made to
implement the human rights compliance framework
in the conduct of operations, with the assistance of
international partners. He acknowledged that respect
for the framework and the conduct of civil-military
activities were essential to winning hearts and gaining
the cooperation of the people in the affected areas.
The various audiences given to the Council
members by Mr. Ibrahim Boubacar Keita, Malian Head

S/PV. 8492

of State, Prime Minister Soumeylou Boubèye Maïga
and, subsequently, by civil society and members of the
political opposition allowed the Council members to
understand the problems facing the people of Mali in
terms of their political, social and security expectations.
During the Ouagadougou stage, the Council held
a working session with members of the Government of
Burkina Faso, who outlined Burkina Faso’s priorities as
part of the activities intended to promote economic and
social development in the geographical area of the G-5
Sahel. Mr. Maman Sidikou, Brigadier General Hanena
Ould Sidi, the Head of the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel, the European Union
representative and the United Nations Development
Programme Resident Coordinator in Burkina Faso also
took part in this meeting.
Pointing out that Burkina Faso spends 22 per cent of
its budget on national defence and security, Government
members shared their plans for the economic and
social development of the country’s vulnerable areas
and highlighted actions to reopen schools. They also
expressed their readiness to ensure respect for human
rights and conduct investigations into alleged human
rights violations committed by the defence and security
forces. The members of the Government of Burkina
Faso informed the members of the Council of their
strengthened cooperation with countries on the coast of
West Africa — Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana, Togo, Benin — on
security issues, given the risk of an increase in the
number of terrorist attacks throughout the subregion.
With regard to Burkina Faso’s priorities, Council
members noted ongoing efforts to operationalize
the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel, including its police
component, the implementation of the Priority
Investment Programme, capacity-building of the
permanent secretariat of the G-5 Sahel and the
empowerment of women. The Council delegation
was also informed of the limitations to the optimal
performance of the Joint Force, owing in particular to
inadequate support arrangements, equipment shortages,
limited basic infrastructure and insufficient training.
At the end of their stay, the members of the Security
Council delegation were received by the President, His
Excellency Mr. Roch Marc Christian Kaboré, who
reiterated his country’s priorities at the helm of the G-5
Sahel by endorsing all of the information previously
conveyed by the members of his Government. President
Kaboré committed to stepping up efforts in support

19-086795/6

S/PV.8492

Security Council mission

of economic and social development, in particular in
affected areas. He also stressed the need to review
the technical agreement so as to ensure adequate
MINUSMA support to the G-5 Sahel with a view to
improving efficiency. That is my summary of Security
Council meetings that were held on G-5 Sahe1 issues.
In conclusion, on behalf of Ambassador Adom,
I too would like to thank the Secretariat team for its
valuable assistance, which contributed to the success of
the Security Council mission.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Ipo for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to members of the Council
who wish to make a statement.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in French): I would just like to say a few words,

6/6

27/03/2019

speaking in French so as not to disrupt the francophone
atmosphere of this meeting. On behalf of us all, I
would like to pay tribute to our French friends for their
excellent logistical support and assistance throughout
the mission. The United Nations experts, including the
members of the Security Council Affairs Division and
the interpreters, also did excellent work.
The President (spoke in French): On behalf of the
Council, I would like to thank all of the members of the
Security Council for their commitment and collective
efforts, all of the members of the Secretariat who
made the preparations for the mission, and everyone
for the exemplary manner in which they assumed
their responsibilities.
The meeting rose at 10.15 a.m.

19-08679
