General AHembly-Twenty-fourth Se11ion

4

2505 (XXIV). Manifesto on Southern Africa

The General Assembly,

Having received the Manifesto on Southern Africa, 8
adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity at its
sixth ordinary session, held at Addis Ababa from 6 to
9 September 1969,
Convinced of the need for intensifying international
efforts for the elimination of apartheid, racial discrimination and colonialism in order that peace and security in southern Africa may be assured,
Recalling its resolution 2011 (XX) of 11 October
1965 on co-operation between the United Nations and
the Organization of African Unity,
1. Welcomes the Manifesto on Southern Africa and
recommends it to the attention of all States and all
peoples;
2. Expresses once again the firm intention of the
United Nations, acting in co-operation with the Organization of African Unity, to intensify its efforts to find
a solution to the present grave situation in southern
Africa.
1815th plenary meeting,
20 November 1969.
2519 (XXIV). Installation of mechanical means
of voting

The General Assembly,
RecalUng its resolution 1957 (XVIII) of 12 December 1963 regarding the installation of mechanical
means of voting in the General Assembly Hall on an
experimental basis and the carrying out of additional
work of a preparatory nature in one or two committee
rooms so as to permit an eventual expansion of the
system,
Recalling also its decision of 7 December 19669 to
approve the use of the mechanical voting system in the
General Assembly Hall on a permanent basis,
Having considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral concerning the installation of mechanical means
of voting in one committee room,10 as well as the
report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions 11 and the report of the Fifth
Committee12 on the administrative and financial implications thereof,
1. Authorizes the Secretary-General to proceed, as
outlined in his report, with the design and construction
of a mechanical voting system for installation in one
main committee room, on the understanding that no
expenditure shall be incurred until a demonstration
model has been completed and confirmation of the
technical accuracy of the design has been established;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a
report to the General Assembly at its twenty-fifth session on the progress achieved in the design, construction and installation of a mechanical voting system in
a main committee room, together with his recommendations on any further steps to be taken.
1820th plenary meeting,
4 December 1969.
8 Ibid., agenda item 106, document A/7754.
• Ibid., Twenty-first Session, Plenary Meetings, 1486th
meeting, para. S1.
10 Ibid., Twenty-fourth Session, Annexes, agenda item 26,
document A/7737.
11 lbid., document A/7755.
11 Ibid., document A/7771.

2520 (XXIV). Participation of States which are
parties to the Statute of the International
Court of Justice, hut are not Members of
the United Nations, in the procedure for
effecting amendments to the Statute

The General Assembly,
Recalling that, under Article 69 of the Statute of the
International Court of Justice, the Security Council
may recommend to the General Assembly for adoption
provisions concerning the participation of States which
are parties to the Statute, but are not Members of the
United Nations, in the procedure for effecting amendments to the Statute,
Having received the recommendations of the Security
Council in this regard, contained in Council resolution
272 (1969) of 23 October 1969,
Decides that:
(a) A State which is a party to the Statute of the
International Court of Justice, but is not a Member
of the United Nations, may participate in the General
Assembly in regard to amendments to the Statute in
the same manner as the Members of the United
Nations;
( b) Amendments to the Statute of the International
Court of Justice shall come into force for all States
which are parties to the Statute when they have been
adopted by a vote of two thirds of the States which
are parties to the Statute and ratified in accordance
with their respective constitutional processes by two
thirds of the States which are parties to the Statute
and in accordance with the provisions of Article 69
of the Statute and Article 108 of the Charter of the
United Nations.
1820th plenary meeting,
4 December 1969.
2521 (XXIV). Special programme of activities
in connexion with the tenth annivenary of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Preparatory
Committee for the Tenth Anniversary of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples, 13
Mindful of the need on the occasion of that anniversary to evaluate the progress so far made in the implementation of the Declaration and, taking into account the various existing obstacles, to formulate specific
proposals for the elimination of the remaining manifestations of colonialism,
1. Approves the report of the Preparatory Committee for the Tenth Anniversary of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples and endorses the recommendations contained therein14 concerning the programme of activities
to be undertaken in connexion with the tenth anniversary of the Declaration;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
all Member States, the specialized agencies and other
international organizations concerned the above-mentioned recommendations for appropriate action and to
report on their implementation to the Special Com13 Ibid.,

B Ibid.,

agenda item 24, document A/7684.
para. 22.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

mittee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
3. Requests the Special Committee, in its preparation of a draft declaration or a suggested programme
of action for consideration at the special commemorative
meeting, to co-operate as appropriate with other United
Nations bodies concerned and, in addition to carrying
out the other specific tasks assigned to it in the report,
to follow, in consultation with the Committee for the
Twenty-fifth Anniversary of the United Nations, the
implementation of the above-mentioned recommendations and to report thereon to the General Assembly
at its twenty-fifth session.
1821st plenary meeting,
4 December 1969.
2536 (XXIV). Report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency

The General Assembly,
Having received and examined the report of the
International Atomic Energy Agency to the General
Assembly for the year 1968-1969, 15
1. Takes note of the report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
the Director-General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency the records of the twenty-fourth session
of the General Assembly relating to the Agency's activities;
3. Invites the International Atomic Energy Agency
to take these records into account in its future work.
1828th plenary meeting,
11 December 1969.
2548 (XXIV). Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples contained in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960,
Recalling its resolutions 1654 (XVI) of 27 November 1961, 1810 (XVII) of 17 December 1962, 1956
(XVIII) of 11 December 1963, 1970 (XVIII) of 16
December 1963, 2105 (XX) of 20 December 1965,
2189 (XXI) of 13 December 1966, 2326 (XXII) of
16 December 1967 and 2465 (XXIII) of 20 December 1968,
Recalling also its resolution 2425 (XXIII) of 18
December 1968 concerning the item entitled "Activities
of foreign economic and other interests which are impeding the implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples in Southern Rhodesia, Namibia and Territories
under Portuguese domination and in all other Territories under colonial domination and efforts to eliminate colonialism, apartheid and racial discrimination
in southern Africa",
111 International Atomic Energy Agency, Annual Report of
the Board of Governors to the General Conference,
1 July 1968-30 June 1969 (Vienna, July 1969) and supplementary report; transmitted to the Members of the General
Assembly by notes of the Secretary-General (A/7637 and
A/7637/Add.1).

5

Recalling further its resolution 2426 (XXIII) of
18 December 1968 concerning the implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized
agencies and the international institutions associated
with the United Nations,
Noting with grave concern that nine years after the
adoption of the Declaration many Territories are still
under colonial domination,
Deploring the refusal of the colonial Powers, especially Portugal and South Africa, to implement the
Declaration and other relevant resolutions on the
question of decolonization, particularly those relating
to the Territories under Portuguese domination, Namibia and Southern Rhodesia,
Bearing in mind that the continuation of colonialism
and its manifestations, including racism, apartheid and
activities of foreign economic and other interests which
exploit colonial peoples, and the attempts of some
colonial Powers to suppress national liberation movements by repressive activities against colonial peoples
are incompatible with the Charter of the United Nations,
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Deploring the attitude of certain States which, in
defiance of the pertinent resolutions of the Security
Council, the General Assembly and the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples, continue to cooperate with the Governments of Portugal and South
Africa and with the illegal racist minority regime in
Southern Rhodesia,
Recalling its resolution 2446 (XXIII) of 19 December 1968 relating to the measures to achieve the rapid
and total elimination of all forms of racial discrimination in general and of the policy of apartheid in particular, especially paragraph 8 thereof,
Recalling the Manifesto on Southern Africa, 19 adopted
by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of
the Organization of African Unity at its sixth ordinary
session,
Recalling that the year 1970 will be the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration,
1. Reaffirms its resolution 1514 (XV) and all its
other resolutions on the question of decolonization;
2. Approves the report of the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples covering its work during
1969, 17 including the programme of work envisaged by
the Special Committee during 1970;
3. Urges all States, in particular the administering
Powers, and the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations
including the various programmes in the United
Nations system, to give effect to the recommendations
contained in the report of the Special Committee for
the speedy implementation of the Declaration and the
relevant United Nations resolutions;
4. Declares that the continuation of colonial rule
threatens international peace and security and that the
16 See Official Records of the General Assembly Twenty
fourth ~ession, Annexes, agenda item 106, document A/7754:
17
Ib,d., Twenty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/
7623/Rev.1}.
