Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

of the Fifth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders with a
view to assisting the Congress in the implementation
of the task set out in paragraph 4 above;
6. Decides to consider at its thirtieth session the
question of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment in relation to detention and imprisonment.
2278th plenary meeting
6 November 1974
3219 (XXIX). Prot~tion of human rights in Chile

The General Assembly,
Convinced of its responsibility under the Charter of
the United Nations to promote and encourage respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all,
Recalling that, in accordance with the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, everyone has the right
to life, liberty and security of person and the right not
to be subjected to arbitrary arrest, detention or exile
or to torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
or punishment,
Recalling also its resolution 3059 (XXVIII) of
2 November 1973,
Taking into account the deep concern expressed by
the Commission on Human Rights about reports from
a wide variety of sources relating to gross and massive
violations of human rights in Chile, particularly those
involving a threat to human life and liberty,
Taking note of the appeal made by the Economic
and Social Council, in its resolution 1873 ( LVI) of
17 May 1974, to the Chilean authorities to take all
necessary steps to restore and safeguard basic human
rights and fundamental freedoms in that country, particularly in those cases involving a threat to human
life and liberty,
Noting that the Sub-Commission on Prevention of
Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, in its resolution 8 (XXVII) of 21 August 1974,7 made an urgent
appeal to the Chilean authorities to respect the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and to comply
with the International Covenants on Human Rights 8
signed and ratified by the Government of Chile,
Noting also that the International Labour Conference, in its resolution X of 24 June 1974, 9 urged the
Chilean authorities, inter alia, to cease violations of
human rights and trade union rights, to guarantee the
life and freedom of arrested, deported or imprisoned
workers, militant workers and trade union leaders and
members of any political party, to put an end to the
practice of torture, to close down the concentration
camps and to abolish the special tribunals, and decided
. to urge the speedy expedition to Chile of the FactFinding and Conciliation Commission on Freedom of
Association as well as the setting up of a commission
of inquiry,
Considering that, notwithstanding all the appeals
made by various organs of the United Nations system,
gross and massive violations of human rights, such as
arbitrary arrest, torture and cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment of political prisoners and detainees,
7 A/9767, annex II.
8 Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
9 International Labour Office, Official

No. J, 1974, p. 40.

Bulletin, vol. LVII,

83

including former members of the Chilean Government
and Parliament, continue to be reported,
I. Expresses its deepest concern that constant flagrant violations of basic human rights and fundamental
freedoms in Chile continue to be reported;
2. Reiterates its repudiation of all forms of torture
and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment;
3. Urges the Chilean authorities to respect fully the
principles of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and to take all necessary steps to restore and
safeguard basic human rights and fundamental freedoms, particularly those involving a threat to human
life and liberty, to release all persons who have been
detained without charge or imprisoned solely for political reasons and to continue to grant safe conduct
to those who desire it;
4. Endorses the recommendation made by the SubCommission on Prevention of Discrim,ination and Protection of Minorities, in its resolution 8 (XXVII), that
the Commission on Human Rights at its thirty-first
session should study the reported violations of human
rights in Chile, with particular reference to torture and
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;
5. Requests the President of the twenty-ninth session of the General Assembly and the Secretary-General to assist in any way they may deem appropriate
in the re-establishment of basic human rights and fundamental freedoms in Chile in the light of paragraph 3
above;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General Assembly at its thirtieth session
on the action taken and progress achieved under paragraphs 3 to 5 above.
2278th plenary meeting
6 November 1974
3220 (XXIX). Assistance and co-operation in accounting for persons who are missing or
dead in armed conflicts

The General Assembly,
Recalling that one of the purposes of the United
Nations is the promotion of international co-operation
in solving international problems of a humanitarian
character,
Regretting that, in violation of the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, resort to force has
continued to occur, causing loss of human lives, widespread devastation and other forms of human suffering,
Reaffirming that it is one of the fundamental obligations of Member States to ensure and promote international peace and security by preventing or ending
armed conflicts,
Recognizing that one of the tragic results of armed
conflicts is the lack of information on persons--civilians as well as combatants-who are missing or dead
in armed conflicts,
Noting with satisfaction resolution V, adopted by the
twenty-second International Conference of the Red
Cross held at Teheran from 28 October to 15 November 1973, calling on parties to armed conflicts to accomplish the humanitarian task of accounting for the
missing and dead in armed conflicts,' 0
10

lntemationa/ Review of the Red Cross, No. 154 (Janu-

ary 1974), p. 22.
