United Nations

S/PV.6206

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6206th meeting
Monday, 26 October 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Le Luong Minh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Viet Nam)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Kafando
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Vilović
Mr. Araud
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Heller
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Çorman
Mr. Rugunda
Mr. Parham
Ms. Rice

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on support to African Union peacekeeping
operations authorized by the United Nations (S/2009/470)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

09-57623 (E)

*0957623*

S/PV.6206

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on support
to African Union peacekeeping operations
authorized by the United Nations (S/2009/470)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Brazil, Nigeria, South Africa,
Sweden and Tunisia, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. Romano Prodi.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Prodi to take a seat at the Council
table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Alain Le Roy, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Le Roy to take a seat at the Council
table.

2

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Ms. Susana Malcorra, Under-Secretary-General for
Field Support.
It is so decided.
I invite Ms. Malcorra to take a seat at the Council
table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to the
Acting Permanent Observer of the African Union to the
United Nations, His Excellency Mr. Tete Antonio.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Antonio to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
I wish to draw the attention of members of the
Council to document S/2009/470, which contains the
report of the Secretary-General on support to African
Union peacekeeping operations authorized by the
United Nations.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Alain Le Roy. I now give the floor to
Mr. Le Roy.
Mr. Le Roy (spoke in French): I have the honour
of addressing the Security Council on behalf of the
Secretary-General to outline the stages that will enable
the strengthening of the capacities of the African Union
(AU) to maintain peace and security and enhance
relations between the United Nations and the African
Union. The presence of Ms. Susana Malcorra, UnderSecretary-General for Field Support, underscores the
importance that the Secretariat gives to this issue and
our will to work together on it.
The report presented today (S/2009/470) sets out
the assessment made by the Secretary-General of the
recommendations included in the report of the African
Union-United Nations panel established under Security
Council resolution 1809 (2008) to consider the

09-57623

S/PV.6206

modalities for support to African Union peacekeeping
operations. The Secretary-General’s report builds on
the recommendations made by the panel, under its
Chairman Mr. Prodi, and underscores some points on
which the Secretariat should take immediate steps to
strengthen its cooperation with the African Union
Commission. This will require, on the one hand,
restructuring our presence in Addis Ababa and, on the
other, of course, strengthening the institutional
capacities of the African Union in the areas identified
by the panel.
The report also considers the financing
mechanisms of African Union peacekeeping operations
authorized by the Security Council and emphasizes the
importance of sustainable, flexible and predictable
funding. I believe that those three adjectives —
sustainable, flexible and predictable — are very
important with regard to the financing mechanisms.
Last year’s debate on regional organizations
enabled the Security Council to reaffirm the
importance of the strategic partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union, under Chapter
VIII of the Charter. We share the belief that security is
prerequisite to sustainable development. That is
particularly true in Africa, where instability and
conflicts continue to undermine the aspirations of
peoples in many countries. The international
community must work together in order to build the
capacity of vulnerable nations to prevent and resolve
conflicts through political solutions.
When a peacekeeping operation is necessary, we
must ensure ongoing support to those who are carrying
it out — usually the Blue Helmets — once their
deployment is authorized. The emergence of new
threats to peace and security makes the environment in
which peacekeeping operations are deployed
increasingly complex. That further underpins the need
to deploy robust and credible peacekeeping missions.
In that context, the enhanced role of African
Union peacekeeping operations and of African regional
economic communities is a major and welcome
development. Their troops have been able to deploy
quickly with limited resources and when the situation
on the ground has needed a robust intervention. The
African Union has assumed its responsibilities in
complex political environments, with the authorization
of the Security Council, when it has had a comparative
advantage over a United Nations peacekeeping

09-57623

operation or when more time was needed to establish a
consensus within the international community on the
preferred course of action.
The African Union has developed its
peacekeeping capacity based on the commendable
principle that the continent should have its own means
to act to prevent conflicts and the resulting suffering. If
the international community really wishes to help it to
achieve that objective, it must more actively support
the strengthening of African peacekeeping capacity.
That entails in particular helping to train each African
troop
contributor,
contributing
financially
to
peacekeeping operations and demonstrating the
political will necessary to resolve conflicts. We must
set ourselves realistic goals and priorities and make
every effort necessary to ensure that the men and
women deployed in conflict areas are equipped with
the means required to achieve those goals.
Over the past five years, considerable progress
has been achieved. The United Nations has broadened
and deepened its strategic and operational partnership
with the African Union. The 10-year capacity building
programme, which is designed to provide support to
the African Union Peace and Security Architecture, has
laid the groundwork for this partnership, especially in
the areas of conflict prevention and post-conflict
recovery. At the same time, our joint efforts in
peacekeeping and mediation in Darfur and our support
for the African Union’s peacekeeping operation in
Somalia are further reminders of the scope and shape
of the various types of partnership that can be achieved
in an effort to address the peace and security
challenges on the African continent. Serious capacity
and resource constraints have, however, hampered the
partnership’s ability to fully realize its potential.
(spoke in English)
The United Nations has worked closely with the
African Union and its partners to determine the best
way to ensure that capacity-building is targeted and
effective. There is a broad consensus that, as a first
priority in the effort to build conflict prevention and
peacekeeping capacity, the African Union should
finalize and recruit the core staff required for the
Commission to support the African Peace and Security
Architecture. At the same time, it is critical that the
African Union define its own priority requirements and
develop a comprehensive road map for long-term
capacity-building that will build on its strategic

3

S/PV.6206

framework and provide the framework for donor
support. This will help to ensure that capacity-building
is demand driven and not imposed externally. This is
extremely important to ensure African Union
leadership and ownership of the process.
Limited capacity is not our only challenge. As has
been noted by this Council and the General Assembly,
there is a need to provide resources for peacekeeping in
a sustainable and predictable manner without
undermining the flexibility required to respond to a
crisis quickly. Currently, African Union peacekeeping
is entirely dependent on the same small pool of donors.
There is little flexibility, sustainability or predictability
in its stream of resources. The lack of certainty as to
when donations will be made impacts the AU’s ability
to plan missions and pay troop-contributing countries.
Reliance on unpredictable sources of funding means
that there is no guarantee that essential capabilities will
be available, which in turn may invalidate planning
assumptions and put a mission at the risk of failure. If
the international community requests the AU to bear
the brunt of its initial response to a crisis, it has an
obligation to support the AU in ensuring that that
response is credible.
In this regard, the report of the Secretary-General
examines the various financing mechanisms which
have been used in the past to ensure effective financing
of AU peacekeeping. It also proposes ways in which
each mechanism could be improved in order to allow
for resources to be more predictable, sustainable and
flexible. Building on the experience of the United
Nations support packages to the African Union
missions in the Sudan and Somalia, which were
financed by assessed contributions and the European
Union Africa Peace Facility, the international
community must work together to find creative
solutions and ensure that the most effective mechanism
is made available to the African Union when the
Security Council authorizes it to undertake a
peacekeeping operation.
Ultimately and as emphasized in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, it is the African Union’s member
States’ responsibility to identify sustainable resources
for the long term. To this end, we are very encouraged
by the African Union Assembly’s decision to increase
the portion of funds — from 6 to 12 per cent —
contributed to peace support operations from its regular
budget.

4

At the same time, it is important to recall that
peacekeeping is no replacement for a political solution
and that peacekeeping operations are most effective
when deployed in support of a peace agreement.
Efforts continue, in parallel, to enhance and support
preventive diplomacy, early warning and conflict
resolution and mediation. Experience teaches us that
peacekeeping operations should be embarked upon
only after careful consideration of all available
response options, and must be accompanied by a viable
political strategy and a set of clear objectives.
In looking forward, the United Nations system is
committed to working with the AU in implementing
the proposals in this report, especially concerning ways
in which to enhance the strategic relationship between
the United Nations Secretariat and the AU Commission
and to provide additional support to the AU in the area
of peacekeeping.
We welcome the AU Peace and Security
Council’s 15 October statement on the SecretaryGeneral’s report and fully support the emphasis on the
need for effective follow-up to implement the
proposals made in the report. Of course, this is going to
be a long-term process that will require continuous
international engagement that is coordinated to ensure
that support is prioritized appropriately. Building a
resilient and responsive African Union is vital to the
establishment of an effective and complementary
system for global peacekeeping. I am confident that the
Council’s meeting today will contribute to that goal.
In closing, we would like once again to thank
former Prime Minister of Italy Romano Prodi, who is
with us here today, for his leadership of the AU-United
Nations panel. Its efforts have been a significant step
forward in a process which will advance our collective
peace and security objectives. We would also like to
thank the African Union Commission, including
Chairperson Jean Ping and our dear friend
Commissioner Ramtane Lamamra, for their continued
commitment and contribution to enhancing peace and
security in Africa.
The President: I thank Mr. Le Roy for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Tete Antonio, Acting
Permanent Observer of the African Union to the United
Nations.

09-57623

S/PV.6206

Mr. Antonio (spoke in French): At the outset, I
extend to you, Sir, the appreciation of Chairperson Jean
Ping, who has been unable to travel but is closely
following the Security Council’s work in support of the
African Union. I congratulate you, Sir, on behalf of the
African Union on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council. I join the previous speaker in thanking
you for having convened this open debate.
We also thank Under-Secretary-General Alain
Le Roy for introducing the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2009/470) and for the support he has reaffirmed for
the African Union. We are, moreover, honoured by the
presence of Mr. Romano Prodi, whom we thank for his
tireless dedication to the noble causes of Africa. We
also thank all the members of the African UnionUnited Nations panel who have worked under
Mr. Prodi’s leadership to bring us together here to
focus on the cause of Africa.
The role of such regional organizations as the
African Union in the maintenance of international
peace and security has been the subject of the
heightened interest and in-depth consideration of the
Security Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council and Assembly of Heads of State and
Government. At the same time, the Security Council’s
primary Charter responsibility in the maintenance of
international peace and security has been amply
reaffirmed by the Council itself and other stakeholders.
Against that backdrop, funding for peacekeeping
operations conducted by regional organizations
remains a central concern of the African Union on the
basis of its experience in various activities to promote
peace and security on the continent. The pertinent
issues addressed in the relevant documents of the
United Nations and the African Union include the
nature of the structure of the partnership between the
United Nations and regional organizations; interinstitutional
coordination
and
consultation
mechanisms; the enhancement of resources to
strengthen the capacities of the peacekeeping and
peace-support operations of regional organizations;
conflict prevention and mediation; support for
peacebuilding and post-conflict reconstruction; human
rights and humanitarian activities. Those are topics at
the heart of the problems plaguing the African
continent.
While pursuing our reflections on this matter, we
have simultaneously experimented with practical and

09-57623

innovative approaches in order to respond to pressing
needs on the ground. Here I must mention the initial
and heavy support packages authorized by the Security
Council for the African Union Mission in the Sudan
(AMIS) as well as the ongoing support for the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). Mention should
also be made of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), which is
further evidence of the innovative approaches taken by
the African Union and the United Nations to addressing
the peace and security challenges on the African
continent.
We believe that the combination of reflection and
pragmatism
has
significantly
enhanced
our
understanding of how great a need there is to establish
predictable and sustainable funding mechanisms for
peace support operations conducted by regional
organizations such as the African Union, with the
authorization of the Security Council, of course. In this
respect, it is clear that the most viable option is to
make use of United Nations assessed contributions. We
are convinced that obtaining predictable, sustainable
and flexible funding for regional organizations such as
the African Union through assessed contributions
would also enable the Security Council to utilize local
comparative advantages in its efforts to tackle, in a
continuous way, the threats to international peace and
security that affect us all.
Over the past few years, the African Union, with
the support of its international partners, has
demonstrated a renewed will to shoulder its share of
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. The decision to deploy a mission in
Somalia, in spite of the volatile security situation
prevailing on the ground — with which we are all
familiar — and the difficult environment overall, as
well as earlier deployments in countries such as
Burundi and the Sudan — and thus in Darfur — bear
testimony to this determination. I should thus like to
recall the decision taken by the special summit of the
African Union held in Tripoli, Libya, at the end of
August 2009, to increase the percentage of the AU
regular budget transferred to the Union’s Peace Fund.
Looking to the future, we believe that the Council
should, in the next stages of its consideration of this
matter, fully utilize the constructive and rich
environment created by the combination of reflection,
pragmatism and lessons learned, in order to take
decisive measures to address the specific issue of the

5

S/PV.6206

predictability, sustainability and flexibility of funding
for regional organizations when they undertake
peacekeeping operations under a United Nations
mandate, and to do so through assessed contributions.
We note the recommendations contained in the
report of the Secretary-General with respect to the
strategic partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union, which provide a good basis for
strengthening the cooperation between the AU and the
United Nations in the area of the maintenance of
international peace and security. We also note the
recommendations made with respect to capacitybuilding, and we stress the need for their speedy
implementation, bearing in mind ongoing African
Union efforts and the need to ensure very close
coordination.
It must, however, be clear that, in order to
address the challenges of peace and security in
Africa — something in which we all have a stake —
we need not only to enhance the capacity of the African
Union, but also to find effective responses to the issue
of financing peace support operations.
Lest we lose sight of our goal, we must bear in
mind that Security Council action on the subject of this
debate will strengthen the unflagging confidence that
the Governments and populations facing the scourges
of conflict and instability place in the Council and in
its readiness to help them restore lasting peace and
security. I therefore seize this opportunity to reaffirm
the commitment of the African Union to continue
working with the Council, Member States and all
international partners in pursuing and achieving this
common goal.
The President: I thank Mr. Antonio for his
statement.
I now give
Mr. Romano Prodi.

the

floor

to

His

Excellency

Mr. Prodi: I am very grateful to be here and
grateful that I have been asked to say a few words even
if that had not been planned; I take this as a great sign
of respect and gratitude for the work that the African
Union-United Nations panel on modalities for support
to African Union operations has done. At the outset, I
should like to thank all the members of the panel for
their efforts and the results that they achieved. I am
deeply grateful for the quality of the individual

6

contributions that all members of the panel made and
for the intense work of the United Nations staff.
Mr. Le Roy has already presented the main
results to the Council, and I do not want to repeat
them. I should like simply to speak of one simple
concept. Peacekeeping is only one of the great African
issues, which include development, health and
infrastructure.
Our panel found, and it is also my deep
conviction, that we cannot continue dealing with Africa
in a bilateral way. Looking at the economic aspects, at
the peacekeeping aspects and at all the problems of
education and health, we simply cannot go on with this
country-by-country approach based on individual
relationships between wealthy countries and African
countries. If we examine the economic aspects, we
cannot find any prospects for development unless we
approach African countries in their wider context, as a
regional and continental union. Inter-African trade is
negligible. Inter-African infrastructure is absolutely
insufficient. There is an absolute necessity to improve
inter-African cooperation for peacekeeping in the
continent.
I invite all the members of the Security Council,
which bears such great responsibility for the future of
the world, to consider African peacekeeping in this
wider context of relations between other continents and
Africa. Clearly, this process related strictly to
peacekeeping will require long-term capacity-building,
on the basis of ownership and full responsibility by the
African Union. In this process, a multilateral approach
must be at the top of our priorities in dealing with
Africa. That is the point of departure, and it is the
conclusion of our panel.
I ask, in particular, the countries that have the
highest level of responsibility in the world economy, in
development and in peacekeeping to analyse the
necessity of helping with any major engagement of the
African Union and other regional structures, in order to
make African development feasible. That is the
direction we need to go in. The proposals presented by
the panel move towards developing the capacities of
the African Union and allowing it to have
responsibility for future peace in Africa.
To be sure, the objections I hear are logical and
understandable. Some say that the existing
organization, the African Union, is not strong enough
to tackle the problems addressed in the report. I

09-57623

S/PV.6206

completely agree, but the task before us is to give the
African Union the ability to build its strength in the
medium and long term. No one thought while writing
the report that everything was ready today for full and
efficient deployment of peacekeeping efforts. However,
if we do not start now, we will never reach our goal.
(spoke in French)
That is the conclusion reached by our panel. I
repeat that the Council will consider all the technical
aspects and technical proposals, but the report must be
seen in the context of a comprehensive African
development plan aiming to provide Africa with all the
means it needs for all countries to act collectively and
in solidarity to promote development on the continent.
(spoke in English)
Those are our conclusions. That is our
contribution to the discussion today. I repeat: let us
now start this long-term effort and work closely with
the entire United Nations system in order to coordinate
the efforts of all countries in Africa so that Africa can
act as a united continent within which cooperation
among all countries is indispensable to a better future.
The President: I thank Mr. Prodi for his
statement.
I shall now give the floor to members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Çorman (Turkey): Allow me to begin by
commending you, Mr. President, for organizing this
meeting on United Nations support to African Union
peacekeeping operations. This issue has been on our
agenda for some time now, and today’s meeting
provides us with a very timely opportunity to review
the steps taken so far and to chart the course of our
future work.
In that regard, I would like to pay a special
tribute to the Secretary-General for his leadership on
this issue and for his dedicated efforts to further
strengthen the partnership between the United Nations
and the African Union (AU). His most recent report
(S/2009/470), in particular, contains valuable
assessments and proposals for the way forward on this
issue.
I thank Under-Secretary-General Alain Le Roy
for his briefing and for focusing our debate on the right
issues, and Under-Secretary-General Susana Malcorra
for her presence in the Council Chamber today.

09-57623

I would also like to thank His Excellency
Mr. Romano Prodi for his briefing today, but even
more for his most valuable contributions to the
considerations of this issue. Indeed, it was his
leadership of the United Nations-African Union panel
last year and the ideas put forth in its report (see
S/2008/813) that paved the way for United Nations
action on this important matter.
Last but not least I would like to express our
thanks to Mr. Tete Antonio, Acting Permanent
Observer of the African Union, for his participation in
today’s meeting and for the very comprehensive
briefing he has just given us. What we are discussing
today is indeed a partnership of vital importance for
both organizations, and we are pleased to see the
African Union approaching that issue with the
professionalism and commitment it deserves.
Over the past year or so, a lively debate has been
going on in several forums, with the participation of all
interested parties, on issues related to the United
Nations peacekeeping system. Indeed, we have been
putting our heads together with a view to finding the
right ways and means to streamline the United Nations
peacekeeping mechanism, which still stands as an
indispensable tool for the maintenance of international
peace and security.
One common point that emerged from all those
debates was the strong emphasis placed on the
necessity of an enhanced strategic dialogue among all
stakeholders, in particular between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations. It has been
stressed over and over again that the increasing
demand for peacekeeping around the globe can be met
only by forging new and strategic partnerships between
the United Nations and regional organizations.
That was also one of the main tenants of the
recent “New Horizon” paper prepared by the
Secretariat. In fact, it is a long-standing commitment
we have collectively undertaken under Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations and in paragraph 170
of the 2005 World Summit Outcome Document
(General Assembly resolution 60/1), as well as in
various other Security Council resolutions and
statements. After all, there is no doubt that the role
played by regional organizations in peace and security
is indispensable and is complementary to the work of
the United Nations, in particular that of the Security
Council.

7

S/PV.6206

In this regard, the African Union is a particularly
important regional actor whose contribution to the
settlement of conflicts on the African continent is of
key significance in the overall efforts to maintain
international peace and security. Indeed, given the time
and energy we spend in the Council to help resolve the
various conflicts in Africa, it is clear that the African
Union provides most needed added value in areas of
critical importance.
It is for this reason that since the adoption of
resolution 1809 (2008), in particular, the Council has
been working very hard to develop a more effective
partnership with the African Union, a partnership
which mutually strengthens the capabilities of each
organization and which creates a synergy of efforts
towards peace and stability. Our point of departure has
been, and still is, that the more efficient and valuable
the African Union becomes in its peacekeeping
operations, the stronger the United Nations and the
entire international community become in their ability
to maintain peace and security.
Within this framework, the joint African UnionUnited Nations panel has put forward many useful
recommendations which were first addressed in the
presidential statement adopted in March of this year
under Libya’s presidency (S/PRST/2009/3). There we
not only took note of those new ideas, but also called
for further joint efforts in this direction, focusing on
issues of mutual interest. We also called on the
Secretariat to develop, in coordination with the AU
Commission, a list of recommendations on ways to
help the African Union further develop its military,
technical, logistic, administrative and financial
capabilities.
That is precisely what the Secretary-General’s
report does. It further elaborates on those
recommendations and proposes practical ways in which
the United Nations can assist the African Union to
enhance its effectiveness in the deployment and
management of peacekeeping operations.
As we see it, there are three main areas in which
we can, and should, make further progress in order to
realize the objectives we have collectively set out for
ourselves. Those are: developing a strategic partnership
between the two organizations at both the political and
operational levels, supporting the institutional
capacity-building of the African Union, and enhancing
the predictability, sustainability and flexibility of

8

financing for African Union-led peacekeeping
operations under a United Nations mandate. To put it
simply, we support the recommendations of the
Secretary-General in all three areas. We believe that
the time has come to translate them into practice.
Indeed, we have spoken long enough. Now is the time
for action.
In that regard, we particularly share the
Secretary-General’s views concerning the need for the
establishment of a predictable, sustainable and flexible
funding system for AU-led peace support operations, as
well as for developing a broad road map for capacitybuilding with a set of short- to long-term initiatives.
Likewise, we very much welcome the idea of
establishing a joint task force between the United
Nations and the African Union to review immediate
and long-term strategic and operational issues, as well
as to conduct a lessons learned exercise on the basis of
our joint endeavours in Somalia and Darfur.
As I mentioned at the beginning of my remarks,
today’s meeting provides us a valuable opportunity to
underscore our commitment to forge a strategic
partnership with the African Union and to chart the
course of our future work. Our deliberations today
therefore have even more practical importance in the
light of the statement issued on 15 October by the
African Union Peace and Security Council, which also
called for an increased strategic partnership on
peacekeeping issues between the United Nations and
the African Union. The draft presidential statement to
be adopted at the end of today’s meeting will therefore
be the response of the Security Council to that call, as
well as a testament of the Council’s intention with
regard to furthering our strategic cooperation.
In our opinion, the comparative strengths of both
organizations and the complementary nature of their
objectives leave no doubt about the value of an
increased strategic relationship between the two
bodies. That is why we fully support the draft
presidential statement before us, which clearly
underscores that point. We would like especially to
thank the Mission of Uganda for its leadership, acting
on behalf of the African Union, in the preparation of
that text.
Investing in Africa’s peacekeeping capacity
means investing in the security, stability and future of
that great continent, as well as of the entire world. It is
a sound investment that will surely pay off as the

09-57623

S/PV.6206

African continent fully develops its own capabilities
and realizes its potential. We have already come a long
way in that direction. Now is the time to further
increase momentum and redouble our efforts towards
our shared objectives.

establishment of a joint task force on peace and
security, the reorganization of the Secretariat’s current
presence at African Union headquarters in Addis Ababa
and the initiatives set out in the report on strengthening
the AU’s institutional capacities.

Turkey is ready and willing to do its fair share in
that regard. The rapidly developing relations between
Turkey and African countries, as evidenced by the
African Union’s declaration of Turkey as one its three
strategic partners, provides us ample ground on which
to build. We are committed to doing so.

We have taken particular note of the SecretaryGeneral’s analysis of existing avenues for providing
United Nations logistical and financial support for AU
peacekeeping operations. There is little accumulated
experience to date in that regard. There was only one
instance of efforts to implement a support package, and
that was irregular in nature. Making such efforts part of
a more regular process would be premature at this
point. That is particularly so given the fact that the
Secretary-General has correctly pointed out that United
Nations support financed through the Organization’s
regular budget does not always ensure sustainability or
predictability for the deployment of AU peacekeeping
operations.

Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Le Roy for his
introduction of the report of the Secretary-General on
support to African Union peacekeeping operations
(S/2009/470). We are also pleased to once again
welcome Mr. Prodi to the Security Council.
Today’s meeting illustrates anew the particular
attention that the Security Council devotes to Africa,
including when it comes to resolving tensions on the
continent.
There is a need to acknowledge that the African
Union (AU) and subregional African organizations
have in recent years become increasingly active in
resolving the problems of the continent. We welcome
and support the resolve of the African Union and its
member States to bear primary responsibility for the
prevention of conflicts and the conduct of
peacekeeping activities in Africa.
African peacekeepers play an essential role in the
operations in Somalia and Darfur. There is no doubt
that the African Union’s peacekeeping capacities and
resources need to be strengthened, including through
the support of countries of the international
community. That is the goal of United Nations
cooperation with the African Union. In that regard, we
must first and foremost focus on strengthening links
between the Security Council and the African Union
Peace and Security Council, as well as between the
Secretariat and the African Union Commission.
In addition to peacekeeping efforts, there is also a
need to devote the necessary attention to the building
of the AU’s capacity in the areas of mediation,
preventive diplomacy and peacebuilding.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s focus on
further developing cooperation between the Secretariat
and the AU Commission, including through the

09-57623

We
also
share
the
Secretary-General’s
conclusions with regard to the fact that the
responsibility for allocating sufficient resources for
African Union peacekeeping operations falls first and
foremost on the member States of that regional
organization. We welcome the African Union’s
decision to increase its contributions to its Peace Fund.
We believe that the idea of setting up a flexible trust
fund under the AU Peace Fund merits further attention.
We also think that the role of the United Nations in
relation to such a fund should be to provide expert
advice.
The establishment by the African Union of a
multilevel collective security structure to prevent crises
and respond to them in a timely manner continues to be
a priority. An important component of that architecture
must be an international peacekeeping entity, namely,
the African Standby Force, in whose establishment the
international community is actively participating.
There is also a need to continue to make active efforts
to strengthen the institutional and legal foundations of
the Force.
The Russian Federation is participating in the
development and implementation of international
assistance programmes for Africa, including in the area
of strengthening the peacekeeping capacities of the
African Union. Russian specialized educational
institutions
include
training
programmes
for
participants in African peacekeeping operations.

9

S/PV.6206

Russian peacekeepers are active in almost all United
Nations peacekeeping operations on the continent. A
Russian helicopter unit is deployed as part of the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan, and another
helicopter unit has begun its activities as part of the
United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad. We intend to continue to develop
our multifaceted cooperation with African countries
with a view to strengthening peace and stability in that
region.
We support the draft presidential statement that
has been circulated among members of the Council.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
of course like to thank Mr. Le Roy for his introduction
to the report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/470). I
should also like to welcome the presence among us of
President Prodi.
My delegation would like to associate itself with
the statement to be delivered shortly on behalf of the
presidency of the European Union. For my part, I
would like to highlight the following points.
First of all, everyone is aware of, and shares, the
considerations upon which our discussion today is
based. The increase in peacekeeping operations in
recent years poses a significant challenge. The United
Nations has had to act continuously, putting eight times
as many Blue Helmets on the ground as it had a decade
ago. In order to better enable the Organization to
overcome those challenges, early this year France and
the United Kingdom began an exercise in thinking
about and modernizing United Nations peacekeeping.
Africa has a unique place in this process. On the
one hand, it is the number-one recipient of
peacekeepers. On the other, it is taking on increasing
responsibilities in these peacekeeping efforts. These
African efforts are being undertaken under the aegis of
the United Nations, as one third of Blue Helmets are
currently provided by African countries. This African
effort is also taking place through the work of the
African Union, including the gradual implementation
of the African Peace and Security Architecture.
This stepping up of African endeavours in the
field of crisis prevention and management is in line
with the spirit of Chapter VIII of the United Nations
Charter and thus merits the full support of the
international community. It merits this support all the
more because the African Union faces peacekeeping

10

challenges that are unique to Africa and that relate to
the fact that its institutional capacity is so recently
acquired.
France, like its European Union partners, will
assume its full role in supporting peacekeeping by
African regional and subregional organizations. This
support must have two facets, namely capacitybuilding and support for operations.
The European Union has developed a plan of
action for African Union capacity-building. The
Renforcement des capacités africaines de maintien de
la paix (RECAMP) programme, in particular, is aimed
at helping the African Union to put the African Standby
Force in place in 2010. France also contributes to
capacity-building in Africa through numerous training
activities that are aimed at building regional,
subregional and national peacekeeping capacities.
France and its partners in the European Union
also support the operations undertaken by African
organizations. This support is well known, but what I
wish to underscore today is that it is taking
increasingly varied forms. In the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), for example, we see a
very clear case of this. France has contributed to the
preparation and deployment of the Burundi contingent;
the European Union naval operation, Operation
Atalanta, is helping to secure AMISOM’s provisioning
routes; European countries are among the primary
financial supporters of AMISOM; and France provided
health care support to the Mission during the midSeptember attacks.
As the Secretary-General’s report shows,
international support for peacekeeping in Africa should
be maintained and stepped up. The United Nations has
a role to play in this. France agrees with the SecretaryGeneral’s opinion that our objective should be African
Union ownership of its peacekeeping instruments, with
full respect for the United Nations Charter. In this
respect I would highlight in particular Article 24 of the
Charter on the primary responsibility of the Security
Council for the maintenance of international peace and
security, and Chapter VIII on the role of regional
organizations.
Along these lines, we agree with the importance
of strengthening the strategic partnership between the
African Union and the United Nations. In this respect,
we thank the Secretary-General for his evaluation of
the various possible modalities for the financing of

09-57623

S/PV.6206

African Union peacekeeping operations. Indeed, as we
build African capacities, we must improve the ways to
finance these operations.
In this context, we must draw lessons from the
support modules established previously in Darfur and
more recently in Somalia. These are exceptional cases
both for financial reasons — namely, the current crisis
and substantial increase in United Nations needs —
and for reasons having to do with governance. Every
organization, first and foremost the United Nations, has
the primary responsibility for financing its activities.
This is why the United Nations practice of
financing from assessed contributions leads to
political, legal and financial problems which we
believe to be serious. There are other modalities that
are effective and realistic. They must be used. The
European Union played a pioneering role in this
respect by establishing in 2004 the African Peace
Facility and allocating €740 million to it since then.
We also welcome the Secretary-General’s thoughts on
ways to galvanize potential donors for the African
Union and harmonizing their procedures, in particular
by helping the African Union establish a trust fund.
Finally, we recognize the importance of enabling
the African Union to benefit from United Nations
institutional experience, that is to say as regards the
capacity of the African Union headquarters to plan,
deploy, support and manage peacekeeping operations.
We must of course not forget the responsibility of the
African States themselves when it comes to
strengthening their capacity as troop-contributing
countries.
Allow me to therefore conclude by underscoring
that building African peacekeeping capacity is a matter
not solely for the United Nations, but also for Africa
and all of Africa’s international partners. France is
among them and will remain committed to this
objective.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation thanks you, Mr. President, for
convening today’s debate. I would like to welcome the
report submitted by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
entitled “Support to African peacekeeping operations
authorized by the United Nations” (S/2009/470). I
would also like to thank Under-Secretary-General Le
Roy, Mr. Antonio and Mr. Prodi for their briefings.

09-57623

At present, peace and stability on the African
continent are gradually improving. But regional
conflicts still constrain faster progress in Africa.
Maintaining peace and stability in Africa remains a real
and pressing challenge facing the international
community. Without peace and stability in Africa, there
will be no sustainable development there. Without
peace and stability in Africa, there will be no lasting
peace and prosperity in the world.
Comprehensive peace in Africa cannot be
promoted without joint efforts by the international
community. In recent years, the United Nations has
been increasing its attention to and contribution to
settling issues of peace and security in Africa. Sixty
per cent of the items on the Council’s agenda are
related to Africa, and nearly half of the Councilauthorized United Nations peacekeeping operations are
in Africa.
We welcome the fact that in recent years, the
African Union has displayed a high sense of its
political responsibilities regarding regional peace and
stability and has actively engaged in good offices and
peacekeeping operations in dealing with hotspots and
difficult issues in Africa. The African Union has been
playing an increasingly important role in maintaining
peace and stability in Africa and settling disputes there.
It has also served as a bridge and linkage for more
effective United Nations interventions in addressing
African hotspot issues. However, issues related to
African Union peacekeeping operations, bottlenecks in
fundraising and capacity-building are becoming more
prominent; here, the African Union needs the support
and help of all international actors, including the
United Nations.
We support the establishment of a strategic
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union aimed at maintaining peace and stability
in Africa, and we support the provision of practical
help by the United Nations to African Union
peacekeeping operations. United Nations assistance has
played an important role in enabling the African Union
to better respond to problems such as those in the
Darfur area of the Sudan and in Somalia.
That is a concrete display of the Council’s role in
maintaining international peace and security. In the
future,
the
Council
should
strengthen
its
communication with the African Union Peace and
Security Council and assist the latter in increasing its

11

S/PV.6206

collective capacity to respond to the challenges in
Africa. The United Nations Secretariat and the African
Union Commission should also step up their
cooperation. As for the recommendation proposed in
the Secretary-General’s report for the establishment of
a joint United Nations-African Union team, we
consider it to be generally feasible. How such a team is
to be implemented will require further consultation
between both sides.
We maintain that the United Nations should assist
African Union peacekeeping operations in finding
more reliable sources of funding. United Nationsauthorized African Union operations currently suffer
from financial shortfalls, as a result of which mandated
levels of troops for deployment have not been reached
even after long delays, funding has fallen far below
projected targets, and troop-contributing countries’
forces have encountered difficulties in performing their
duties.
Due to various constraints, a predictable,
sustainable and flexible financing mechanism has yet
to be established. This is most regrettable. We believe
that all parties should study the five financing
mechanisms mentioned in the Secretary-General’s
report, define fair, balanced and effective mechanisms
as early as possible, and ensure their full use by all
parties, including United Nations support.
We also support stepping up the institutional
capacity-building of peacekeeping operations. In
addition to the shortage of funds, inadequate
institutional capacities in management and strategic
planning pose another major challenge to African
Union peacekeeping operations. We call for capacitybuilding to be made a priority in United NationsAfrican Union cooperation. Through personnel
training, information-sharing and the exchange of
experience, the United Nations should also step up
cooperation with the African Union and accelerate
implementation of the Union’s 10-year capacitybuilding programme. We support the United Nations in
helping the African Union to address, via the short-,
medium- and long-term measures discussed in the
report, such problems as logistics and human
resources. The African Union, meanwhile, should also
work out a long-term, comprehensive capacity-building
plan.
At present, the new strategic partnership between
China and Africa is developing in a sustained, steady

12

and rapid manner. China has consistently advocated
and supported a greater role for the African Union in
maintaining peace and stability on the continent. In
recent years, through bilateral and multilateral
channels, we have provided various forms of assistance
to a number of peacekeeping operations in Africa. The
fourth Ministerial Conference of the Forum on ChinaAfrica Cooperation is scheduled to be held in Sharm
el-Sheikh, Egypt, in early November. We believe that
the meeting will further enhance pragmatic cooperation
between China and Africa in all areas. In future, China
will continue to help the African Union and countries
of Africa to the best of its ability and to support the
United Nations and the African Union in strengthening
their comprehensive cooperation.
Finally, I thank Uganda and other African
countries for drafting the presidential statement under
the agenda item under discussion today. China supports
the Security Council’s adoption of the draft statement
to demonstrate to the international community the
Council’s political will in support of United Nationsauthorized African Union peacekeeping operations.
Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank the Council for organizing this
debate to consider the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2009/470) assessing the recommendations of the
African Union-United Nations panel on the modalities
for support to peacekeeping operations authorized by
the United Nations and led by regional organizations,
in particular the African Union. I would also like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Alain Le Roy, Mr. Tete
Antonio, Acting Permanent Observer of the United
Nations, and Mr. Romano Prodi for their important
statements.
Following the Security Council’s consultations
regarding the report submitted by the African UnionUnited Nations panel in December 2008 (S/2008/813),
we awaited the Secretary-General’s report with a great
deal of interest. It would thus be remiss of us not to
convey our wholehearted thanks to him for his report.
We also wish to reiterate our appreciation for the
panel’s timely recommendations, which make
significant contribution to collective efforts to
strengthen the African Union’s capacity to meet the
challenges facing the African continent and to mobilize
greater support on the part of the international
community, especially with the aim of improving the
predictability, sustainability and flexibility of financing

09-57623

S/PV.6206

for African Union peacekeeping operations authorized
by the United Nations.
That is all the more important because, despite
their repeatedly demonstrated goodwill, subregional
and regional organizations, especially the African
Union, encounter objective difficulties in supporting
increasingly expensive long-term peacekeeping
operations or increasingly complex crisis situations.
The most egregious and pressing such case is that of
Somalia, where, as a result of insufficient financial
assistance in support of the African Union’s
commitment, the conflict is only deteriorating. The
diagnosis is therefore clear: a lack of modalities for
guaranteed, flexible financing and limited institutional
capacities. We now need to find the best way to address
these
difficulties,
which
are
certainly
not
insurmountable.
Since the report addresses United Nationsauthorized missions, we feel that the optimal solution
is to be found in establishing cooperation, or better yet,
an open partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union, based on Chapter VIII of the
Charter. The complexity of conflicts and threats to
peace demand a collective response based on genuine
political will on the part of the Organization, and in
particular the Security Council, to support the African
Union’s efforts.
Frankly, after all the statements of faith that have
been made and commitments undertaken within this
very body, which is fond of recalling its principal
responsibility as a bulwark of international peace and
security, the time has come to act. In the wake of the
Secretary-General’s assessment, my delegation would
therefore like to underscore the importance of the
following tasks.
First is the need to strengthen strategic relations
and to develop a common strategic vision for the
United Nations and the African Union through reliable
arrangements between the Security Council and the
Peace and Security Council, as well as between the
United Nations Secretariat and the African Union
Commission, in order to improve their coordination
and effectiveness in the prevention and management of
conflict and on issues of common interest.
The partnership between the two organizations
must be maintained and reinforced in order to
strengthen the African Union’s human resources. In
this regard, we support establishing a special joint

09-57623

United Nations-African Union team for peace and
security whose mission is to review current and longterm strategic and operational issues.
With respect to making financing for
peacekeeping more predictable, sustainable and
flexible, we need to establish appropriate financing
mechanisms for United Nations-authorized African
Union peacekeeping operations, with the ultimate aim
of creating a standing African Union peacekeeping
capacity and of providing African Union missions with
operational resources.
The African Union must pursue its internal efforts
to set up its own logistical capacities. We must seek
ways and means to strengthen the African Union’s
institutional
and
operational
capacities
in
peacekeeping, and to give it all the support necessary
to establish the African Peace and Security
Architecture and to build a standing emergency
response force.
While we recognize the importance of
peacekeeping activities, special attention should also
be paid to prevention and mediation efforts and to
exploit the comparative advantages of regional and
subregional organizations in this respect. We encourage
the United Nations to maintain its support for the
African Union’s 10-year capacity-building programme,
and we welcome the capacity-building activities
undertaken by many United Nations departments with
the African Union with respect to elections, mediation,
conflict settlement, and peacekeeping planning and
implementation. These efforts will have to continue,
and we await with interest the assessment to be made
later this year of the 10-year programme. We must also
focus our attention on close cooperation between all
international partners assisting the African Union’s
institutional and logistical capacity-building.
Turning specifically to the issue of financing, the
Security Council, through its resolution 1809 (2008),
itself recognizes that the absence of predictable,
sustainable and flexible resources constrains the
African Union’s capacity for action. Although it is true
that voluntary contributions have facilitated the
deployment and implementation of peacekeeping
operations by the African Union, as many here have
recalled, the lessons to be learned from the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan or the African Union
Mission in Somalia have highlighted the deficiency of
such contributions in covering all the needs of a large-

13

S/PV.6206

scale peacekeeping operation. With that assessment in
mind, and given the difficulties facing the African
Union in assuming the financial and logistic
responsibilities for peacekeeping operations on the
continent, we reiterate our support for the
recommendations of the African Union-United Nations
panel and for the Secretary-General’s assessment
regarding the re-allocation of United Nations-assessed
contributions to back African Union peacekeeping
operations authorized by the United Nations.
It will be recall that the African Union decided in
August to devote 12 per cent of its regular budget to
financing the African Union Peace Fund. That decision,
which we commend, reflected the continent’s desire
and political commitment to find solutions to the
thorny issue of taking responsibility for peacekeeping
operations. Despite that very important decision, it is
quite clear that there remains a need for partners and
donors to support the efforts of the African Union.
Regional organizations, especially the African
Union, and indeed the Security Council cannot shirk
their responsibility in the maintenance of peace under
the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations. Faced with the increased complexity of
conflicts and peacekeeping mandates and with
mounting requests for assistance, they must pool their
efforts and define and strengthen the framework of
their partnership and their action.
We reiterate our gratitude to the Chairman of the
high-level panel, Mr. Romano Prodi, as well as the
members of his team for their very valuable
contribution. We hail the constructive assessment of the
Secretary-General regarding their recommendations.
In conclusion, we wish to convey our gratitude to
the Ugandan delegation for its efforts to promote the
adoption of a draft presidential statement at the end of
this meeting. Of course, we support the draft.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I thank UnderSecretary-General Le Roy for his presentation and
welcome the fact that Under-Secretary-General
Malcorra is also here with us for this debate. We are
also grateful for the presentation by Mr. Antonio on
behalf of the African Union and to Mr. Prodi for his
contribution and for the work of the United NationsAfrican Union panel under his leadership.
The issue of United Nations support to African
Union (AU) peacekeeping under a United Nations

14

mandate is important. The United Kingdom welcomes
the opportunity to debate it here in the Council.
Peacekeeping plays a vital role in the
maintenance of international peace and security. In
recent years, we have seen an increase in both the scale
and complexity of the challenges. The United Kingdom
supports the efforts under way to develop a more
effective and strategic approach to peacekeeping.
Given the range of challenges faced not only in
peacekeeping but also in conflict prevention,
peacebuilding and mediation, the role of regional and
subregional organizations is becoming increasingly
important. We therefore welcome the enhanced
relationship between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations, in particular the African
Union, as outlined in resolution 1809 (2008).
Since the adoption of that resolution some
18 months ago, there has been much consideration of
the different ways the relationship can be enhanced.
We have also seen concrete examples of practical
support from the United Nations to the African Union,
notably on the African Union Mission in Somalia. The
report of the panel chaired by Mr. Prodi (S/2008/813),
which the Council debated in March, was an important
contribution to the debate.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2009/470) is
the latest step in this work. It provides a number of
useful ideas for how the two organizations can
continue to develop their strategic and operational
relationship. As the Secretary-General observes in his
report, building sufficient institutional capacity in key
management, support and strategic planning functions
represents a major challenge for the African Union. We
welcome his suggestions to help build African Union
capacity, and in particular his proposal for a capacitybuilding road map. That should form part of the wider
African Union strategic plan for 2009-2012 in order to
underpin African ownership and responsibility and
ensure synergy with the African Union’s overall
development.
Building African Union management capacity,
including resource management, is essential not only to
managing immediate and future peacekeeping
demands, but also to enabling a more effective
partnership between the African Union and donors. We
also need to see harmonized reporting requirements for
donors.

09-57623

S/PV.6206

The United Kingdom supports the development
of African Union peacekeeping capability both
bilaterally and through international partners, which
includes support for the Africa Standby Force, regional
training centres and African Union political offices. As
Ambassador Araud has already told us, the European
Union, as the main financial partner of the African
Union, is providing substantial additional support —
€300 million of funding for African Union capacitybuilding through the Africa Peace Facility, of which the
United Kingdom contributes over €45 million. We
recognize the need to work towards enhancing the
longer-term predictability, sustainability and flexibility
of financing for AU-led operations under a United
Nations mandate.
The Secretary-General highlights a range of
potential options in his report. We would not rule out
any of these options at this stage. A proposal for
establishing a standing flexible trust fund within the
framework of the existing African Union Peace Fund
has the potential to provide rapid funding for AU
operations as well as for longer-term needs.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s intention to
establish a joint task force on peace and security, which
will review immediate and long-term strategic and
operational issues. We also welcome the other
proposals to develop the interaction between the
United Nations Secretariat and the African Union
Commission. We look forward to further Council
discussion of these issues.

United Nations and the African Union (AU) can find a
predictable, guaranteed and sustainable source of
funding for AU peacekeeping operations. The United
Nations and the AU formed a joint panel, led by
Mr. Romano Prodi, former Prime Minister of Italy, to
study the issue. On 31 December 2008, following a indepth and detailed study, the panel issued its report
(see S/2008/813), which recommended a number of
practical steps aimed at converting the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) into a United Nations
peacekeeping operation through the use of the United
Nations regular budget for six months.
In a presidential statement dated 18 March 2009
(S/PRST/2009/3), the Security Council, under the
Libyan presidency, requested the Secretary-General to
submit a report on practical ways to provide effective
support for the African Union and to include in it a
detailed assessment of the recommendations contained
in the report of the African Union-United Nations
panel. The African Union Peace and Security Council,
in its communiqué dated 13 March 2009, stated that the
panel’s report was an important step in the efforts to
enhance the AU’s capacity to address the challenges
facing the African continent in the area of peace and
security. It also emphasized the need for continued
efforts to find predictable, sustainable and flexible
funding for AU peacekeeping operations. In the report
before us (S/2009/470), the Secretary-General states
that the AU Commission repeatedly emphasized that
need during its consultations with the Secretariat.

Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke
in Arabic): I would like at the outset to welcome
Mr. Romano Prodi and to thank him for his presence
with us today. We wish also to thank him and his panel
for their laudable efforts in preparing the report
(A/2008/813) and drafting its recommendations. These
efforts have enabled us to meet on several occasions,
including today. We also wish to thank UnderSecretary-General Le Roy for presenting the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2009/470) before us and for
the efforts he and his colleagues in the Secretariat have
undertaken to prepare the report and the assessment
contained therein.

Clearly, there is an ongoing effort to support the
African Union in building its own capacities. While we
appreciate that acknowledged effort, it requires
continuous assessment. The main problem — securing
sustained, predictable and flexible funding for African
peacekeeping — continues to completely elude us. It
cannot be solved through voluntary contributions
unless States with the capacity to do so commit
themselves to making specific contributions to the AU
Peace Fund for several years. However, because we
doubt that that will happen, we remain convinced that
funding from the United Nations regular budget is the
best option, at least with regard to AMISOM. We
believe that making it a United Nations mission as
soon as possible is crucial to the restoration of peace
and stability in Somalia and throughout the Horn of
Africa region.

More than two years ago, the Security Council
began to take a serious look at ways in which the

While some here might say that the Libyan
delegation is being radical in its demands, reality

We remain committed to continuing to assist the
development of the African Union’s capacity to deliver
peace and security in Africa.

09-57623

15

S/PV.6206

shows otherwise. Our emphasis on the requests and
needs of Africa is based on the following.
First, accelerating the restoration of peace and
security in Somalia is essential to restoring stability in
the Horn of Africa and to enhancing the credibility of
and strategic partnership between the United Nations
and the African Union.
Secondly, the United Nations spends huge
amounts of money on peacekeeping operations in areas
in which there are fewer threats to international peace
and security and to the lives of civilians than in
Somalia. Somalia must not be treated differently.
Thirdly, a number of States that object to the use
of the United Nations regular budget in Somalia spend
hundreds of millions of dollars every year on their
maritime presences off Somalia’s coast. Had those
resources been allocated to funding and developing
AMISOM so that it could meet United Nations
standards and reach its authorized strength, the
Government of Somalia could have extended its
authority throughout the country and the phenomenon
of piracy off the Somali coast, which necessitated those
foreign maritime presences, would have disappeared.
Within its limited capacities, the African Union is
attempting to meet the needs of its peacekeeping
operations through its Peace Fund, which has been
receiving 6 per cent of the AU’s regular budget. On
31 August 2009, during the special session that it held
in Tripoli on the consideration and resolution of
conflicts in Africa and the promotion of sustainable
peace, the AU decided to raise that amount to 12 per
cent. We hope that the Fund’s donor base will be
expanded and that States able to do so will generously
contribute to the Fund until a consensus can be reached
within the Security Council on how to find a
predictable and sustainable source of funding for AU
peacekeeping operations that will enable them to meet
United Nations standards and reach their authorized
strength.
We appreciate the efforts of the United Nations to
enhance the capacities of the AU. We also appreciate
the support provided to AMISOM by the United
Nations and donors, and we hope that that support will
continue and grow until AMISOM becomes a United
Nations mission.
We must not forget that responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security rests

16

first and foremost with the Security Council. The
activities of the African Union are meant to support the
role entrusted to the Security Council in Chapter VIII
of the Charter. Therefore, promoting partnership and
shouldering its responsibility towards African Union
peacekeeping operations are duties mandated by the
Charter, and the Council must carry out those duties
and responsibilities without hesitation.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish at the outset to thank Under-Secretary-General Le
Roy for his briefing and Mr. Antonio for his statement
this morning. I recognize the presence among us of
Mr. Prodi and thank him once again for his work as
Chair of the African Union-United Nations panel.
Costa Rica is convinced that a new era of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations has arrived. Such
cooperation is no longer an aspiration or, much less, a
claim; it is a need, given the array and the nature of the
crises that must be faced by bringing together as many
efforts as possible. Cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations has received greater
attention by the Security Council in recent years,
particularly cooperation with the African Union.
However dialogue between the two organizations
stands to be strengthened. The Prodi report
(S/2008/813) and the report of the Secretary-General
that we are discussing today (S/2009/470) bear witness
to this. Costa Rica understands the scope of the
cooperation between the Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council; however
we believe that the matters at the heart of that
cooperation must necessarily go beyond the financing
of peacekeeping operations.
In the maintenance of peace and security in
Africa there are shortcomings of which we are all
aware. The hostilities among participants, sometimes
violent, sometimes concealed, are long-lasting and
consume resources essential to the task of building
peace. Still, these are opportunities to show maturity
and capability. Further, there is a wide array of other
possible areas of cooperation that must be
strengthened, such as on issues like conflict
prevention, early warnings and mediation. The cases of
Kenya and Madagascar and the current situation in
Guinea are examples of what is possible and show
clearly how necessary it is to strengthen cooperation.
At this phase in the process of rapprochement and joint
endeavours, the key to effective strategic association

09-57623

S/PV.6206

would seem to be found in timelier, deeper interaction
between the two organizations.
Formal contacts between the Security Council
and the African Union Peace and Security Council
should be reviewed. Let us recall that this year the
annual meeting of the councils did not take place due
to a matter of formalities. The format of these meetings
would not seem to be the most appropriate either.
Because of the size of the two structures, the meetings
are not very functional. There is a need for greater
substantive preparation and this must include the
preparation of special envoys, joint mediators and
other senior officials who work directly in the primary
situations of the joint agenda.
On the level of the United Nations Secretariat and
the African Union Commission, we support the
recommendation of the Secretary-General aimed at
establishing an official mechanism for consultation on
matters of mutual interest, as well as the
recommendation for the establishment of a team at the
Under-Secretary-General
and
African
Union
Commissioner levels.
Since the foundation of this Organization there
has been a recognition, in Chapter VIII of the Charter,
of the role of regional organizations in maintaining
international peace and security. Because of their
obvious relative advantages, the regional organizations
can be in a better position to act in moments of crisis.
The African Union has done just that on many
occasions, including, most recently in Somalia and
Darfur.
However, beyond merely reacting to crises, the
most important contribution of the regional
organizations to international peace and security is that
of their role as mechanisms of collective security. In its
Presidential Statement of 19 November 2008
(S/PRST/2008/43), the Security Council underscored
the
relationship
among
collective
security,
disarmament and the development of peoples. The
primary function of regional organizations is to offer
their members real security assurances, allowing them
to allocate their resources to development instead of
diverting resources to arms races.
This issue is particularly relevant in Africa, where
each cent spent on weapons could be better used in
education, health care or other areas promoting the
economic and social development of their peoples. The
African Union must bolster its efforts to vigorously

09-57623

promote collective security on the continent. The
situations between Chad and Sudan, between Djibouti
and Eritrea and between Ethiopia and Eritrea represent
a call upon the African Union to deploy additional
efforts and to attain greater effectiveness in
maintaining peace and security. There are also
opportunities
to
strengthen
African
Union
commitments to development in the economic and
social spheres of the nations of Africa.
To conclude, I express my appreciation to the
delegation of Uganda for having prepared the
presidential statement that we will adopt at the close of
this debate. My country supports that statement fully.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): I want to
thank Under-Secretary-General Le Roy for his briefing
today, Under-Secretary-General Malcorra for her
presence and Mr. Antonio for providing the perspective
of the African Union. We thank as well Mr. Prodi for
his participation today.
I would like to take a moment to salute the many
African nations that support peacekeeping operations
with resources, police and troops. These contributions
have saved lives across the continent and around the
world. We are here today to promote that vital work by
deepening the partnership between the African Union
(AU) and the United Nations. We appreciate the work
of Mr. Prodi, the AU-United Nations panel and the
Secretary-General in laying out and carefully analysing
possible next steps to advance this important
partnership.
The United States fully supports enhanced
strategic ties between the Security Council and the AU
Peace and Security Council, along with more
structured coordination between the United Nation
Secretariat and the AU Commission. We also welcome
the attention of the African Union to develop a longterm, comprehensive, capacity-building roadmap in
cooperation with the United Nations and international
partners. We will continue to support the effort to
enhance the AU secretariat’s capacity to plan, manage
and sustain peacekeeping operations. And we are
dedicated to helping to build the capacity of all African
nations to secure peace through mediation, crisis
management, post-conflict reconstruction and the
development of conflict-prevention capabilities within
civilian institutions and civil society.
The United States applauds the contributions of
African nations to peace and security. Currently more

17

S/PV.6206

than 70 per cent of United Nations military personnel
are deployed to missions in Africa. We note that
African nations provide approximately 43 per cent of
the forces in United Nations missions on the continent,
and we recognize the major deployment of over 5,100
AU personnel in Somalia and the critical work being
done together by the African Union/United Nations
Hybrid operation in Darfur.
As President Obama emphasized during his
meeting with major troop- and police-contributing
countries last month, the United States is doing its part
to improve peacekeeping operations across the
continent and around the globe. We are consulting
more closely and frequently than ever with leading
troop- and police-contributing countries, as well as
other peacekeeping partners. We are seeking mandates
that are matched by the capacity and resources of their
peacekeeping missions. We are intensifying efforts to
mediate conflicts and revive flagging peace processes.
We are helping the United Nations to mobilize critical
assets,
including
medical,
engineering
and
transportation units, and are devoting more attention to
peacebuilding activities so that Governments can
enable peacekeepers to responsibly exit when their
work is done.
Throughout all this, we recognize the need for
secure and stable funding for African Union
peacekeeping. The United States has been and will
remain a major bilateral contributor to African
peacekeeping operations and to training and equipping
initiatives. We support the use of a multi-donor trust
fund. We have also supported, on an exceptional basis,
the use of assessed contributions to support the African
Union Mission in Somalia. However, we must stress
that that decision was only possible in the unique
circumstances of Somalia, and the United States is
unable to make a broad commitment to support such
arrangements in future operations.
To demonstrate clearly our seriousness of
purpose, I will mention just a few of our investments in
African peacekeeping since we last discussed this topic
in March.
Through the African contingency operations and
training assistance programme, the United States has
trained over 28 battalions from 15 African countries to
prepare over 23,000 peacekeepers for deployment. We
have provided substantial equipment packages to
African troop-contributing countries, including nearly

18

$20 million in equipment packages for Burundian and
Ugandan battalions in AMISOM and another
$20 million for 72 urgently needed armoured vehicles.
The United States Government has also trained,
equipped and airlifted several battalions to serve in
Darfur. We continue to support the presence of peace
and security advisers at both the African Union’s
Strategic Planning and Management Unit and at
ECOWAS headquarters.
Those contributions demonstrate our commitment
to strengthen the African Union’s peacekeeping
capabilities, but we recognize that there is much more
work to be done. The scale of the challenge is great,
and so we encourage other donors to provide financial
support for African peacekeeping bilaterally, through
multi-donor trust funds or through other mechanisms.
We have taken careful note of the SecretaryGeneral’s call for donors to coordinate more closely
and to harmonize administrative reporting and
accounting requirements.
It is in the interest of all nations to improve the
efficiency and effectiveness of African peacekeeping.
We believe that through coordinated efforts between
African nations and the international community,
including the United Nations, we can achieve real
progress. The United States remains steadfast in its
commitment to strengthen peacekeepers across Africa
and around the world. We are pleased to support the
presidential statement that will be issued today.
Mr.
Rugunda
(Uganda):
Thank
you,
Mr. President, for organizing this important debate. I
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Alain
Le Roy for presenting the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2009/470). I recognize the presence of
Under-Secretary-General Susana Malcorra. Let me also
thank the representative of the African Union, Mr. Tete
Antonio, for his statement and thank His Excellency
Romano Prodi for his words of wisdom and for his
formidable leadership regarding the need for building a
strategic relationship between the African Union and
the United Nations.
This debate gives the Council and other Members
of the United Nations another opportunity to focus on
peace and security in Africa in general and on support
to African Union peacekeeping operations authorized
by the United Nations in particular.

09-57623

S/PV.6206

We commend the panel led by Mr. Prodi for their
report (S/2008/813), which made a number of key
recommendations on how the strategic relationship
between the African Union and the United Nations
could be further strengthened. That report was an
important contribution towards the overall efforts to
enhance the capacity of the African Union in
undertaking peacekeeping operations.
We recall that after the debate on the Prodi report
(see S/PV.6092 and 6092 (Resumption 1)), the Security
Council requested the Secretary-General to submit an
assessment of the recommendations contained in it. We
are convinced that the Secretary-General has made a
reasonable assessment of the Panel’s recommendations,
giving the Council a firm basis on which to take the
process forward.
The primary responsibility for maintenance of
international peace and security is vested in the
Security Council. But peacekeeping is increasingly
becoming a shared responsibility in which the United
Nations, regional and subregional organizations and
the wider international community have critical roles to
play. The United Nations/African Union Hybrid
Mission in Darfur (UNAMID) and African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) are good examples of
the collaboration between the United Nations and
African Union.
The African Union has shown its resolve towards
conflict prevention, mediation and resolution in Africa.
It is working on a comprehensive peace and security
architecture, including an African standby force and
early warning system. The African Union has also
underscored the need for its member States to adhere to
constitutionalism, democratic governance and the rule
of law.
The African Union and its subregional
organizations such as the East African Community
(EAC), the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) and the South African
Development Community (SADC) have developed
significant capacity, as demonstrated by their response
to conflict situations in various countries. African
ownership has been shown through the contribution of
troops, logistics, political leadership and finances,
according to the capacity of its member States.
Uganda welcomes the ongoing efforts to
strengthen cooperation between the United Nations and

09-57623

the African Union. We commend the Secretary-General
and his staff, and also the Chairman of the African
Union Commission, for the efforts undertaken in
fostering stronger ties between the African Union and
the United Nations. We are convinced that building a
more strategic and effective relationship will be
mutually beneficial in our collective efforts towards
peace, stability and development. My delegation would
like to focus on three fundamental elements that we
consider critical for the success of this strategic
partnership.
First, when the African Union deploys
peacekeeping operations it is contributing to the
maintenance of international peace and security. It has
the advantages of proximity and capability to mobilize
and respond quickly. But often the African Union lacks
the financial resources to do that. The Security
Council, in its resolution 1809 (2008), recognized the
need to enhance the predictability, sustainability and
flexibility of funding for regional organizations when
they undertake peacekeeping operations under a United
Nations mandate.
It was the expectation of the African Union that
the Security Council would, this time, make a firm
commitment in this regard. The African Union-United
Nations Panel made an unequivocal recommendation to
consider the use of assessed contributions for specific
peacekeeping operations on a case-by-case basis for a
period of six months to facilitate transition to a United
Nations mission. That recommendation was also
positively assessed by the Secretary-General in his
report.
Both the Panel and the Secretary-General also
acknowledged that voluntary contributions are not only
unpredictable but also unsustainable. That is borne out
by the example of pledges to AMISOM of over $230
million that were made in April 2009; to date only a
small proportion of the confirmed pledges have been
disbursed. And yet the AMISOM troops are on the
ground in Somalia, taking enormous risks and at times
making the ultimate sacrifice, on behalf of the region
and the international community. The authorization of
a support package for AMISOM was therefore a
welcome and significant contribution.
After several months of deliberations on the
critical issue of financing African Union peacekeeping
operations authorized by the Security Council, it is not
enough for the Council to only undertake to keep all

19

S/PV.6206

options under consideration. It is important to
recognize that an ineffective United Nations
peacekeeping capacity anywhere in the world greatly
undermines the credibility of the United Nations in the
eyes of the population.
Secondly, there is a need to strengthen further the
relationship between the Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council with respect
to conflict prevention, mediation, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. We also call for the enhancement of
regular interaction, coordination and consultation
between the United Nations and the African Union
Commission on matters of mutual interest.
Thirdly, the institutional capacity of the African
Union needs to be enhanced to ensure the effective
planning,
management
and
deployment
of
peacekeeping operations. We encourage the African
Union Commission to develop a long-term
comprehensive capacity-building framework, in
consultation with the United Nations and other
international partners.
Let me reiterate that peacekeeping is an essential
and indispensable tool available to the United Nations
and regional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security. Its effectiveness will
be further enhanced through closer cooperation and
coordination between the United Nations and the
African Union. Uganda therefore considers this debate
to be part of a process in which actions and decisions
will be taken to better support and facilitate AU
peacekeeping operations.
It is time that the Council took decisive action
and committed itself to practical ways to provide
effective support for the African Union when it
undertakes peacekeeping operations authorized by the
United Nations. I wish to once again commend the AUUnited Nations panel and the Secretary-General for
their reports and, finally, I thank all delegations for
their contributions to the draft presidential statement as
an outcome of our deliberations.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): We are grateful for
the important contributions made today to our debate
by
Under-Secretary-General
Alain
Le
Roy,
Ambassador Tete Antonio and President Romano
Prodi. I would also like to acknowledge the presence
here today of Under-Secretary-General Malcorra.

20

I would like to join others in thanking the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2009/470) on
support to African Union peacekeeping operations
authorized by the United Nations. Austria fully
supports the statement to be delivered later in our
meeting by the representative of Sweden on behalf of
the European Union.
Since earlier this year, the Security Council has
been examining key questions of United Nations
peacekeeping. The Council does so in response to the
increased demand for more complex peacekeeping
activities and the subsequent new approach that is
required towards the successful implementation of
these activities. The Secretary-General’s report,
following up on the work of the African Union-United
Nations panel (see S/2008/813), provides us with one
more important contribution to our discussion of this
very pertinent issue. It rightly focuses on areas of
particular relevance to the close cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union.
The strategic partnership between the United
Nations and regional organizations with regard to
peacekeeping is of great importance to international
peace and security. In this context, the close
cooperation and coordination between the United
Nations and the African Union, including the regional
economic communities, have been of vital importance
to conflict resolution, prevention, early warning and
mediation on the African continent. Austria strongly
welcomes the increasingly important role of the
African Union in this regard.
Strengthening the African Union’s institutional
capacities for peacekeeping operations is essential if
the African Union is to take on a more significant role
in the maintenance of peace and security in Africa. The
Secretary-General has made several proposals on how
to address this issue, including the development of a
comprehensive plan and road map for capacitybuilding to be drawn up by the African Union with the
support of the United Nations and other relevant
partners. Austria welcomes this recommendation and
believes that its implementation needs to be considered
in the light of ongoing efforts in capacity-building,
supported by the European Union and other
international actors with a view to ensuring African
ownership and close coordination among all relevant
activities and actors.

09-57623

S/PV.6206

In this context, we would also like to commend
the current African Union Commission for its
leadership in strengthening African capabilities, and
would like to invite all African Union member States to
lend their full support to these efforts. We hope that
important and courageous decisions will be taken in
the near future.
We are of the opinion that the partnership among
the African Union, the United Nations and the
European Union has been extremely beneficial to crisis
management on the African continent. The Africa
Peace Facility, as well as the close coordination and
cooperation among the three organizations in specific
peacekeeping situations — such as we experienced in
the case of the transition from the European Union
military operation in the Republic of Chad and in the
Central African Republic to the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad —
demonstrate that this triangular partnership is
beneficial to all.
In his report, the Secretary-General also outlines
possible ways to support African Union-led
peacekeeping missions under a United Nations
mandate. As I have said on an earlier occasion at which
we discussed this matter, Austria warmly welcomes a
stronger role for the African Union in conflict
prevention and resolution in Africa. We therefore
believe that all options — and I insist on all —
outlined by the Secretary-General in his report, aimed
at supporting African Union-led peacekeeping missions
under United Nations mandates should be seriously and
substantively considered further. I listened very closely
to what my colleague, the Permanent Representative of
Uganda, just said on this subject.
The
question
of
establishing
adequate
accountability mechanisms for the different support
activities to the African Union is also critical. We
concur with the assessment of the Secretary-General
that donors and all other stakeholders should
harmonize their respective reporting and accountability
standards to alleviate the burden imposed on the
African Union by numerous existing requirements.
Austria believes that the use of lessons learned is
of great relevance to future cooperation between the
organizations and would allow them to identify
measures for improving their cooperation even further.
We welcome the idea of drawing up such lessons, and
we believe that this exercise should be undertaken with

09-57623

all partners involved in order to benefit from their
respective comparative advantages and insights.
Austria is convinced that, in our way ahead,
important cross-cutting issues such as respect for
international law and human rights — especially the
rights of women and children in armed conflict — and
the protection of civilians should be integral parts of
our approach. We further believe that it is essential to
take into account the views and concerns of troop- and
police-contributing countries.
Finally, let me express my delegation’s full
support for the draft presidential statement and thank
Uganda for drafting it and for leading the negotiations
to a successful conclusion.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): At the outset, allow me to
thank Under-Secretary-General Alain Le Roy for his
valuable remarks, and Under-Secretary-General Susana
Malcorra for her presence with us today. I would
particularly like to thank Mr. Romano Prodi for his
contribution and for all his endeavours, and Mr. Tete
Antonio for his contribution to our work today.
Croatia fully supports the statement to be
delivered later today by the Swedish representative on
behalf of the European Union.
We have read with great interest the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2009/470) on practical ways to
provide effective support to the African Union in
undertaking peacekeeping operations authorized by the
United Nations, including his detailed assessment of
the recommendations contained in the report
(S/2008/813) of the African Union-United Nations
panel established under resolution 1809 (2008).
Recognizing the primary responsibility of the
Security Council for the maintenance of international
peace and security, Croatia supports the increasing
engagement of regional and subregional organizations
in conflict prevention, peacekeeping and post-conflict
reconstruction, consistent with Chapter VIII of the
United Nations Charter.
In that context, we further support the
development of an effective strategic partnership
between the United Nations and African Union (AU)
on matters relating to the maintenance of peace and
security, as well as the strengthening of coordination
and consultation mechanisms between the two
organizations at all levels in order to make the most of
their respective advantages and, at the same time, to

21

S/PV.6206

avoid working at cross purposes. I should like to
mention that the third meeting between Security
Council and African Union members during the
Council’s visit to Africa last May constituted a step in
that direction. In that regard, we welcome the
establishment of a United Nations-AU task force
charged with reviewing immediate and long-term
strategic and operational issues.
Peacekeeping operations undertaken by the AU
so far have clearly shown the exceptional value of
rapid response on the part of regional actors, as well as
the benefits of national and local ownership of such
actions. In this regard, we welcome the AU decision to
increase the statutory transfer from the Union’s regular
budget to the AU Peace Fund from 6 per cent to 12 per
cent.
Furthermore, we salute all those African States
that have so far contributed troops and supported
peacekeeping operations throughout the region and
beyond. We salute Uganda and Burundi, in particular,
for their extraordinary involvement and sacrifices in
Somalia. On the other hand, the fact that some of the
operations undertaken were seriously constrained by a
lack of military capabilities, inadequate resources or
weak institutional capacity is certainly a reason for
major concern.
Croatia shares the view that peacekeeping is not
the only tool for dealing with every conflict and that
peace and stability in Africa — as well as in many
other troubled regions of the world — cannot be
achieved through military means alone. We strongly
encourage cooperation between the AU and the United
Nations on a number of capacity-building initiatives
under the 2006 United Nations-African Union TenYear Capacity-Building Programme in relevant fields
such as conflict prevention, early warning and conflict
resolution and mediation. We believe that a forwardlooking capacity-development strategy must link the
resources of the United Nations with those of other
partners in the field. We also strongly support ongoing
efforts to strengthen the African Peace and Security
Architecture as well as to operationalize the African
Standby Force, which would definitely represent a
major contribution to peace and security in Africa.
We call on the AU to undertake further intensive
efforts to enhance its capabilities to plan and execute
peacekeeping operations, as well as to develop a longterm capacity-building road map in cooperation with

22

its international partners. At the same time, we are of
the view that there is a dire need for better
coordination between the numerous donor-sponsored
initiatives and other contributions targeting the area of
peace and security — of which there are more than
130, as we learned from the Prodi report (S/2008/813).
This should alleviate, to a certain extent, the burden on
the AU administrative capacities in the field, which
have not been fully developed and which are often
bogged down by reporting obligations to donors and by
multiple audits. In that context, we welcome United
Nations efforts to develop a harmonized administrative
and financial management framework that could
consolidate funding based on a limited number of
thematic programmes and a single financial reporting
format in order to further engage existing donors and to
attract new ones, including from the private sector.
Croatia believes that the issue of the funding of
regional peacekeeping operations remains central to
enhancing the relationship between the United Nations
and the AU. We share a common understanding that
predictability, sustainability and flexibility of financing
of AU peacekeeping operations is of the utmost
importance. We are looking forward to the continuation
of the consideration of all options outlined in the
Secretary-General’s report, bearing in mind at the same
time the established rules and practices of the United
Nations.
We also note with great interest the idea of
establishing, within the framework of the African
Union’s Peace Fund and in accordance with the
principles of financial accountability, a flexible multidonor trust fund in order to maximize the effectiveness
of voluntary contributions and provide the necessary
sustainability, predictability and flexibility of
resources.
Finally, let me reiterate our full support for the
principle of African ownership as a crucial factor not
only for effective action in the field of peace and
security in Africa, but also for socio-economic
development. In that context, strong partnerships with
the international community should only serve as a tool
to finally cement and reconfirm that ownership.
Lastly, I express my full support for the draft
presidential statement and I thank the Ugandan
delegation for having prepared it.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): I should like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Le Roy for his introduction

09-57623

S/PV.6206

of the report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/470). I
also welcome the participation of His Excellency
Mr. Romano Prodi and the representative of the
African Union (AU) and, of course, the presence
among us of Under-Secretary-General Malcorra.
First and foremost, there will be no peace and
security in the world without peace and security in
Africa. Japan therefore welcomes the opportunity to
discuss how to further strengthen cooperation between
the United Nations and the AU.
We are grateful for the report of the United
Nations-African Union panel (see S/2008/813) and the
report of the Secretary-General, which together provide
a sound basis for our considerations. I should like to
emphasize that to achieve peace and security in Africa
we must address peace and development in an
integrated manner. Durable peace cannot be achieved
without securing the safety, livelihood and dignity of
the people living in conflict situations. Efforts towards
peace and security should be accompanied by
appropriate actions in favour of development. In that
belief, Japan continues to support the efforts of African
countries to consolidate peace and achieve economic
growth through the process of the Tokyo International
Conference on African Development, which has been
very successful.
More than 68,000 uniformed men and women are
now deployed in peacekeeping operations, at work
throughout Africa. We are deeply grateful to them.
Taking the magnitude of this number into account,
close cooperation between the United Nations and AU
is indispensable at every stage from conflict resolution
to peacekeeping and peacebuilding. The mandates of
peacekeeping operations increasingly include such
activities as disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, and the promotion of good governance
and the rule of law. The broad range of peacebuilding
activities which go beyond peacekeeping operations
could be synchronized closely with the operations.
Effective peacebuilding efforts are also an important
factor in planning exit strategies for peacekeeping
operations.
I should like now to turn to the issues of the
strategic partnership between the United Nations and
the AU, capacity-building and the financing of AU
operations. First, we should further promote the
strategic partnership between the United Nations and
the AU at all levels — at the Council level and between

09-57623

the Secretariat and Commission — because it is
beneficial to both organizations to share information
and to consult and coordinate whenever making
decisions affecting each other. Close cooperation
between the United Nations and the AU is also
essential for the planning and management phase of
peacekeeping operations. In this connection, I should
like to urge the Secretariat to review and streamline the
various United Nations presences in its Addis Ababa
office, and to make them more cost-effective, to
achieve the purpose of strengthening the strategic
partnership with the AU.
Secondly, I should like to address ownership and
capacity-building. The efforts of the AU and African
countries to undertake peacekeeping operations should
be highly commended. But durable peace cannot be
achieved by peacekeepers alone. Political and peace
processes are essential to promote and consolidate
peace. The most effective political processes come
from the initiatives of African leaders themselves. We
therefore welcome the political efforts of African
countries, through the AU and subregional
organizations such as the Economic Community of
West African States and the Southern Africa
Development Community, to resolve conflicts with a
strong sense of ownership. We welcome the decision of
the AU Summit to request the AU Commission to take
preparatory steps to increase statutory transfers from
the AU budget to the Peace Fund from 6 to 12 per cent.
Japan has also welcomed and supported the AU Panel
of the Wise, which is playing an important role to
mediate and resolve conflict in the region.
With regard to capacity-building, it is essential to
extend support to strengthen the capacity of African
troop-contributing countries. Japan has committed to
assist the capacity-building of the African Peace and
Security Architecture through the Peace Fund. We are
also contributing to national and regional capacitybuilding, including support for peacekeeping
operations training centres in Egypt, Ghana, Kenya,
Mali, South Africa and many other places. It is also
important to support the African Union’s Ten-Year
Capacity-Building Programme, as the Programme will
be evaluated at the end of this year. I hope this
assessment will contribute to improving future
implementation.
Thirdly, with regard to the financial aspects of
African Union-led peacekeeping operations, I wish to
make the following general points at this stage. First,

23

S/PV.6206

the launching of peacekeeping operations requires
well-qualified
personnel,
training,
equipment,
transportation, logistical support and financial
resources. We understand the desire to secure stable
resources for those purposes. Secondly, peacekeeping
operations which are authorized and conducted by the
African Union and its subregional organizations are
supported by the African Union budget and voluntary
contributions. Thirdly, the main issue is peacekeeping
operations which are organized and conducted by the
African Union but also authorized by the Security
Council. Such operations are also financed by the
African Union budget and voluntary contributions.
Japan, for its part, has been actively contributing to
African Union operations, including $11 million to
support African Union activities in the Sudan and
$9 million to the trust fund for the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), as well as support for
other activities.
It is important for all donors to disburse their
pledges early and to monitor and coordinate their
activities with other donors. This practice is similar to
peace operations in other parts of the world which are
also authorized by the Security Council but conducted
by non-United Nations entities. We note recent cases of
using United Nations assessed contributions for United
Nations support packages to African Union
peacekeeping operations — the African Union Mission
in the Sudan (AMIS) and AMISOM — when it is a
matter of either the start-up stage of a United Nations
peacekeeping operation, as in the case of AMIS, or an
essential integral part of a transition to a United
Nations peacekeeping operation, as in the case of
AMISOM.
In order for the United Nations budget to be used
established rules and procedures of the United Nations
must be followed. The United Nations Charter clearly
states that all expenses of the United Nations shall be
borne by Members through assessed contributions.
This is a fundamental rule of the Organization, which
must be taken into account when considering the
options mentioned in the report of the SecretaryGeneral.
In conclusion, the issue of peace and security in
Africa entails many challenges. Japan is hopeful,
however, that the African countries can find a way
towards a bright future, and we are determined to
continue contributing to that process.

24

Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation thanks Under-Secretary-General Alain Le
Roy for his introduction of the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2009/470), and we are grateful for the
analysis and recommendations it contains. We also
appreciate the presence of Under-Secretary-General
Susana Malcorra and thank Mr. Tete Antonio for his
message from the Permanent Observer Mission of the
African Union to the United Nations. We also very
much regret that no member of Mr. Prodi’s delegation
has taken the trouble to remain in the Chamber to hear
the Council’s debate.
Pursuant to Chapter VIII, Article 52, of the
United Nations Charter, the Security Council has
repeatedly reaffirmed the importance of building
African Union capacities in the maintenance of peace
and security in Africa in coordination and cooperation
with the United Nations. However, it is clear that the
international community should work together to
improve the situation and capacity of the African
Union, in order to create a true bridge of international
and regional cooperation and communication aimed at
optimizing collective attention to the challenges faced
by the African continent, in the light of the
proliferation of conflicts on the agenda and the fact
these constitute a good part of that agenda.
My delegation believes that to strengthen
peacebuilding and peacekeeping in Africa, four main
profoundly interrelated areas must be addressed
simultaneously: conflict resolution, which means
establishing peace; economic development and the
building of institutions; respect for human rights; and
conflict prevention, based on attention to and
eradication of the causes of conflict. None of these
tasks may substitute for the other. In many cases, the
challenge posed by the magnitude of the task lies in
addressing these four enormous tasks simultaneously.
We praise the resolve of the United Nations in
moving forward in those areas, and we recognize the
stated willingness of the African Union to rapidly
deploy mediation and peacekeeping missions, with the
support of subregional organizations, in order to
prevent the escalation of conflict. However, we also
recognize that material and logistical limitations of the
African Union have reduced the scope of these
objectives.
It is essential — and we must be honest on this
point — to promote greater coherence within the

09-57623

S/PV.6206

Security Council in order to achieve greater
coordination when joint decisions are taken by the
African Union Commission and the United Nations
Secretariat. In that regard, we support the
recommendation of the Secretary-General that relations
between the African Union Peace and Security Council
and the United Nations Security Council be
strengthened in the areas of mediation and
peacekeeping. In that regard, we welcome the fact that
in the context of the May 2009 Security Council trip to
Africa, representatives of both bodies made a
commitment to us that they would carry out
consultations on ways and means for strengthening
cooperation and partnership.
It is obvious that much remains to be done along
those lines. Clearly this relationship will lead to greater
understanding and clear and comprehensive approaches
in specific situations such as the crises in Somalia, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Sudan.
Should this not occur, there is a risk that we will not
achieve better coordination and will be left with only
our good intentions.
We also welcome the recommendations for the
establishment of a structured mechanism for
consultations and information exchange on matters of
mutual interest to both bodies to examine current and
long-term strategic and operational matters. This would
also assist the implementation of the 2006 Ten-Year
Capacity-Building Programme as a general framework
for United Nations support for the African Union in the
area of international peace and security.
Further, my delegation awaits the proposal to be
submitted by the Secretary-General to the General
Assembly on restructuring United Nations support to
the African Union in the area of peace and security on
the ground, including further measures aimed at
bringing greater integration and streamlining of the
Secretariat presence in Addis Ababa.
Mexico agrees with the African Union-United
Nations panel chaired by Romano Prodi that the
success of any peacekeeping operation requires not
only a clear mandate but also the support and resources
needed for the fulfilment of the mandate. For that
reason, we understand that predictable, sustainable and
flexible financing mechanisms are a priority
requirement. In that regard, we recognize the efforts of
the Secretary-General to propose possible financing
options for African Union-led and United Nations-

09-57623

endorsed peacekeeping operations for a period of six
months and based on concrete cases.
We believe it is relevant to analyse in depth the
five proposed financing mechanisms based on the
efficacy and experience of the African Union Mission
in Somalia, the African Union Mission in Sudan and
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur. We should also consider the report that the
African Union will submit on identifying capacitybuilding priorities for peacekeeping logistics,
administration and management, which would serve as
the framework for guiding assistance programmes and
financing mechanisms.
We welcome the progress made in recent years in
strengthening the role of the African Union and the
continent’s
subregional
organizations
in
the
maintenance of peace and security. We also welcome
the implementation of strategies for prevention, early
warning, conflict resolution and mediation. In this
regard, we deeply appreciate the efforts of African
countries that provide contingents for peacekeeping
operations in and outside of the region, including on
other continents.
Lastly, we support the draft presidential statement
prepared by the delegation of Uganda that will be
adopted as the outcome of today’s debate. We agree
that a peacekeeping operation is part of a political
solution, but not a substitute for such a solution.
Parallel actions must be undertaken to strengthen and
support preventive diplomacy, early warning,
mediation and conflict resolution. We must focus on
those areas if we are to attain peace and security in
Africa.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity.
I thank Under-Secretary-General Alain Le Roy;
Mr. Tete Antonio, Acting Permanent Observer of the
African Union to the United Nations; and Mr. Romano
Prodi for their participation and contribution to the
work of the Council in today’s meeting. I also thank
Under-Secretary-General Malcorra for her presence
here today, and welcome the participation of the States
members of the African Union (AU) in this debate.
While the Security Council has primary
responsibility in the maintenance of international peace
and security, regional and subregional organizations
are playing an increasingly significant role in

25

S/PV.6206

peacekeeping operations authorized by the United
Nations. Nowhere in the world has this fact manifested
itself more vividly than in Africa. Hence, enhancing
the strategic partnership between the United Nations
and the African Union will boost the international
community’s collective power in resolving conflicts in
Africa and improve the latter’s capacity to resolve
existing local conflicts and prevent future ones.
We fully support the promotion of the strategic
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union in the area of peacekeeping, in
accordance with Chapter VIII of the United Nations
Charter, resolution 1809 (2008) and relevant
presidential statements of the Security Council.
Since the adoption of resolution 1809 (2008) in
April 2008, considerable progress has been made in
United Nations-AU cooperation and partnership in this
field. Endowed with its comparative advantage and
valuable experiences and lessons accumulated through
decades of carrying out peacekeeping operations in
Africa, the African Union is capable of making
important contributions to the success of any United
Nations-authorized joint peacekeeping operation on the
African continent.
Finding ways and means to effectively support
AU peacekeeping operations will add value to the
Security Council’s task of maintaining international
peace and security. Enhanced dialogue and close
consultation in their respective decision-making
processes between the United Nations and the African
Union should be further promoted, especially between
the Security Council and the AU Commission. This
cooperation can range from conflict analysis to strategy
development and the operational planning of
peacekeeping activities.
We note with appreciation that a mechanism for
joint annual meetings between the Security Council
and the African Union Peace and Security Council has
been established and implemented for the past three
years. We support ongoing efforts to promote
information exchange and cooperation between the
United Nations Secretariat and the African Union
Commission.
Due to its limited resources and capacity, the
African Union has faced tremendous difficulties in
carrying out peacekeeping operations authorized by the
United Nations. Further support should be extended to
ensure the successful finalization of the United

26

Nations-African Union 10-year capacity-building
programme. The efforts made by the African Union,
with the support of the United Nations, to build, over
the long term, the African Standby Force, should also
be recognized and encouraged.
Regarding financial contributions, which remain
one of the thorniest challenges to the success of joint
United Nations-AU peacekeeping operations, we take
due note of the recommendations put forth in the AUUnited Nations panel report (S/2008/813) and the
Secretary-General’s
assessment
of
these
recommendations, and hold that all options deserve due
consideration.
We call on all able donor countries to extend
necessary financial and logistical resources to facilitate
the implementation of present and future AU
peacekeeping operations authorized by the United
Nations. In this connection, we welcome the readiness
of the European Union to earmark funds for the AU in
the framework of its Africa Peace Facility.
Finally, we share the Secretary-General’s
observation that peacekeeping is merely part of a
political solution, not an alternative to it. Adequate
attention should be paid to preventive diplomacy, early
warning, conflict prevention and mediation. Lessons
from
Kenya,
Darfur,
Mauritania,
Zimbabwe,
Madagascar and many other flashpoints in Africa have
shown the importance of early warning and mediation
in preventing and resolving local conflicts.
Apart from pooling resources for peacekeeping
operations, earmarking sufficient resources for socioeconomic development to address the root causes of
conflicts on that continent must be considered a
priority because it is the only way to prevent the
recurrence of conflicts and sustain peace and stability
where it they have been hard-earned.
I thank the delegation of Uganda for drafting the
draft presidential statement that we will adopt at the
end of this meeting.
I resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I call on the representative of Sweden.
Mr. Lidén (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. Turkey, Croatia, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia, Ukraine, the Republic

09-57623

S/PV.6206

of Moldova, Armenia and Georgia align themselves
with this statement.
As highlighted in the recent New Horizon
non-paper, the global demand for peacekeeping
activities requires a new strategic approach.
Developing close and effective partnerships between
key actors should be the centrepiece of such an
approach. We agree with the assessment of the
Secretary-General in his report on support to African
Union-led peacekeeping operations (S/2009/470) that
partnerships between the United Nations and regional
organizations have become a critical factor of modern
peacekeeping.
The strategic partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union, including the regional
economic communities, should continue to be
developed. Efforts should be made to increase the
efficiency of relations between the Security Council
and the Peace and Security Council, as well as between
the United Nations Secretariat and the African Union
Commission. The European Union takes note of the
measures proposed by the Secretary-General on how to
move forward with this partnership.
In peacekeeping, a triangular dynamic is evolving
among the United Nations, the African Union and the
European Union. The current support to Somalia is a
case in point. The United Nations and the European
Union both give substantial support to the African
Union Mission in Somalia. The European Union has
also deployed a naval operation to protect vessels of
the World Food Program from pirates.
The European Union continues to support the
institutional capacity-building of the African Union. A
road map to operationalize the African Peace and
Security Architecture is about to be finalized by the
African Union, the regional economic communities and
the European Union. The United Nations is engaged
through a 10-year capacity-building programme.
The Secretary-General has now proposed a
number of new initiatives. One useful idea is to
develop a broad road map for capacity-building.
African ownership has to be ensured, and it should be
part of the wider strategic plan of the African Union.
Lessons learned from, inter alia, the African Peace
Facility should be taken into consideration in any new
initiative for capacity-building.

We recognize the need to enhance the
predictability, sustainability and flexibility of financing
for African Union-led operations under a United
Nations mandate, while not ruling out any option
currently being studied. We are committed to seeking
pragmatic and effective ways by which bilateral and
other international partners of the African Union could
further support the development of the African Peace
and Security Architecture.
The European Union recognizes the authority of
the Security Council and the General Assembly to
decide on United Nations modalities of support on a
case by case basis for African Union-led peacekeeping
operations under a United Nations mandate. Any
proposal must be accompanied by appropriate
accountability mechanisms. At the same time, longterm capacity-building should be pursued.
The European Union remains strongly engaged
with the United Nations and the African Union in
peacekeeping. The United Nations and the European
Union are increasingly developing joint strategic
responses. The members of the European Union bear
roughly 40 per cent of the costs of United Nations-led
peacekeeping operations. Peace and security is a
central part in the strategic relationship between the
African Union and the European Union. The African
Peace Facility has become an important tool for the
funding of African Union-led peacekeeping operations.
Today, the European Union bears about 40 per cent of
the costs of African-led peacekeeping operations.
The United Nations and the European Union
share the ambition to support the African Union in
general and, not least, in peacekeeping. The
information exchange and coordination of our
respective support should be further strengthened to
ensure coherence and additional synergies.
The European Union is strongly committed to
further developing its respective partnerships with the
United Nations and the African Union, as well as to
supporting similar endeavours between the United
Nations and the African Union. We are determined to
continue to assist the African Union in developing its
own capacity to deliver peace and stability on the
continent. The European Union would also welcome
increased support for the peacekeeping efforts of the
African Union from non-traditional donors.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.

09-57623

27

S/PV.6206

Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to address the
Council on this important issue. I also wish to thank
Under-Secretary-General Alain Le Roy for his briefing,
and I appreciate the participation at this meeting of
Mr. Tete Antonio, Acting Permanent Observer of the
African Union (AU).

to conflict prevention and peacekeeping on the
continent, it must seek to extend all the necessary
support for those endeavours. Cooperation with
regional organizations under Chapter VIII of the
Charter is, first and foremost, a way for the Council to
better exercise its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.

I also want to welcome the presence among us
today of Mr. Romano Prodi. The Secretary-General’s
report on support to African Union peacekeeping
operations (S/2009/470) draws effectively upon the
Prodi report and its vision for an enhanced partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union. I
would like to echo Mr. Prodi’s call for an approach that
looks at Africa from a regional perspective, analyses
African peacekeeping within the broader context of
promoting social and economic development and
strengthens the multilateral dimension of our efforts.

The Secretary-General’s report on support to
African Union peacekeeping operations is a rich
document that contains many useful proposals. I am
certain that the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, the Security Council and the Fifth
Committee will give it the careful consideration it
deserves. Today, I would like to briefly comment on a
few of the ideas put forth in the report.

Brazil has a permanent, deep and multifaceted
commitment to Africa that is rooted in our important
historical, cultural and political links with the
continent. We seek to support Africa’s efforts to
achieve peace, security and development through
various means, from military cooperation to technical
assistance and capacity-building. Brazil is currently
contributing to five peacekeeping missions in Africa
and has participated in many others in the past. We also
seek to contribute to peacebuilding, in particular
through our work in the Peacebuilding Commission’s
country-specific configuration for Guinea-Bissau.
More recently, we have engaged in initiatives
designed to broaden the scope of our bilateral
cooperation with African countries in such matters. In
Guinea-Bissau, for instance, a Brazilian military
mission has been established that is expected to be
fully operational early next year, with a focus on
training. We are beginning a programme of intense
military cooperation with Mozambique, with a specific
focus
on
capacity-building
for
peacekeeping
operations. That involves training officers and
exchanging experiences, which will ultimately enable
Mozambique to create its own peacekeeping training
centre. Consultations are under way with other
countries in order to define the terms of enhanced
bilateral military cooperation.
Peacekeeping is a global responsibility as well as
a global asset. As the United Nations recognizes the
African Union’s ability to make a unique contribution

28

My delegation endorses the need for a broader
and more institutionalized dialogue between the
Security Council and the Peace and Security Council of
the African Union. Such a dialogue must be informed
by the will to listen, thus allowing for a genuine
exchange of views with the aim of finding the most
appropriate avenues of cooperation between the two
organizations.
Brazil also believes that strengthening the ties
between the Secretariat and the Commission of the
African Union is of great importance. We welcome the
report’s suggestions in that regard. We look forward to
debating the Secretary-General’s forthcoming proposal
to reconfigure the Secretariat’s presence in Addis
Ababa in the Fifth Committee.
Concerning the financing of peacekeeping
operations carried out by the African Union under a
United Nations mandate, it seems to my delegation that
more work needs to be done. Building the African
Union’s capacity in the areas of budgeting, accounting
and management is certainly an important aspect of
that. Donors should also strive to harmonize their
accountability requirements and to make their funding
mechanisms more flexible, long-term and predictable.
The creation of a trust fund for African Union
peacekeeping operations is an idea that deserves
serious consideration. In our view, a trust fund could
have two valuable results. First, it could attract a
number of non-traditional donors who would find it
difficult to participate in such efforts through the
bilateral route. Secondly, by its very nature, the fund
could help to address the challenge of coordinating

09-57623

S/PV.6206

international cooperation, and thus make it more
effective.
In conclusion, I wish to mention the need for us
to see the maintenance of international peace and
security in Africa, as anywhere in the world, as a
process that is not, and cannot, be limited to
peacekeeping. Conflict prevention, post-conflict
peacebuilding and strong socio-economic development
are key to maintaining and consolidating political
stability. The Security Council, United Nations
agencies,
funds
and
programmes,
national
Governments and the Secretariat should redouble their
efforts to work together, under the principle of national
ownership, to effectively support the efforts being
made all over the African continent to build peaceful
and prosperous societies. Brazil will continue to do its
part.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): We thank you,
Mr. President, for allowing us to participate in this
important debate today on peace and security in Africa.
My delegation joins others in welcoming the presence
of His Excellency Mr. Romano Prodi at this important
debate. We also welcome the participation of UnderSecretaries-General Le Roy and Malcorra, and we
thank them for introducing the report of the SecretaryGeneral on support to African Union peacekeeping
operations authorized by the United Nations
(S/2009/470). We also wish to thank the Permanent
Observer of the African Union (AU) for his statement.
Our appreciation also goes to the Secretary-General for
his report and for his assessment of the important
recommendations contained in the report of the African
Union-United Nations panel (S/2008/813) chaired by
Mr. Prodi.
The United Nations Charter, as emphasized at the
2005 World Summit, recognizes the importance of
forging predictable partnerships and cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
in order to confront current and future peace and
security challenges. This recognition is articulated in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter VIII of the
Charter.
Our efforts towards a strategic partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union
(AU) in the maintenance of peace and security on our
continent are informed by the reality that regional

09-57623

organizations have a comparative advantage in
confronting such challenges within their regions, as
recognized by the Secretary-General in his report. The
comparative advantage is increasingly allowing the AU
to respond to conflicts in a proactive and rapid manner,
limiting the escalation of conflict and human suffering
in cases where the United Nations processes take a
long time to decide and deploy while the situation on
the ground is deteriorating. The comparative
advantages of such an approach are clearly evident in
the recent interventions by the African Union in the
Sudan and Somalia, as well as through its mediation
efforts and peace support operations, thus clearly
demonstrating its political will and commitment to
confronting peace and security challenges.
The African Union continues its efforts to
implement the African Peace and Security Architecture
to deal with conflict prevention in a sustainable
manner. Recalling resolution 1809 (2008), we are
cognizant that despite the demonstrated political will to
resolve conflicts, the availability of predictable
resources remains the most important constraint on
Africa’s capacity to give effect to those commitments
and help resolve its own conflicts. The increase in
peacekeeping operations in the past few years and the
increasingly important role regions play in preventing,
resolving and managing necessitate the continuation of
dialogue between the United Nations and the AU to
address that challenge.
We
expect
the
Security
Council,
in
acknowledgement of Africa’s efforts, to play its role as
the primary body responsible for the maintenance of
international peace and security, as provided for in its
Charter. That support cannot be rationalized by
advancing bureaucratic arguments to prevent us from
doing what is morally and politically correct. A clear
commitment and unambiguous message by this
Council will dispel the perception of many Africans
confronted by conflict that the international community
is apathetic and indifferent and, at worst, places
financial considerations above the interests of people’s
lives.
It is in this context that the current report of the
Secretary-General is to be welcomed. In acting on the
mandate of the Security Council as articulated in its
presidential
statement
of
18
March
2009
(S/PRST/2009/3), the Secretary-General reported on
practical ways to provide effective support for the
African Union when it undertakes peacekeeping

29

S/PV.6206

operations. The report provides useful proposals and a
detailed assessment of the recommendations contained
in the report of the African Union-United Nations
panel.
The report of the Secretary-General characterizes
the role of the African Union and its regional
organizations in supporting the Security Council under
Chapter VIII of the Charter as a welcome development
and makes important recommendations on how the
United Nations and the international community could
further ensure the sustainability and predictability of
Africa’s peacekeeping efforts that are mandated by the
United Nations. The report provides clear guidelines
and recommendations for ensuring a structured and
strategic relationship between the United Nations and
the African Union, which are worthy of serious
consideration and immediate implementation.
The proposed recommendation on financial
mechanisms also warrants particular attention and
further exploration. Whereas those developments are to
be welcomed and could form the basis for continued
support and engagement, they should not result in
complacency. Rather, in working with the African
Union, the United Nations should continue to review
and seek ways of ensuring predictable, flexible and
sustainable financing for peacekeeping operations
undertaken by the African Union.
It is my delegation’s view that the General
Assembly also could demonstrate its willingness to
strengthen Africa’s peacekeeping capacity and
capability by considering the recommendations of the
Secretary-General on financing options, just as the
Council is doing here today.
In conclusion, South Africa supports the
presidential statement to be adopted today by the
Security Council. We eagerly await the establishment
of the African Union-United Nations task team and its
subsequent report on the implementation of the
Secretary-General’s recommendations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Jomaa (Tunisia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the African Group.
Allow me at the outset to congratulate you,
Mr. President, upon your presidency of the Security
Council for this month and on the wise manner in
which you have been conducting the Council’s

30

proceedings. We want to thank Mr. Le Roy for his
presentation today and to welcome among us
Mr. Romano Prodi.
It has been seven months since the Security
Council adopted its presidential statement on the
agenda item “Peace and security in Africa” on
18 March 2009 (S/PRST/2009/3). That statement
constituted additional proof of the Council’s
recognition and awareness of the crucial importance of
establishing more effective strategic relationships
between the African Union and the United Nations.
The ongoing process of continuous consultations and
cooperation between the main bodies of both
organizations is indeed commendable and should be
further strengthened and improved.
We therefore welcome today’s Council meeting to
consider the Secretary-General’s report entitled
“Support to African Union peacekeeping operations
authorized by the United Nations”(S/2009/470), and
we hope it will contribute to achieving tangible
progress in this area.
While recognizing the Security Council’s primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, we are all well aware of the
increasing importance of regional arrangements in the
promotion of peace, security and stability in their
respective regions. Africa is a perfect example of this
rising new dynamism in regional arrangements.
The African Union has established a continental
peace and security architecture and has shown its
unswerving willingness and commitment to meet the
challenges faced by the continent in terms of security
and stability. The Peace and Security Council, the
initiatives undertaken by the Panel of the Wise, the
measures undertaken in the establishment of the
Continental Early Warning System and the measures
aimed at the launching of the African Standby Force
illustrate this new dynamic.
Nevertheless, Africa’s strong political will to
overcome the difficulties related to peace and security
on the continent needs to be bolstered by substantial
support for the African Union’s resource base and
capacities. That was in fact the spirit of the report of
the African Union-United Nations panel to consider the
modalities of how to support African Union
peacekeeping operations chaired by Mr. Prodi
(S/2008/813) and the main purpose of the SecretaryGeneral’s report. The issues dealt with were, first, how

09-57623

S/PV.6206

to establish a close strategic partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union and which
mechanisms and processes should be put in place to
enhance the partnership between the two organizations;
and secondly, what mechanisms are the most
appropriate to ensure the predictability, sustainability
and flexibility of financing African Union
peacekeeping operations authorized by the United
Nations.
In this context, the African Group would like to
share with Council members some of our observations
on these issues. We stress the importance of a more
developed and effective partnership between the
United Nations and regional organizations, especially
the African Union.
Secondly, we underline the importance of the
African Union-United Nations panel’s report, dated
31 December 2008, on the modalities for support to
African Union peacekeeping operations as a qualitative
and decisive step towards improving this partnership
for peacekeeping operations in Africa.
Thirdly, we take note of the recommendations in
the Secretary-General’s report of 18 September 2009.
Those recommendations, as underlined at the 206th
meeting of the African Union Peace and Security
Council held in Addis Ababa on 15 October 2009,
“provide a good basis for strengthening cooperation
between the African Union and the United Nations in
the maintenance of peace and security”.
Fourthly, we express the readiness of the African
Union to continue its consultations and close
cooperation with the United Nations in order to ensure
“predictable, sustainable and flexible funding for
African Union-led peace support operations”
(S/2009/470, para. 6).
Fifthly, we note with appreciation the
recommendations concerning capacity-building for
peacekeeping operations.
Sixthly, we underscore the crucial importance of
effective and continuous follow-up of these
recommendations and the means to implement them.
The African Group considers that maintaining the
momentum of fruitful discussion and consistent
consideration of these issues, and ensuring adequate
and timely follow-up on the agreed recommendations
and measures to be taken, is essential to achieving our
common ultimate goal: maintaining peace and security

09-57623

throughout the world by rendering peacekeeping more
effective and more compatible with the requirements of
each region.
The President: I call on the representative of
Nigeria.
Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): Mr. President, I thank
you for convening this debate on peace and security in
Africa as it relates to support for African Union
peacekeeping operations authorized by the United
Nations. The fact that this debate is taking place a few
months after a similar one under the presidency of
Libya (see S/PV.6092) is indicative of the importance
the Council attaches to the issue.
Nigeria commends the Secretary-General for his
incisive report contained in document S/2009/470, and
thank Ambassador Tete Antonio, Acting Permanent
Observer of the African Union, and Mr. Alain Le Roy,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
for their illuminating briefings to the Council.
Similarly, we recognize the presence of Mr. Romano
Prodi in our midst at this important debate.
The recognition by the framers of the United
Nations Charter that peace and stability are the
precursors of social and economic development
explains the special role given the Council on the
question of maintaining international peace and
security. Nigeria firmly supports the Security Council
in its primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. However, regional
organizations are a critical and integral component of a
broader global strategy for maintaining and
strengthening peace and security within the ambit of
Chapter VIII of the Charter.
My delegation is encouraged by the continued
close collaboration between the United Nations and the
African Union in their efforts to strengthen partnership
in the area of peace and security, and by the
cooperative endeavours of the two organizations
towards achieving peace and security in such
challenging situations as in Darfur and Somalia. The
Council should therefore build on lessons learned from
these endeavours in strengthening future cooperative
work.
If the African Union is to continue to undertake
responsibilities effectively and efficiently, it requires
robust support for its existing peace and security
architecture, which consists of the Peace and Security

31

S/PV.6206

Council, the Continental Early Warning System, the
Panel of the Wise, the African Standby Force and the
Peace Fund. Africa also needs sustainable, flexible and
predictable funding for peacekeeping operations, as
well as support for facilitating building the continent’s
peacekeeping capacity and institutional mechanisms.
For these reasons, Nigeria has been steadfast in
its commitment to the United Nations, the African
Union and the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) in regard to strengthening peace and
security, particularly at the regional levels. In this
regard, Nigeria has played a proactive role in regional
efforts to complement the Security Council’s primary
duty of maintaining peace and security and in
consonance with Chapter VIII of the Charter,
concerning regional arrangements. As chief motivator
for the creation of the ECOWAS Ceasefire Monitoring
Group in 1990, Nigeria provided the backbone of the
troops that enforced the Cotonou peace agreement for
Liberia, ended the civil war and military rule, and
restored democratically elected Governments in
Liberia and Sierra Leone.
As an active and founding member of the African
Union Peace and Security Council, Nigeria would like
to reiterate its firm support for the Secretary-General’s
recommendations on the panel’s report (S/2008/813),
as well as the detailed analysis provided in his latest
report. We are not unmindful that, no matter how
painstaking the exercise may be, it cannot address all
the peacekeeping challenges that have built up on the
African continent over the years. We are, however,
encouraged that, if genuinely implemented by all
stakeholders, the recommendations would indeed lay a
solid foundation for viable support to the African
Union peacekeeping operations authorized by the
United Nations.
The use of United Nations-assessed funding to
support United Nations-authorized African Union
peacekeeping operations, and the establishment of a
voluntarily funded multi-donor trust fund, canvassed
over the years as a panacea for the lingering problems
of peacekeeping in Africa, would be of immense
assistance. Similarly, there is a need to establish a trust
fund for capacity-building, the development of the
African Union’s logistics capacity, and the
establishment of a joint United Nations-African Union
team to examine the implementation of the panel’s
proposals.

32

While reaffirming the decision of world leaders,
as expressed in the 2005 World Summit Outcome
Document (General Assembly resolution 60/1), that the
development of African peacekeeping capacity should
be the central objective of the United Nations in the
next decade, Nigeria hopes that today’s debate will
assist the Council in forging a new consensus and
support for the proposals contained in the SecretaryGeneral’s report. Once more, we urge the Council to
adopt a presidential statement approving the five
financing mechanisms that have been proposed to fund
African Union peacekeeping operations, with a view to
strengthening the African Union’s capacity to respond
to the ever-growing peacekeeping and security
challenges in our region. We look forward to the
emergence of a robust and more strategic alliance
between the African Union Peace and Security Council
and the Security Council, as well as between the
United Nations Secretariat and the African Union
Commission.
The President: I now invite Mr. Antonio to
respond to comments and questions raised.
Mr. Antonio (spoke in French): Thankfully, there
were no questions addressed to the African Union, but
I could not leave this Chamber without thanking all the
members of the Security Council and all the
delegations that have taken the floor to once again
show their solidarity with Africa through their support
of the African Union. We have taken note of all the
concrete proposals that have been made, and I would
like to reaffirm the desire of the African Union to live
up to its part of the responsibilities.
At this late hour in the debate I would like to
underscore in particular Mr. Prodi’s remarks at the
outset of the meeting, referred to also by some
delegations, that the issue of peacekeeping operations
is just part of the problem. There is also the need for a
comprehensive approach. In many forums, we have
analysed the deep causes of conflict in Africa, which
we must bear in mind.
We have also spoken a great deal about the need
for a capacity-building plan for the African Union. I
would like to say here that capacity-building is part of
our concerns in the African Union. As the Council
knows, the African Union’s strategic plan has four
principal pillars — peace and security, peace and
development, shared values, and the building of
capacity in the African Union Commission. Thus,

09-57623

S/PV.6206

capacity-building is already a part of our concerns.
Everything the African Union needs can fall within the
framework of our cooperation with all partners, in
particular the United Nations, on capacity-building.
Having said that, I would like to reiterate that the
African Union is willing to work with all partners, and
in particular the United Nations, on moving forward
with these reflections that we have begun today —
reflections which only strengthen the need for a
multilateral approach to matters regarding Africa.
The President: I thank Mr. Antonio for his
clarifications and invite Mr. Le Roy to respond to
comments.
Mr. Le Roy (spoke in French): I would to
address just a few brief words of thanks to all
delegations for their support for the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2009/470), on support for the
United Nations-authorized African Union peacekeeping
operations. While not repeating what he said, I think
that the framework provided by Mr. Prodi was very
significant.
For our part, we remain firmly committed to
working with the African Union, and its Commission in
particular, to update the Security Council by next April
and, by then, to set up the joint United Nations-African
Union Commission task force and to restructure our
presence in Addis Ababa to be both more logical and
more cost-effective, as the representative of Japan also
requested.
Finally, as to the last element of our commitment,
I have been invited to participate three days hence in
the African Union Peace and Security Council summit
at the level of heads of State. Of course, I will be
present in Abuja in three days. I believe that at that
point we will discuss the Sudan and the Mbeki report.
This is yet another example of the ongoing
strengthened day-to-day cooperation between the
African Union Commission and the United Nations
Secretariat.
The President: I thank Mr. Le Roy for his
clarifications.
After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council recalls its previous
relevant resolutions and statements of its

09-57623

President which underscore the importance of
developing effective partnerships between the
United Nations and regional organizations, in
particular the African Union, in accordance with
the United Nations Charter and the relevant
statutes of the regional organizations.
“The Security Council reiterates its primary
responsibility under the Charter for the
maintenance of international peace and security
and recalls that cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations in matters relating to
the maintenance of international peace and
security, and consistent with Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations, can improve
collective security.
“The Security Council welcomes the
continuing important efforts and enhanced
peacekeeping role of the African Union and its
subregional organizations, consistent with
Security Council resolutions and decisions, to
prevent, mediate and settle conflicts in the
African continent.
“The Security Council reaffirms its
resolution 1809 (2008), which recognizes the
need to enhance the predictability, sustainability
and flexibility of financing regional organizations
when they undertake peacekeeping under a
United Nations mandate.
“The Security Council reiterates that
regional organizations have the responsibility to
secure human, financial, logistical and other
resources for their organizations, including
through contributions by their members and
support from donors. The Security Council
commends the support extended by donors to the
African Union Peace and Security Architecture
through specific mechanisms, including the
African Peace Facility.
“The Security Council recalls the statement
of its President (S/PRST/2009/3) in which it
requested the Secretary-General to submit a
report on practical ways to provide effective
support for the African Union when it undertakes
peacekeeping operations authorized by the United
Nations that includes a detailed assessment of the
recommendations contained in the report of the
African Union-United Nations panel (A/63/666S/2008/813), in particular those on financing, as

33

S/PV.6206

well as on the establishment of a joint African
Union-United Nations team. The Security
Council notes that the aforementioned report is an
important contribution towards the overall efforts
to enhance the capacity of the African Union in
undertaking peacekeeping operations.

“The Security Council notes the assessment
of the options for financing African Union
peacekeeping operations authorized by the
Security Council outlined in the report of the
Secretary-General and expresses its intention to
keep all options under consideration.

“The Security Council notes with
appreciation the report of the Secretary-General
on support to African Union peacekeeping
operations authorized by the United Nations
(A/64/359-S/2009/470).

“The Security Council notes that the
African Union needs to enhance its institutional
capacity to enable it to effectively plan, manage
and deploy peacekeeping operations. The
Security Council, in this regard, calls upon the
African Union, in the context of developing its
Strategic Plan for 2009-2012, to develop a longterm, comprehensive capacity-building road map,
in consultation with the United Nations and other
international partners.

“The Security Council reiterates the
importance of establishing a more effective
strategic relationship between the United Nations
Security Council and the African Union Peace
and Security Council and between the United
Nations Secretariat and the African Union
Commission. The Council encourages further
enhancement of regular interaction, coordination
and consultation between the United Nations and
the African Union on matters of mutual interest.
The Security Council notes the ongoing efforts by
the Secretariat and the Commission in this regard.
“The Security Council underlines the
importance of expediting the implementation, in
close consultation with other international
partners, of the 2006 United Nations-African
Union Ten-Year Capacity-Building Programme
for the African Union, mainly focusing on peace
and security, in particular the operationalization
of the African Union Standby Force and the
continental early warning system. The Security
Council supports the ongoing efforts to
strengthen the African Peace and Security
Architecture and reiterates its call for the
international community, particularly the donors,
to fulfil their commitments as endorsed by the
2005 World Summit Outcome document.
“The Security Council recognizes that, in
deploying peacekeeping operations authorized by
the Security Council, the African Union is
contributing towards maintenance of international
peace and security in a manner consistent with
the provisions of Chapter VIII of the United
Nations Charter.

34

“The Security Council underlines the need
for the United Nations and the African Union to
study the lessons learned from the Light and
Heavy Support Packages for AMIS, the logistics
package for AMISOM, as well as the
collaboration under UNAMID and the United
Nations Support Office for AMISOM (UNSOA),
in close consultation with other international
partners.
“The Security Council welcomes the
intention of the United Nations Secretariat and
the African Union Commission to set up a joint
task force on peace and security to review
immediate
and
long-term
strategic
and
operational issues.
“The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to update the Council by
26 April 2010 and submit a progress report no
later than 26 October 2010.”
This statement will be issued as a document of
the
Security
Council
under
the
symbol
S/PRST/2009/26.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.30 p.m.

09-57623
