TWENTY-SECOND

YEAR

MEETING: 1O/l 1 JUNE 1967

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l356)
Adoption of the agenda

... . .. ... . .. ... ,. ... ... .I .. . ..

Page

. ...,...... .. . .. . .. ... .,,. ,.. .. .... . ..

Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and
Denmark addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/7902) . . . . . .
Complaint of the representative of the United Arab Republic in a letter to the
President of the Security Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, is repeated aggression threatening peace and security in the Middle East
and endangering international peace and security” (S/7907) . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/79 10) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . , . . . . . . . . . , . . .
Letter dated 9 June 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics addressed to the President of the Security Council
concerning an item entitled: “Cessation of military action by Israel and
withdrawal of the Israel forces from those parts of the territory of the United
Arab Republic, Jordan and Syria which they have seized as the result of an
aggression”(S/7967)
..,........................I...........

SIPV.1356

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. , .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Secutity Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

L
.I.”

THIRTEEN

HUNDRED AND FIFTY-SIXTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Saturday, 10 June 1967, at 9.15 p.m.
&es&nt:

Mr. Hans R. TABOR (Denmark).

letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/791 0)

Preserzt: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France, India, Japan, Mali, Nigeria, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and United States of America.

Letter dated 9 June 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
addressed to the President of the Security Council
concerning an item entitled: “Cessation of military action
by Israel and withdrawal of the Israel forces from those
parts of the territory of the United Arab Republic,
Jordan and Syria which they have seized as the result of
an aggression” (S/7967)

Provisional agenda (SiAgendall356)

1. Adoption

of the agenda.

2. Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and Denmark addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/7902).
3.

Complaint of the representative of the United Arab
Republic in a letter to the President of the Security
Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and
security in the Middle East and endangering international peace and security” (S/7907).

4.

Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/7910).

1. .The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisions
previously taken by the Council, I shall now, with the
consent of the Council, invite the representatives of Israel,
the United Arab Republic, the Syrian Arab Republic and
Jordan to take places at the Council table, and the
representatives of Lebanon, Iraq, Morocco, Saudi Arabia,
Kuwait, Tunisia and Libya to take the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber, in order to
participate without vote in the discussion.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. G. Rafael (Israel},
Mr. M. A. El Kony (United Arab Republic), Mr. G. J
Tomeh (Syria) and Mr, M. H. El-Farra (Jordan) took places
at the Council table, and Mr. S. Chammas [Lebanonj, Mr.
K. Khalaf (Iraq), Mr. A. T. Benhima (Morocco), Mr. J, M.
Baroody (Saudi Arabia), Mr. S. Al-Shaheen (Kuwait),
Mr. M. Mestiri (Tunisia) and Mr. W. El Bouri (Libya) took
the places reserved for them

5. Letter dated 9 June 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
addressed to the President of the Security Council
concerning an item entitled: “Cessation of military
action by Israel and withdrawal of the Israel forces
from those parts of the territory of the United Arab
Republic, Jordan and Syria which they have seized as
the result of an aggression” (S/7967).
Adoption

2. The PRESIDENT: When we adjourned this morning it
was on the understanding that all members would keep
themselves available for an urgent meeting in case of an
emergency situation. Against this background I decided, in
response to an urgent request of the Permanent Representative of the United of Soviet Socialist Republics, to convene
this meeting on short notice.

of the agenda

The ageryda was adopted.

3. I have received
the following
letter from
Mr. Fedorenko, the representative of the Soviet Union:

Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and Denmark addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/7902)

“In view of the continuation of military activities by
Israel despite the adoption of the cease-fireresolutions by
the Security Council, I have the honour to request an
immediate meeting of the Security Council on 10 June
1967 to consider the question of the flagrant violation by
Israel of the Security Council’s decisions calling for the
cessation of military activities.“[S/7970./

Complaint
of the representative
of the United Arab
Republic in a letter to’ the President of the Security
Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and
security in the Middle East and endangering international
peace and security” (S/7907)

1

Member of the United Nations with the same right as other
Members-in order to carry out a further aggressiveraid on
its capital.

4. The Security Council will now continue its discussion
of the four items inscribed on its agenda. Since our last
meeting, a joint draft resolution has been submitted by
Argentina, Brazil and Ethiopia, and distributed in document S/7968.

11. We would ask what limits are there to this’cynicism.
,What do the so-called representatives of Tel-Aviv take the
Security Council for.7 When are these lies and this deceit
going to be stopped.7 Surely all this confirms, the assessment of the situation and of the IsraeI Government’s
activities, which was given by the Soviet delegation at the
Security Council’s last meeting, namely, that Tel-Aviv is
deliberately deceiving and misinforming the Council.

5. Mr. FEDORENKO
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): This urgent meeting of
the Security Council has been convened at the request of
the Soviet Union in connexion with a further flagrant
violation by Israel of the Security Council’s decisions
calling for a cease-fire and cessation of military activities.

12. It is a matter to be deeply deplored and condemned
that the mighty protectors of the hardened liars who
represent Tel-Aviv are sitting here at our table. The Council
cannot associate itself with war maniacs, who look at things
blindfolded and not with open eyes.

6. Soon after the Security Council had adjourned this
morning, a further raid was carried out on the capital of the
Syrian Arab Republic, Damascus, by Israel military aircraft.
The city was subjected to a new bombing attack by
Tel-Aviv’s marauding air force. In addition, according to
accurate and verified information, fighting continued in the
direction of Damascus, fifty-five kilometres from the
capital of Syria, in the region of Kuneitra. According to the
Soviet Union’s own reliable sources of information, the
Israel air force carried out a bombing attack at 12 o’clock
New York time on the capital of Syria, the city of
Damascus. Thus, the Council is once again witnessing a
most flagrant violation by Israel of the Security Council’s
decisions and of its repeated appeals for an immediate
cease-fire and the cessation of military activities.

13. The new facts concerning Israel’s war crimes confirm
that there is no reason whatever for the Security Council to
have any confidence in Tel-Aviv. Israel’s actions towards
the Arab States and its unceasing violations of the Security
Council’s decisions are nothing but a direct mockery-1
repeat, mockery-of the principles of international law, and
a mockery of the United Nations and of the Security
Council itself and its decisions. We say this in ord.er to
ensure that no one shall have any doubts on this score, and
that no one shall be under any delusion. We understand
perfectly well what is going on here and we know in what
direction they are trying to side-track the work of the
Security Council.

7. At the morning meeting, when the Council was considering the question of the continuation
of Israel’s
aggressive acts against the Syrian Arab Republic, it was
perfectly obvious, as is clear from the Secretary-General’s
reports, that the Israel aggressor had not abandoned his
intention of acting in defiance of the Security Council’s
decisions, and of trying to achieve his military objectives in
the territory of the Syrian Republic.

14. In our earlier statements we have already drawn
attention to the fact that, in pursuing their aggressivel;olicy
tactics, Israel’s leaders are copying the infamous tachcs of
the Nazi criminals. As you will remember, this comment
aroused the hypocritical displeasure of the representative bf
Tel-Aviv.

8. Many members of the Security Council have in their
statements condemned these acts by Tel-Aviv. The delegations of a number of countries members of the Security
Council have noted with alarm in their statements the fact
that the Israel air force has been carrying out gangsterous
raids on the capital of Syria and the surrounding area, and
they have pointed out that this fact has been confirmed
beyond doubt by United Nations representatives in their
reports to the Secretary-General which are before us on the
table.

15. But facts speak louder and more convincingly than
any excuses. And the facts are as follows: the Israel
Minister of Information and the Minister of Defence, IMoshe
Dayan, hastened to declare that Israel would never go back
to its old frontiers which were established under the
Armistice Agreements, and that they were intending to
demand that the land seized from the United Arab
Republic, Jordan and other countries should be annexed to
their territory.

9. However, while the representatives of certain Western
Powers-and particularly
the United States of America-were endeavouring to lead the Council into a morass of
casuistry and to obscure the perfectly clear picture of the
crime committed by Tel-Aviv, Israel’s aggression against
Syria was continuing and indeed it is still going on.

16. We would like to ask what right have they to do this.
What right does the aggressor have to claim that his
brigandage should be rewarded with land seized. from
neighbouring peoples.7 Does this not bring to mind the
grievous memory of the demands made by the leaders of
the Reich for so-called Lebensraum-I do not think Ihere is
any need to remind you of this, Mr. President-that
Lebensraum for which they unleashed the Second World
War? Does this not remind us of the Hitlerite leaders’
cynical arguments about the “natural frontiers” which
Fascist Germany was to reach in its criminal pre:datory
war?

10. We have already noted with indignation that it is
intolerable for the Security Council to be involved in a
shameful spectacle, a farce, a competition in false statements; and at the very moment when the person who
speaks here on behalf of Tel-Aviv was incessantly repeating
the false assertions that Israel had accepted the cease-fire,
squadrons of the Israel air force were crossing the frontier
of the Syrian Arab Republic-a
sovereign State, and a

17. The Security Council must call the high-handed
aggressors to order and compel them to respect the S’ecurity
2

Council not in their statements-to’ which no credence
whatsoever can be attached-but in their deeds, and to
cease military activities against Syria and ,other Arab States
immediately.
18. The Council has no right to wait any longer in
decisively condemning the Israel aggressors for their flagrant violation of the Security Council’s decisions. The
peoples know full well the value of the false assertions
made by the aggressors and their accomplices concerning
their love for peace.
19. The PRESIDENT: Before I call on the next speaker on
my list, I shall give the floor to the Secretary-General to
give the Council the information currently available to him
on the question before us.
20. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
As members will recall, at the end of this morning’s meeting (1355th meeting/
I had informed them of the proposal for a cease-fire
arrangement which was being presented to both sides by
the Chief of Staff, General Odd Bull. Shortly after the
meeting adjourned, word was received from General Bull
that he had been notified by both sides of their acceptance
of his cease-fire arrangement which was to go into effect at
1630 hours GMT. That message was circulated to the
Security Council as document S/7930/Add.2.
21. Since the time fixed for the cease-fire I have received
very little information and therefore I can give the Council
only a limited report. I must say frankly that I prefer not to
make fragmentary reports because they can often be
misleading, but in view of the fact that the Council is
requiring information from me while its meetings are under
way, and since the observers themselves, because of war
conditions and restrictions on their movements and communications,
are unable to observe and report as they
normally
do, I have no choice but to give you the
information
as I get it, which is in the form of “flash”
reports from the field. Before the Council had adjourned
this morning, I sent to the Chief of Staff, General Odd Bull,
a request for information on the following five questions:
(1) Has aerial activity stopped, does it continue and if so
where?
(2) Does artillery shelling continue and if so where and by
whom?
(3) Is there a continuation of shelling of Israel villages and
if so where or has it ceased?
(4) To what extent have the troops of Israel penetrated
into Syria and where do they remain?
(5) How close to Damascus did Israel troops approach?
22. Late this afternoon I received the following response
from General Bull on those questions:
“Confirmed
reports sparse since no United Nations
observation in area of hostilities. Following as full and
accurate as possible:
“(1) Tiberias reports from 1400 hours GMT to 1700
hours GMT of continuous helicopter flights, to and from

Israel/Syria, probably resupply and casualty evacuation.
Helicopters carrying navigation lights as light faded, At
1647 hours GMT, Damascus reported air bombing by two
Delta-winged aircraft in area seven to ten kilometres in
southerly direction from Damascus. Commenced 1639
hours GMT. Aircraft not identified due to distance but
seen by United Nations military observers at Israel-Syrian
Mixed Armistice Commission headquarters. Confirm delinitely bombing, although strike could not be seen due to
intervening buildings.”
In this connexion I would point out that this wasseventeen
minutes after the cease-fire arrangement was to go into
effect, which was, as I had reported earlier, 1630 hours
GMT.
“(2) At 1752 hours GMT, three United Nations military
observers in Tiberias area reported four artillery guns
firing from position north of observation post Delta.
Target area not seen but flashes observed. Indicate firing
from east to west (Syria to Israel), At 1805 hours GMT,
artillery fire continues from positions one to one and a
half kilometres north of observation post Delta.
“(3) No reports from Tiberias, which has no observation over area of Israel settlements excepting Syrian
demilitarized zone, but artillery fire reported in paragraph 2 indicates Syrian fire towards Israel from Syrian
position location Hill 62.
“(4) Both Israel and Syrian authorities confirm occupation of Kuneitra by Israel forces. Israel claims prior to
cease-fire.
“(5) No report of Israel troops closer to Damascus than
Kuneitra-approximately
sixty-eight kilometres by road
south-west from Damascus.”
23. I’ also received the following message from the
Chairman of the Israel-Syrian Mixed Armistice Commission:
“Following message received from senior Syrian delegate on 10 June at 1953 hours GMT: ‘Israel paratroops
dropped at Tsil (approximately thirty kilometres east Of
Lake Tiberias) and at Rafid (approximately twenty
kilometres south.south-east of Kuneitra) from he!!copters’,”
24. I have subsequently asked the Chief of Staff to send to
me with greatest urgency all information available to him
on the reported bombing of Damascus or its vicinity and on
any other breaches of the cease-fire arrangement. I have
asked him to give me all possible information on the general
situation with regard to the observance of the cease-fire
arrangement and on the steps being taken to achieve full
observance of the cease-fire. I have also asked him to
indicate what steps have been taken to deploy observers on
both sides of the Line, including Kuneitra, as envisaged in
the cease-fire arrangement.
2.5. The latest report I have received from General Bull,
which came in not long ago, is as follows:
“Reference Secretary-General’s statement to the Security Council on morning of 10 June, following situation
regarding implementation of cease-fire.

-

i
I

“(1) I proposed a cease-fire together with no further
movement of troops to be effective at 1630 hours GMT,
10 June. This proposal was accepted by both parties.

know what is going on at the front, then we should like to
ask who does know what is going on at the front and who is
carrying out this aggression? Perhaps it is someone else?
Perhaps it is someone else sitting here at our table? We
would like to have an answer to this.

“(2) I instructed the Chairman of the Israel-Syrian
Mixed Armistice Commission to re-establish Kuneitra
control centre in the afternoon of 10 June and informed
Israel authorities accordingly. Chairman dispatched an
advance group of observers accompanied by three Syrian
liaison officers towards Kuneitra for this purpose, but
when they arrived at Sasa (approximately
forty kilometres from Kuneitra) it was learned that the latter town
had been invested by Israel forces. It was thus impossible
to achieve this first stage of deployment of [United
Nations] observers as planned.

30. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Syria, on whom I now call.
31. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): I wish to thank the Secret.ary
General for the reports that he has read out to us. I should
like to emphasize, at the same time, that my delegation
would have been able to make a fuller analysis of and a
more detailed commentary on those reports if it had had
the texts. As members will have noted, many names and
many different hours have been mentioned in the reports
which makes it difficult for us at this time to comment
fully on the aggression by the Israel forces against Syria and
on their systematic invasion of the land of a Member State
of the United Nations. May I add in passing that this
Member State, Syria, is one of the founding Members of the
United Nations which took part in the drafting of the San
Francisco Charter.

“(3) It was planned to position first group of observers
immediately after cease-fire became effective and as soon
as possible on both sides in the battle area. Due to the
changing situation this could not be done prior to
darkness on 10 June.
“(4) It is our intention as soon as possible commencing
morning 11 June to arrange for the deployment of
observers from both sides in an orderly fashion into the
battle area. Until observers can be deployed, UNTSO is
without definite knowledge regarding the troops on the
ground and has no ability to observe any developments.
Isolated pockets of resistance are likely to exist within
which troops may not be under the control of or even in
communication
with their national authorities. Under
such conditions UNTSQ. is in no position to provide
definite information or useful observation on the ceasefire situation.

32. My remarks on the reports of the Secretary-General
are the following: First, Israel planes attacked Damascus
and bombarded Damascus seventeen minutes after the time
which had been fixed for the cease-fire. The Nsrael
representative cannot claim, nor can the Israel authorities
claim, that they did not know of the time specified for the
cease-fire.
33. The second point, one of the utmost importance, has
already been established-a point on which you will
remember, Mr. President, we had to call you and disturb
you last night at 2 a.m.-and that is the occupation of
Kuneitra. . The representative of the Soviet Union has
already taken up and clarified this point. Kuneitra is
occupied now and was occupied at the time when the
representative of the Tel-Aviv authorities was telling the
Council, in one intervention after another, one statement
after another, that Kuneitra had not been occupied.

“(5) The difficulties are heightened by the fact that
armed forces of one party are deep in the territory of the
other.”
26. Mr. FEDORENKO
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): We must be grateful to
the Secretary-General for his detailed report on the actual
state of affairs.

34. Third, that beyond Kuneitra, the invading Israel
hordes from occupied Palestine have also occupied Sasa,
which is on the way to Damascus.

27. We have seen once again how far the Israel forces have
gone in their aggressive acts and how far the representatives
of Tel-Aviv have gone in their lies.

35. Fourth, that paratroopers have been dropped in Tsil
and Rat-id. If I followed the Secretary-General closely, as 1
tried to do, that happened at 19 hours and some minutes.
This was also after the cease-fire order.

28. Two very obvious facts, among others, are clear from
the Secretary-General’s report. First, the raid by Israel
military aircraft on the capital of Syria, Damascus. Need I
recall how many hours we have spent here listening to the
endless, irresponsible and shameless assertions that there
had in fact been no bombing? Secondly, the occupation of
Kuneitra by Israel forces.

36. Fifth, that the bombing by the Israel forces and Air
Force have not ceased.
37. These were not allegations, as some members of the
Security Council have attempted to say in order to decrease
the importance and gravity of the situation that we are
facing; these were facts.

29. You will remember how we spent the whole morning
listening to the endless “evidence” given by the Israel
representative to the effect that this town had not been
occupied by the Israel invaders. Was this not pure deceit?
After this, can we really listen to him here and trust what
he says? And the Israel representative was not speaking for
himself. Look at the verbatim record-he was referring to
his Government. If those to whom he was referring do not

38. After the reports that have been read to us IOYthe
Secretary-General, it must now be crystal clear to all
members of the Council who it is that is lying to the
Council, -to the United Nations and to the international
4

community. But more important than that, it must be
crystal clear who is protecting the liar. For the Security
Council this morning saw the protector of the liar remove
the mask from his face and come to the defence of the
aggressor, in language, to my regret, so vindictive that I
would hesitate even to repeat it. I must say, in all humility,
that I was one of those who drafted the charter of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization in London in 1945 and since then I have been, on
and off, in the United Nations. Never in my life have I
heard here such vindictive language as I heard today. In
saying this, I am not trying to be personal or vindictive; I
say it because it is directly related to the problem we are
discussing now. It is directly related to the acts of piracy,
aggression and genocide committed by the protected Israel
Zionist hordes and their benefactors in the United States of
America.
39. This is not in the least to be minimized, because as the
Security Council sits here discussing this grave situation, we
are not facing the Israelis alone. I am glad, in a way, that
the representative of the United States unmasked himself
this morning and showed his real face, showed who is the
real aggressor.
40. The PRESIDENT: I have no other speakers on my list
at present. I have listened very carefully to what the
representative of Syria said-namely, that it might facilitate
our work if we had before us the report submitted by the
Secretary-General to the Council. I wonder whether members would like to have the report before we proceed, or if
they want to continue the debate immediately.
41, Mr. PARTHASARATHI
(India): In my intervention
early this morning (1354th meeting] I drew the attention
of the Council to the grave situation that had been created
by the flagrant defiance by one of the parties of the
resolutions adopted by the Security Council ordering a
cease-fire. I said in that statement that the SecretaryGeneral’s report clearly established that Damascus had been
bombed. Since then we have had more information from
the area and the Secretary-General has given us several
reports which amply confirm that the Damascus area, and
perhaps the city of Damascus also, have been repeatedly
bombed.
42, When we were discussing this question, all during this
morning, some doubts were raised as to whether Damascus
had been bombed, Some doubts were also raised as to
whether Israel forces were moving into Syrian territory.
43. NOW, to sum up very briefly what the reports have
conveyed to us: First, there is no doubt whatsoever that the
Damascus area has been bombed, Second, Kuneitra has
been occupied by Israel forces. Third, Israel forces have
driven deep into Syrian territory. Fourth, there has been
some shelling, though direct evidence is not available, from
the Syrian side.
44. But it is evident that what has happened in that area is
that the Israel forces have occupied an extensive area in the
northern part; and if we are to go by the reports in the
Presscoming from Israel, the objective that Israel wants to
achieve in the area is very clear,

45. This morning I said that this created a very grave
situation and that we should have to take swift action not
only to assert the authority of this Council but also to
ensure that such defiance and such loss of life should not be
allowed to continue.
46. Having stated this, I would suggest that we should
recess for a little while, study very carefully the written
report of the Secretary-General, and meet again.
47. The PRESIDENT:
United Arab Republic.

I call on the representative of the

48. Mr. EL KONY (United Arab Republic): Hardly more
than a few hours after we had a lengthy meeting of the
Security Council, during which members of the Council
reiterated their positions in firm support of the cease-fire
order, and at the end of which the Council was made to
understand that at long last its order for a cease-fire was
about to enter into effect, hardly more than a few hours, as
I say, after that meeting we are once more faced with the
same ugly behaviour on the part of the Israelis.
49. Warning after warning was directed to and put before
the Council that the Israelis are full of bad faith. Or are we
to assume that they are depending heavily on outside
support, the same support which was furnished readily and
generously by two great Powers, permanent members of the
Security Council, when the Israelis made a dastardly attack
on my country? Apparently, the determination among the
Israelis and their supporters, namely, the United States and
the United Kingdom, is to continue a specific line by which
they can achieve a definite task. That task, in their minds
and in their hearts, is to face not only the Arab States but
most definitely also the Security Council with a fait
accompli. They want to achieve their own selfish unprincipled interests by committing aggression. That is their
method in reaching their goals: unholy alliances, secretly
concluded, have always been their motto in dealing with
colonial affairs. They are repeating, together with their
tool, Israel-their subservient tool-this same unjust, unfair
and wicked policy. Colonialism followed that policy in Asia
and applied it in Africa, and it is most scrupulously being
adopted in our part of the world. These policies are
doomed no matter how strong or how large the armadas
and forces behind them. We state again, and indeed we shall
continue to reiterate, our appeal that the Security Council
should discharge its responsibilities on behalf of peace and
justice.
50. The bombardment of Damascus by the Israelis is
atrocious, It is still continuing after the cease-fire. The
invasion of Syria continued after the cease-fire. This
flagrant violation of the cease-fire should be condemned by
the Security Council, It is time for this Council to act and
to act quickly. It is to be regretted that through the tactics
of the United States delegation the Security Council has
been paralysed up to now.
5 1. Mr, TARABANOV
(Bulgaria) (translated from
French): It is hardly surprising that there are scarcely any
speakers here from some delegations at this stage in our
debate, now that we have heard the Secretary-General’s
report on the additional crimes committed by the Tel-Aviv
authorities and gangs of international adventurers.

57. The world wastruly shocked by the arrogance, infamy
and treachery of those who launched this aggressi
to
stake their lust for the property and territory of others.

52. Since Israel launched its aggression against the Arab
countries, some delegations here have demonstrated such
anxiety-the
sign of a guilty conscience-that they now
cannot condemn the aggression and instead are seeking to
excuse and encourage it.

58. The equivocation in which the representative from
Tel-Aviv indulged this morning when he claimed he hald no
idea where the Israel troops were, that he did not know
that those troops had occupied Kuneitra-excuse me, if I
mispronounce the name-or that a particular bombardment
or troop movement was going on somewhere or other, all
that was of course designed to create this atmosphere of
doubt so as to allow the aggression to rage until the very
last moment, and even after the cease-fire.

53. Three days have gone by since the Security Council
adopted its first cease-fire resolution [233 (1967)], which
it was hoped would put an end to all military activities in
the region and lead to the withdrawal of the aggressor’s
troops behind the position they won through their assault.
This was done in order to halt the aggression, re-establish
peace in that part of the world, put out the fires of war at
their source and remove the threat to international peace
and security they represent.

59. That is a very serious crime. The Israel Minister of War
did not ask for the cease-fire. The Security Council had
been appealing for the cease-fire for three days. We had
allowed two hours to find out whether the cease-fire was
being observed. We were led to believe that it was, or at
least an attempt was made to get us to believe it, whereas
two days later, the bombings and attacks on Syria and the
other Arab countries were still continuing.

54. However, certain countries which are members of the
Security Council and their delegations, most of all, of
course, the United States and Israel delegations-the latter
taking part in the Council’s work as the representative of
the aggressor nation-naturally
did not consider the matter
in that light. On the contrary, they have done everything to
confuse the issue and present the situation and positions in
a most unusual light. By their attitude they have encouraged further aggression for several days now, beyond
the cease-fire deadline established not by the Israel authorities, but by the Security Council. They have thus aided and
abetted the imperialist circles in the United States and the
Israel adventurers who conspired to strike at the independent Arab countries, thereby establishing and entrenching an
imperialist outpost in the Middle East personified by the
State of Israel.

60. Some of the Council members at this table compladned
that the information the Secretary-General had provided
within his limited means wasnot enough as a basis for them
to condemn the aggression. But now that the aggressor has
occupied the territory they wanted him to occupy, the
same persons can permit themselves to expresssome sort of
regret. But what counted was to stop the aggressor. The
aggression should have been prevented from continuing.
But those individuals did nothing of the sort. Instead, they
held up the Council’s work. We are all aware that isome
delegations worked incessantly exerting tremendous pressure on other deleg. tions, sowing trollble and doubt. ‘They
already had the information they needed. There can be no
doubt, for example, that the United States delegation had
detailed information on what was going on at the front.
There can be no doubt that other well-informed delegations
representing old empires or benefiting from their assistance
knew what was happening in the Arab countries. Their ties
there are much too strong for them not to have been
informed, but they complained that they were not.

55. The extremist circles now governing Israel, which owes
its existence to a United Nations decision, and certain
imperialist circles in the United States were not pleased
with the Arab nations’ determined and firm resistance to
Israel’s perfidious attack. After scoring early victories which
enabled it to attack vital Arab centres with unparalleled
violence, Israel has continued to act like an international
adventurer and has continued its aggression inside the Arab
countries in defiance of Security Council resolutions and
the unanimous desire of world opinion. The purpose of this
continued aggression-which has recently been the subject
of statements just about everywhere, in the Israel press,
radio and television transmitted to the United States-was
of course to overthrow the legitimate Governments of the
progressive Arab countries if possible, and to establish
regimes that would be submissive instruments in the hands
of the imperialistic and adventurous circIes which had
seized power in Israel. The next step was to occupy Arab
territory so as to use it later as an asset to back up the
territorial claims already being voiced with considerable
propaganda support almost all over the world, and particularly in the United States of America.

6 1. That was the situation when Israel was to be allowed
to pursue its aggressive course. We were told that Kuneitra
was not occupied. We will no doubt hear some representatives say: “Kuneitra was occupied between the time I
said it was not and the effective cease-fire called for by our
Minister for National Defence, Moshe Dayan.” It is easy to
pick a moment when it can be admitted that Kuneitra was
occupied; but we know that it was occupied before then.
We know that the Israelis were there, but they did not want
to admit it because they were determined to SOW doubt.
62. We shall be told that all those actions were launched in
retaliation for artillery fire on various Israel villages. But
those are only excuses. The victim of aggression cannot
cease defending himself until the aggressor has ceased fire.
The party who began the fighting is the one who must stop,
and not the victim. Do you think that someone whose
house has been, broken into by an intruder intending to
attack and rob him will not defend himself because the
intruder is brandishing a pistol? Even if he did not have the

56. Indeed, it was no mere chance that all the statements
made by Israel authorities-the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
the Permanent Representative from Tel-Aviv here, among
others-were intended to create an atmosphere of doubt,
‘for the aggression against the Arab countries could continue
under this veil of doubt; occupation of the territory could
continue; Damascus and other towns and villages in Syria
and the other Arab countries could be bombed.
6

slightest chance, he would defend himself, because he is a
courageous man. A courageous people is defending itself
and we support those who defend themselves in the struggle
for national independence and freedom. The Bulgarian
nation and many other countries which fought for years
and even centuries against foreign domination or against
dictators to win their national independence are now the
staunchest defenders of all peoples seeking to free themselvesfrom colonial and imperialistic domination.

devoting ourselves to with all of the resources at our
command. Instead of that, much of the time of the Council
is devoted to diatribes against my country about alleged
involvement in this conflict. I have stated many times, and I
again wish to state, that the United States is in no way
involved in this conflict, but, on the contrary, has used its
influence here and diplomatically in the interests of, first,
avoiding the conflict, and then bringing it to an end. We
have done more than make statements to the Council in
this regard. We have offered to have impartial observers of
the United Nations make a determination with respect to
the charges that have been made. I have not heard from
those who make the charges any willingness on their part to
subscribe to this point of view. But what better proof can
there be of lack of involvement than a willingness to have
charges of this type, which are false and malicious, put to
the test of impartial observation? In fact, I pointed out
what was quite clear: that with respect to the canard that
the Sixth Fleet was involved in this exercise there was
another country with naval craft in the vicinity which could
enlighten the Council about this situation. What I was
referring to in that connexion is perfectly obvious. Here
again tonight we have had another illustration of this, and
all I can say again-and I will continue to say it-is that
there is no involvement on the part of the United States,
that we are quite willing to have the charges that were made
investigated impartially, and that it does not serve the cause
of peace to repeat these baseless charges.

63. That is why we cannot allow such deeds to be
committed by certain States, by certain imperialistic circles,
whether they are provoking or actually directing those
actions. That is also why the full sympathy of the Bulgarian
people and other nations who have fought for their
freedom is on the Arab side.
64. It will be no mere coincidence when we learn from
press dispatches that the People’s Republic of Bulgaria has
broken off diplomatic relations with Israel. For what is the
use of maintaining diplomatic relations with a State that
has turned adventurer and become an outpost of imperialism? Nor is it any mere coincidence that the Czechoslovak
Socialist Republic has just broken off diplomatic relations
with Israel. And it will be no mere coincidence if other
socialist countries announce that they are going to break
off diplomatic relations with Israel or have already done so.
We cannot, we must not allow an international adventurer
to set itself up as an outpost of imperialism in the Arab
world and lay the foundations for neocolonialism in Africa
and Asia.

68. We were the ones who proposed last night that we
should receive reports, and we welcome very much the fact
that that is now being done. We very much appreciate the
straightforward way in which our distinguished Secretary
General has rendered these reports, in which he has pointed
out the facts and pointed out the limitations, and has urged
that further facts should be obtained so that this Council
can act appropriately. We do, however, have some facts
before us, and we have indicated a willingness throughout
to act upon such facts, and to act in an even-handed and
impartial way. Indeed, we have tried to make it very clear
that it is the obligation of both Israel and Syria to comply
strictly with the cease-fire order, This is not the final task
of the Council, but it is the essential first task.

65. Under these circumstances, we believe that the Security Council must take a decision as soon as possible,
immediately, if possible. It must condemn the international
pirates who have launched aggression against the Arab
countries. It must also condemn the masterminds of that
aggression, who are to be found all over and whose
representative is in this room. The Council must take
decisions and see to it that they are respected. It must
decide that the occupation troops must immediately leave
the countries they are occupying. It must take steps to
ensure that all the agreements already concluded will be
firmly respected and that peace will be preserved and
maintained in the Near East and throughout the world.

69. We have a very grave situation in the Middle East. To
rebuild the fabric of peace in the area is going to be very
difficult. We all know that. To quench the flames of war is
very difficult. We ought first of all to have a cessation of all
military activity, and end to the conflict. This is the first
and primary task, although it is not the final task. We will
have to go on to other matters which were mentioned in
the resolution we have submitted to the Security Council

66. The PRESIDENT:
The Secretary-General has informed me that ,his report to the Council is being
reproduced and will be distributed to members in less than
half an hour.’
67. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): It has
been the consistent view of my Government from the very
beginning of this conflict that the Security Council should
have a single goal: to quench the flames of war in the Near
East and to begin to move towards peace in the area.
Throughout our deliberation on this subject we have
attempted by all the means at our disposal to expedite the
action of this Council and the action of the United Nations
in this direction. This is our task; this is what we should be
‘1 The.report
subsequently

SG/SM/742.

I

[S/7952/Rev.2].

70. It does not help to have invective in this situation.
Invective does not take the place of progress. I should like
to make it very clear that it has not been my practice at any
time in the United Nations to impugn the veracity or
integrity of anyone representing his country at the United
Nations. But when charges are made against the United
States that have no foundation, it is the plain obligation of
the representative of the United States to rebut those
charges and to place before the Council the facts, or the
means of verifying the facts.

of the Secretary-General, dated 10 June 1967, was
circulared as United Nations Press Release

7

“1. Condemnsany and all violations of the cease-fire;

7 1. There is another point that I mentioned earlier which I
think is very clear, and that is that I respect the right of
every member of this Council to represent his country. I do
not imply that any member of the Council in appearing
here represents anybody other than his country. When a
remark is made that the representative of the United States
speaks perhaps for some country other than his own, I take
strong exception, and I think justifiably so. Such a remark
should not be countenanced by an international organization. We speak for our countries, we state their policies,
and we attempt to the best of our abilities to present the
point of view of our countries to this Council. That is the
responsibility of every member, and I respect any member
who does that with all the energy and vigour at his
command. That is all I meant by my statement this
morning. I will not accept from anybody the concept that
in speaking here I speak from any other basis than the
interests of the United States of America whom I proudly
represent before this Council. Any imputation to the
contrary I will not tolerate, nor do I think any diplomatic
body should tolerate it, because it is inconsistent with the
attitude that we owe each other as colleagues at the United
Nations.

“2. Requests the Secretary-General to order a full
investigation of all reports of violations and to report to
the Security Council as soon as possible;
“3. Demandsthat the parties scrupulously respect its
cease-&e appeals contained in resolutions 233 (19(;7),
234 (1967) and 235 (1967);

“4. Culls upojz the Governments concerned to i;ssue
categoric instructions to all military forces to cease all
firing and military activities as required by these resolutions.” /S/7971.]
75. The PRESIDENT:
I now call on the SecretaryGeneral, who has asked to speak in order to submit to the
Council some supplementary information he has received.
76. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
I have just received
the following cable from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Israel:
“His Excellency U Thant,

72. Now the immediate question before us is a cease-fire
order, That is the problem we have at hand, that is why we
have been called into session twice today. Our concern is
that that cease-fire must be recognized. Both Syria and
Israel have given General Bull solemn assurances that they
accept the cease-fire and will fully implement it, It is a
source of encouragement to me from the SecretaryGeneral’s reports that incidents of violations, except those
that occurred possibly within a few minutes after this
agreement was made with General Bull, are not being
repeated. I sincerely hope that this is so, and I await more
detailed reports of the Secretary-General so that we .can
determine that hopefully now at least-and it should have
been earlier-the cease-fire is in effect.

“Secretary-Genera1 of the United Nations,
“United Nations Headquarters, New York
“Referring to your cable I wish to inform you that
orders were issued in accordance with the cease,.fire
arrangement reached with the assistance of your representative, General Odd Bull, with effect from yesterday
evening at 1830 hours local time. The cease-fire went
effectively into force at the appointed hour and has’
continued without interruption, The Israel forces are
adhering scrupulously to and maintaining fully the
cease-fire arrangement.
“‘(Signed) Abba EBAN
“Minister for Foreign A ff&W

73. This morning I was prepared to submit a draft
resolution, even on the basis of the fragmentary information
we had, condemning any violation of the
cease-fire by any source. It is interesting to me that while
we are accused of being involved, which we are not, those
who make that accusation never make reference to their
condemnation of a violation of the cease-fire if it comes
from any source other than those whose cause they
advocate. We are advocating the cause of peace in the
Security Council, and we are advocating the cause of
respect for the cease-fire orders of the Council, and we take
the position that the cease-fire orders must be complied
with-1 repeat, must be complied with.

77. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of
India, who has asked to speak on a point of order.
78. Mr. PARTHASARATHI
(India): I formally move the
suspension of the meeting for half an hour under rule 33,
paragraph 1, of the provisional rules of procedure.
79. The PRESIDENT: A motion has been made under rule
33, paragraph 1, to suspend the meeting. According to rule
33: “Any motion for the suspension or for the simple
adjournment of the meeting shall be decided without
debate.”

74. To that end, I submit the following draft resolution,
which I shall now read, and ask to be distributed:

80. I call on the representative of France on a point of
order.

“The Security Council,

81. Mr. SEYDOUX (France) (translated from French):
Following up the Indian representative’s request, the
French delegation merely wished to ask the Secretary
General to give us, in addition to the reports already
mentioned, the latest information he may have received
during the past hour, so that we may each speak on the
basis of the most recent information,

“ffaving heard the reports of the Secretary-General on

the current situation,
“Gravely concerned at reports and complaints it has
received of air attacks, shellings, ground activities and
other violations of the cease-fire between Israel and Syria,
8

82. The PRESIDENT: The motion made by the representative of India is to suspend the meeting for half‘ an
hour. It is supplemented by a request by the representative
of France that the Secretary-General supplement the
information he has already submitted to the Council with
further information which he might have received in the
meantime.

than the one which formerly supervised the Syrian-Israel
border?
9 1. I realize that all this is difficult and may take a lot of
time; but in such a complex situation, we would consider it
most important-and
I think my colleagues would agree
with me-to have a complete and up-to-date report on the
questions I have mentioned and on others which might
arise.

83. I put to the vote the motion made by the representative of India to suspend the meeting for half an hour,

92. The PRESIDENT: I give the floor to the Secretary
General to reply to the questions raised by the representative of France.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
The ma tion was adopted unanimously.

93. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
In reply to the questions posed by the representative of France, I have the
following observations.

The meeting was suspended at IO.55 p.m. and resumed at
12.40 a.m.

84. Mr. SEYDOUX (France) (translated from French): My
delegation has studied the Secretary-General’s report of
10 June and concludes that the situation is still very
serious. The gravity of the developments reported prompts
me to ask several questions.

94. With respect to his first question, relating to paragraph 1 on page 2 of my report to the Security Council, we
have no further information from General Bull regarding
the recurrence of bombing, as I have stated in my report.
95. The second question related to paragraph 2 on the
same page, concerning firing from east to west, that is,
firing from Syria to Israel. We have no further information
from General Bull indicating that the firing was repeated or
that there was a recurrence of firing.

85. The first concerns paragraph 1 on page 2 of the
Secretary-General’s report. Most of the incidents reported
in that paragraph seem to have occurred shortly after the
cease-fire went into effect. We should like to know whether
such activities, which are very serious in themselves, have
persisted. That is our first question.

96. With respect to the third question relating to paragraph 4 on the same page, all we know concerning the
occupation of Kuneitra by Israel forces is contained in my
report, namely that Israel claims that its forces occupied
Kuneitra prior to the cease-fire. There was no other version
from the other side.

86. My second question relates to paragraph 2, concerning
artillery fire from east to west, from Syria to Israel. We
should like more details about the fire and should like to
know whether it is continuing.
87. Paragraph 4 mentions the occupation of Kuneitra. We
should like to know at what time the occupation occurred
and whether Kuneitra is actually the farthest Israel troops
have advanced along this road, which on the map is the
road to Damascus.

97. I have to report to the Council also that there is no
further report of any other air incident over Syria, or for
that matter over Israel.
98. In continuation of my answer regarding paragraph 4
on page 2, I have to report that the United Nations military
observers were not in Kuneitra when that town fell to the
Israelis, so we have no means, at least for the moment, of
checking whether Kuneitra fell to the Israelis prior to the
cease-fire or after the cease-fire. The United Nations
military observers are not in a position to report on this
point, at least for the moment.

88. Paragraph 5 at the bottom of page 3 of the same
report deals with the difficulties observers are encountering
because of the fact that the armed forces of one party have
penetrated deep into the territory of the other. We should
like to know whether Syrian territory apart from the
Kuneitra region has been entered, and if so, what is the
extent of the penetration.
89. My delegation would also like to take this opportunity
to pay a tribute to General Bull and his colleagues, who are
certainly doing all they can with the means at their
disposal. As the Secretary-General and his colleagues are no
doubt well aware, we are encountering transmission difficulties, and because of the slowness of transmission, our
information is already relatively old.

99. Regarding the question posed by the representative of
France on the matter of incursions into Syria, we have no
definite information from either the Chief of Staff of
UNTSO or the Chairman of the Israel-Syrian Mixed
Armistice Commission. But according to general information that we have, based on the previous report, the
incursion in some places is about twelve miles deep inside
Syria.

90, This prompts me to ask two more questions. First,
does General Bull have enough personnel in the area to
carry out the inquiries the Secretary-General has asked him
to undertake on behalf of the Security Council? If he
needs more, can he count on assistance from the other
Mixed Armistice Commissions now perhaps less burdened

100. Regarding the last question, pertaining to the sufficiency, or otherwise, of the staff of General Odd Bull, I
will transmit this question immediately to General Bull. But
as I indicated in my report to the Council yesterday (see
1353rd meeting/, the efficiency and promptness in reporting of the United Nations military observers in the area
9

depend primarily on freedom of movement; and of course
the security factor is also a very important consideration.
101. Concerning the possibility of redeployment of other
members of the United Nations military group from other
areas, I shall also immediately ask General Bull about his
observations, For the moment, however, my feeling is that
freedom of movement and the security factor are more
important for his purpose of carrying out his present
responsibilities than is the enlargement of tlie force. Then
too, I wish to report to the Council that General Odd Bull
has not so far asked for additional staff.
102. The PRESIDENT:
his reply.

I thank the Secretary-General for

103. The representative of France has an additional
question to ask. I shall therefore ask the next and only
speaker among the members of the Council whose names
are inscribed on my list whether he would yield to the
representative of France so that the representative may ask
a supplementary question. I would ask the representative of
the Soviet Union whether he will allow me to let the
representative of France ask his supplementary question of
the Secretary-General.
104. Mr. FEDORENKO
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): We shall be very pleased
to yield the floor to our colleague from France so that he
can ask any questions he considers necessary in order to
clarify a point which is of interest not only to him but also,
I hope, to all other members of the Council.
105. Mr. SEYDOUX (France) (translated from French): I
wish to thank the representative of the Soviet Union for
having generously allowed me to speak before him. I should
also like to thank the Secretary-General for having kindly
replied so thoroughly to various questions my delegation
had regarding the current developments in Syria.
106. From paragraph 2 on page 3 of the Secretary
General’s report, which is concerned with the importance
of establishing or re-establishing the Kuneitra control
centre, it seems that, for the reasons indicated there, it has
not been possible to re-establish the centre.
107. In order to facilitate the work of General Bull’s
observation team, I wonder whether another attempt might
not be made to make the centre operational. That was the
last question I wished to ask.
108. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
I have been in constant touch with General Odd Bull, even today, in fact, and
this is one of the issues I raised with him. I am expecting a
reply from him, perhaps by tomorrow.
109. Mr, FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): We should like to make a
few comments in connexion with the statements which
have been made during the Council’s present meeting.

flowery discourse concerning the “benevolent” policy of
Washington which he sees, at least in his liberal imagination,
as crowned with the halo of a noble champion, as it were,
of “peace throughout the world”. He did this, of course,
without any reproach and, as we see, without any reference
to the monstrous aggression in the Near East or the
barbarous war waged by United States imperialism in
Viet-Nam. Donning this mythological cloak, the United
States diplomat delivered himself of his splendid monologue, obviously appealing to the television screen with its
very specific audience. It is remarkable, in this connexion,
to see how carefully the speaker completely avoided1 the
question of the bombing of Damascus and the piratical
seizure by Israel interventionists of a col;sidLrable pa t oc
Syrian territory, including the town of Kuneitra.
111. And yet it is precisely this which is the main topic
for consideration by the Security Council today. But the
United States representative then attempted to reduce the
whole matter to the need for obtaining “missing,” or
“additional”
information and further “clarifications” and
everything else which he would like to have but which does
not in fact really exist; and at the same time he: was
obviously feeling embarrassed at the indisputable facts of
Tel-Aviv’s gross violation of the Security Council’s decision
calling for the cease-fire and at the shameful treat.ment
accorded to the victim of aggression.
112. We now have before us the report of the Secretary
General which;inter a&a, makes it absolutely clear that the
facts regarding the bombing of Damascus and the forcible
seizure of Syrian territory, including the town of Kuneitra,
by Israel invaders are perfectly true.
113. Or, perhaps, the Washington diplomat wouid qucstion the impartiality and objectivity of the Secretary
General’s report in this case? This prompts us to a:rk the
representative of the United States at this table whether he
condemns the bombing of Damascus, whether he condemns
the fact that the representative of Israel has cynically tried
to mislead the Security Council by denying the capture of
Kuneitra at the very time when this town wasalready in the
hands of Israel troops.
114. We are prepared to yield the floor to th,e distinguished judge, and will resume our statement later, if the
speaker so wishes.
115. The PRESIDENT:
Has the representative of the
Soviet Union finished his statement?
116. Mr, FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): We are glad to give our
United States colleague an opportunity of telling the truth
in answer to our question.
117. The PRESIDENT, And the representative of the
Soviet Union desires to continue his statement after the
reply?
118. Mr, FEDORENKO

(Union of Soviet Socialist IRepub-

lies) (translated from Russian):

110. As we have all heard, the United States representative-who has just spoken-has repeated once again, in an
exceedingly pedantic and stereotyped fashion, a very

Yes.

119. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): I am
prepared, as the draft resolution [S/7971] which I have

c

submitted shows, to condemn all violations of the cease-fire
confirmed by the Secretary-General in his report,
120. I should like to ask a question of the representative
of the Soviet Union. Is he prepared to condemn all the
violations of the cease-fire confirmed by the Secretary
General in his report?
121. Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): We have just had further
proof that the United States representative has no desire
whatsoever to tell the truth. As before, as always, he is
swerving very dangerously on sharp corners, and, instead of
giving an answer, he has thought of nothing better than to
ask a question himself. I shall of course reply to his
question; but before that, in view of the order in which the
questions were asked, I should like him to give an answer
on the substance of my question. I do not want to listen to
any more manoeuvres and stunts.
122. And now I should like to continue my statement.
The representative of the United States has spoken of the
need to observe the cease-fire and to ensure the implementation of the decision calling for the cessation of military
activities. He has even hastily introduced a draft resolution
on this subject for consideration by the Security Council.
But it is obvious that the United States representative has
suddenly forgotten what cease-fire is involved, and on what
lines-and I should like to point out that it is not without
an ulterior motive that he has done this. What is involved,
in fact, is the consolidation of Israel’s seizure of a
considerable part of the territory of the Syrian Arab
Republic. This is the crux of the matter; this, as the
Russians say, is where the dog is buried, Is it not obvious
that our United States colleague is attempting to help the
Israel aggressor to strengthen his hold on new positions
which, as we pointed out in our earlier statement, are now
described as “vital boundaries”. And here no excuses will
help Mr. Goldberg disguise the truth.

hope that the United States representative will refrain from
further subterfuges, and will not go on saying that this is
not a camel but a horse with a hump. It is doubtful, of
course, whether the United States representative has
enough courage and fortitude to condemn openly in this
important body and before the eyes of the whole world,
the shameful aggression committed by Israel’s rulers, to
condemn their violation of the Security Council’s decision
and to give a proper assessment of the treachery of the
Israel adventurers.
125. We shall not try to persuade the distinguished judge,
It is enough that he has shown the untenability of his
position by remaining silent. But we cannot be silent,
Nobody has a right to keep silent, and particularly not the
members of the Security Council, who have a special
responsibility for the fate of the world and of mankind. We
hope that the members of the Council will say the decisive
word by indignantly condemning the criminal aggression
and severely censuring the Tel-Aviv adventurers,
126. We hope that the Security Council will express its
views on the monstrous
aggression clearly and
unequivocally and will take steps to curb the high-handed
interventionists and put a stop once and for all to their
adventurist campaigns against neighbouring Arab peoples.
127. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Israel, to whom I now give the floor.
128. The representative of the Soviet Union has asked for
the floor on a point of order,
129. Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian}: Mr. President, with all due
respect to you and to the members of the Security Council,
do you not think it would be more appropriate, at this late
hour, to give the floor to other representatives at this table
who have more right to speak as the victims of aggression?

123. Israel did not cease military activities when the
Security Council asked it to. The armed hordes of the
Tel-Aviv interventionists continued to trample on the soil
of Arab peoples and continued to violate the national
sanctuaries of the Arab East. But when did Tel-Aviv think
fit to make a statement about the cessation of military
activities? This occurred much later, after the basic
strategic objectives of the Israel adventurers had been
achieved, And here we should like to clarify our position in
regard to the draft resolution,submitted by the Washington
diplomats. In this draft resolution [S/7971], an attempt is
in fact being made to justify the crime which has been
committed. Do our United States colleagues really believe
that the Security Council is naive or is weakening its
vigilance? Do they really rate the members of the Security
Council so low as to believe that a piece of paper like this,
which they have palmed off on us all before this responsible
meeting, will receive understanding and support?

130, As for the representative of Tel-Aviv, it is hardly
necessary for me to say that he has lied enough here in the
Council, and we would not be missing a great deal if he
were to refrain from making any further statements and
from telling any more demonstrable lies.
131, The PRESIDENT: I have to call on the speakers in
the order in which they are inscribed on my list. I have only
the representatives of Israel and Jordan on my list, so I have
to call on the representative of Israel now..
132. I call on the representative of the Soviet Union on a
point of order.
133. Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russianj: Mr. President, in all humility-as it is customary to say on these occasions-I
should have expected you, as President, to show more
understanding and to make a greater effort to face the stark
reality of the situation which has been created by those to
whom you now wish to give the floor.

124, This is the position from which we approach the
United States draft resolution which has one single dishonest purpose-namely, to serve the interests of the Israel
aggressor,to help him, as one might say, to, legalize his
forcible occupation of the territory of Arab countries. We

134. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of the
United States on a point of order.
11

145. The PRESIDENT: A point of order has been raised
by the representative of Bulgaria, .who has asked that the
representative of Israel concentrate on the question which
the Council is discussing at present.

135. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): My
point of order is a very simple one. It is not, I think, within
the rules of this Council for any member of this Council to
challenge the good faith of the President in applying the
rules as even-handedly as he has. I think that is impermissible under the rules of this Council.

146. When we started our discussion on this question, I
asked all members of the Council, to concentrate, asfar as
possible, on the issues before us, and, as far as possible, to
avoid any remarks of a personal character. I think great
flexibility has been permitted in the speeches that have
been made, containing accusations against other countries, I
have left it to the representatives to reply for them&Ives,
and I have not so far found that they have gone beyond
what is permissible from the point of view of the Chair, But
I believe that we would all be interested in continuing our
discussion in dignity and that we all should concentrate, as
far as possible, on the issues which we are discussing.

136. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on a point of order.
137. Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): Mr.President, I thought
that you and I were having a dialogue primarily as between
colleagues; and if you have an opinion of this matter then,
of course, you are entitled to state it, just like any other
member of the Security Council, without any prompting
and without the voice of America which we have heard
enough already.

147. I call on the representative of Israel.
138. As for procedure, I should like to ask our United
States colleague whether it is honest to lie here in the
Security Council. And is it honest to go on trying to
deceive the members of the Council and to maintain that
the Israel invaders have not seized the land and cities of
other peoples?

148. Mr. RAFAEL (Israel): I am not here as the accused
party; I am not here in the dock, and the representative of
Bulgaria has not been appointed as a prosecutor, I amhere
as the representative of an independent country. This
country has been vilified; invective of the most malicious
source has been thrown at my country; personal abusehas
been heaped against its representative. I would ask the
patience of the representative of Bulgaria to listen carerfully
to what I have to say in response to what has been said to
me and to my country. I am fully convinced that the
manner in which these addresses were made by the
representative of the Soviet Union and by the representative of Bulgaria very much remind us of that very sombre
chapter of the Moscow trials . . .

139. Once again we see who is taking which side, who is
for the truth and who is for wrongdoing and who is trying
unrestrainedly to protect the criminals.
140. The PRESIDENT:
Members of the Council have
heard the point of order raised by the representative of the
USSR. In accordance with rule 37 of the provisional rules
of procedure, the Council decided to invite certain Member
countries of the United Nations to participate without vote
in the Council’s discussion of this matter. According to the
provisional rules of procedure, I have to call on the speakers
in the order in which they ask for the floor. Therefdre, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
established practices of this Council, I now call on the
representative of Israel.

149. Mr. TARABANOV
(Bulgaria) (translated porn
Mr. President, I asked you to call him to order.

French):

1.50. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the representative of
Israel, and I repeat my general appeal to all speakers, to
concentrate on the issues we are discussing.

141. Mr. RAFAEL (Israel): The representative of the
Soviet Union chose to address this Council in a tone and
style so well known from a very dark chapter in Soviet
history. He has spoken as though he were prosecuting at
one of the Moscow trials in the sombre years of the
1930’s.. I

151. Mr. RAFAEL (Israel): These representatives have
tried to intimidate not only their opponents but also those
who hear their words; they have tried to wear us out in long
night meetings. They threaten and blacken, with scrup&us
disregard for the facts, which they select and twist to suit
their own ulterior motives.

142. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the representative of
Bulgaria on a point of order.

152. But this is not a trial; this is the highest organ of the
United Nations, where representatives of independent
Governments represent their countries. And no attempt to
brow-beat, on the part of Mr. Fedorenko and his assistant
prosecutor, will deter me from defending the interests and
the honour of my country and of my people. We thought
that the representative of the Soviet Union had reached,
yesterday, a record-low in vilification when he dared to
refer in one breath to Israel and to the Nazi monsters,
whose names I do not need to mention in the Security
Council, For a representative of a country which itself has
suffered under the Nazi yoke, and has made such terrible
sacrifices to throw it off, to use that kind of lanrguage
regarding a people which suffered just as much from the
Hitlerite oppression is absolutely shameful. I leave it to
world opinion to pass judgement on this outrage.

143 0 Mr. TARABANOV
(Bulgaria) (translated porn
French): We are not here today to listen to digressions; we
are here to consider the aggression Israel has committed. If
the Israel representative wishes to address the Security
Council, he must reply as the party accused of aggression
and he must not try to distract the Council with irrelevant
matters, particularly by mentioning a country which, at the
cost of many lives, helped to save mankind from Hitlerian
aggression, to which it nearly fell victim.
144, I therefore ask you, Mr. President, not to allow the
representative of that aggressive nation to try to distract the
Council from its work.
12

1.53. The representative of the Soviet Union accusesIsrael,
with its population of some 2.5 million people, of
aggression against the Arab world, with its more than 60
million people. He should better remember his own history,
when a people of 200 million in 1940 invaded the territory
of a small and valiant people of 3 million. He blindly
refuses to admit that these same Arab States have for
twenty years been threatening to annihilate Israel and to
apply to its people the “final solution” which eluded Hitler.
He chooses to forget that these have not been paper threats,
but have been backed up by an uninterrupted chain of
terrorist and belligerent acts, which passed their danger
level this last May, when massive Arab armies concentrated
all around our frontiers and established a joint command
which openly avowed aggressive intent against my country.
They opened the hostilities. Egypt, Jordan, Syria, Iraq, one
after the other, moved against Israel. They were repelled,
and were driven back into their territory.

159. The Arab States, and Syria foremost among them,
are responsible for the tension and hostility which have
occurred. For nearly twenty years they have persisted in
the maintenance of a state of war. They wish to practise a
war of limited liability: to be free to attack and to be
immune from the risks of a determined defence, But that is
an untenable proposition. There cannot be half peace and
half war: war on Israel and peace for the Arabs.
160. What we want is total peace, peace for both the Arab
States and Israel equally.
161. The PRESIDENT:
Jordan.

I call on the representative of

162. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): The question before the
Council has received most unfair treatment so far. Yesterday we heard much legal phraseology from legal brains. We
heard terms used such as final evidence, conclusive,
definite, clear, established, hearsay, permissible, not permissible, judgement, decision and what-not. Every single term
was introduced to drag out the question further and to
leave the aggression without taking a decision of condemnation,

154. The Soviet Union, instead of supporting efforts for a
peaceful settlement in accordance with its own principle of
international relations, has fanned, and is continuing to fan,
the passions of Arab violence and the flames of hatred and
extremism. This has contributed in no small way to the
present calamities of the Arab world. Those who are really
and truly concerned for the peace and welfare of all the
peoples of the Near East should do everything to quench
the passions, and not to inflame them.

163. I thought I was in a court. I was tempted to bring a
charge of war crimes to be examined by this tribunal,
particularly since the crime committed by Israel is the very
same crime committed by Nazi Germany. In fact the very
same crime was presented by the United States and by the
permanent members who are in the Security Council now
as a charge during the Ntirnberg trials. I thought I wasin a
tribunal, listening to all that legal phraseology. Then I was
reminded by the same Mr. Rafael who has been presented
to the Council earlier as a terrorist-he worked as a terrorist
in the underground movement; he was a member of the
Haganah in Palestine. It was this same terrorist who this
morning has reminded the Council-when he said that
nothing in the United Nations Charter provides for prosecution and judges-that this is not a tribunal, that “You
cannot try me or accuse me or treat me as an accused”.

155. Before the recess, the Secretary-General read a
telegram which he had received from the Foreign Minister
of Israel, Mr. Abba Eban, stating that Israel forces are
maintaining fully the cease-fire arrangement, I can add now
that since that telegram was dispatched, I have received
information that the cease-fire is being respected and that
the front is quiet, and that no hostile activity is taking
place.
156. Again the allegation has been made that Israel
aircraft have been bombing Damascus. I deny that. I deny it
as I denied yesterday that Israel aircraft had attacked Cairo.
I note that the Arab spokesmen do not revert to that
allegation any more. All that the SecretaryGeneral’s report
states with regard to Damascus this afternoon is that the
bombing took place from an unidentified aircraft at an
unidentified place on an unidentified object in an area
seven to ten kilometres south of the city. No court in the
world would look at such evidence. No Israel aircraft were
at that time in that area.

164. I was hoping that the Council would take immediate
action. The crime is clear. The admission has been made.
The Israel Ambassador in London did not deny that Israel
had started invading, killing, murdering and bombing. The
National Broadcasting Corporation stated on 8 June that
the Israel Ambassador in London had confirmed that his
country fired the first shot in the war in the Middle East.
That statement was in a speech delivered before an all-party
meeting of Members of Parliament in London. Here we are
witnessing a clear attempt at distortion.

157, When I spoke this morning, Israel forces were not in
Runeitra. They entered the town before the cease-fire came
into effect.

165. Now that the crime has been committed, a Zionist
peace campaign is being waged. Pages of newspapers have
been used to mislead American public opinion. These pages
speak about peace. One of them states: “Israel wants
peace”. They have the word “peace” spelled wrongly; it
should be “piece”. They do want piece and piece and piece.
One piece was the part invaded in Jordan and which was
occupied. That is piece number one. Piece number two is
Gaza. Piece number three is part of Syria. Now they are
singing the song of peace for the good-hearted American
people.

158. With regard to the Israel paratroops mentioned in
General Bull’s report [see para. 23 above], I wish to draw
the Council’s attention to the fact that this information was
transmitted only by the Syrian authorities. However, the
report submitted by the Secretary-General confirms that
Syrian gun positions opened fire on Israel after the
cease-fire had gone into effect, It is remarkable that this
confirmed information did not give rise to anxiety and
comment on the part of certain members of the Council.
13

166, Now that the crime has been committed they are
trying to mislead American public opinion by singing for
them the song of peace, trying to cover up the crime. On
the other hand, here in the Security Council, instead of its
taking immediate action we are having a discussion about
law, legality and illegality. That discussion took place
yesterday. Today, when the facts have become very clear as
presented by our Secretary-General, we see a different
approach. We find the United States coming to the Security
Council to say that: “It would not render a judgement on
the basis of allegations by one of the parties.“2 The United
States will not render a judgement on the basis of
allegations by one of the parties. These are not allegations
now, they are facts that have been established. But I do not
doubt that the Council has not forgotten that in October
1966 the United States-Ambassador
Goldberg to be
exact-submitted
to the Council a draft resolution condemning a State on the basis of a one-sided investigation
report.

170. I can dwell on many lies of Mr. Rafael, but I do not
think I should waste the time of the Council. You h.ave
heard a great deal about them, They were very albly
exposed by my colleague, Professor Fedorenko; they were
exposed very ably by my colleague, Ambassador
Tarabanov; and they are explained very ably by the
documents which rebut the claims and the denials made by
Mr. Rafael.
171. That being the case, I sincerely and honestly believe
that it does not befit the great prestige of this important
body to keep the victims waiting, the victims who look up
to this great body, and to continue manoeuvring-and I am
referring to those who are championing the manoeuvring-to hide the crime, to avoid a clear-cut condemnation
of the criminal in favour of the victim,
172. The lack of action on the part of the Security
Council is contributing to the deterioration of the situation
in the area. Yesterday morning I read out information
[1355th meeting] about the exodus, about the thousands
of people who have been displaced, expelled, intimidated
and forced to leave their homes. I read out and descrjbed
the human tragedy which is now being witnessed by the
Security Council, by the members responsible for international peace and security, harmony and human rights. I
have just received further information.
It reads: “The
Jordanian Red Crescent today accused Israel of ousting
Jordanian inhabitants on the west bank of the Jordan River
from their homes and driving them to the truce line.” That
means to the cease-fire line recommended by the Security
Council. When they make people cross, are they not
defying the Council’s cease-fire decision? When they push
the people out, are they not ignoring the Council’s
authority, its very prestige in the world and in the Arab
world? The message states further: “This act completely
violates the provisions of international law,” Here my
Government is posing a question to the jurist, to those who
speak law when it suits their purpose. This is an addition to
the crime that you are witnessing, Mr. President, you and
the Security Council.

167. When we received more convincing evidence, the
United States approach was that it was not clear whether
this was based on specific information. Thus, information
coming from the machinery in the area was not enough.
168. More evidence was presented by the SecretaryGeneral, and then we heard that Israel had denied those
charges and that the Security Council should have more
impartial information. Israel denials are not new to the
United States. Israel denied that the United States ship that
was off the shores of Sinai which was attacked by the
Israelis, was carrying the United States flag. The United
States Government, or United States information media-offhand I do not know exactly which-said that the
ship was carrying the United States flag. The Israelis denied
that in the morning, only to have it confirmed in the
afternoon by both authorities.
I69. We heard the Secretary-General say that the United
Nations did not have information whether or not the
occupation of Kuneitra took place before the cease-fire. I
think the answer to that is very simple. Early yesterday
morning, after the cease-fire resolution /235 (1967)J was
adopted, Mr. Rafael denied it categorically; and he repeated
this two or three times. He said:

173. Jordan still hopes that the Security Council will
overcome pressure and will overcome everything which
stands in the way of reaching a just decision, a decision
which reflects the reality of what has happened. I hope that
the Security Council will, without any further delay, adopt
a decision condemning the criminal and safeguarding the
rights of the victims.

“We have already heard a report from the SecretaryGeneral that the Israel representative in Jerusalem has
denied these allegations. I denied a similar charge before
the Council adjourned last evening (1353rd meeting]. I
categorically deny it again now.” /1354th meeting,
para. 51.1

174. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Syria, to whom I now give the floor.

He denied that it took place after the cease-fire, and later
on both confirmed that it did take place. When you
compare both, the admission of the Israel authorities in the
area and the denial of the representative who spoke here on
instructions from his Government, it becomes clear, it does
not need any further evidence, that the crime was committed after the cease-fire resolution, after the action
decided upon by the Security Council; it was taken in
defiance of the Security Council.

175. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): The statement that was made
by Mr. Rafael tonight is very significant. It is significa.nt in
its briefness, because it was as brief as the inv’asion
constituting the crime was large. But certainly the brevity
of the statement of Mr. Rafael is also significant in (other
respects, because if he had continued to say more things,
more lies would have been disclosed. It is also significalnt in
a third respect, because from the way he delivered his
statement and from the way he left the Council chamber
after he delivered it, it betrayed the criminal who has lost
his nerve and cannot face up to his crimes. The members of

2 See United Nations Press Release SC/2908, dated 10 June 1967,
lake 6.

14

L

the Council have already listened to the exposure of lies
perpetrated by the representative of the Tel-Aviv authorities, Now we have the record before us here.

Again the same thesis has been maintained, that all this
operation, all this invasion of Syria, the penetration into
Syrian territory of twelve miles, as recognized by the
Secretary-General, is only to “silence the guns” on the
armistice demarcation line.

176, The representative of the Tel-Aviv authorities started
by saying that he does not want to twist facts. But if there
is anyone here who has twisted facts, it is the representative
of the Tel-Aviv authorities. Here I have the verbatim record
of the 1353rd meeting of 9 June 1967. To our accusation
that the area of Damascus was being bombarded and that
Israel planes were overflying Syrian territory, Mr. Rafael
answeredasfollows:

179. Regrettably, I must speak here again about how some
of the members of the Council approached this question
when I was telling the Council that the Israel army was
invading Syria and killing people in Syria.
180. The representative of the United States-and here I
hasten to say that I am not injecting any personal remarks;
I have maintained that the policy of the United States
Government of protecting, strengthening and defending
Israel goes back to the very creation of Israel-the representative of the United States said this, which I shall read
from the verbatim record:

“I want to repeat again that no Israel aircraft has
bombed or is bombing Damascus. I also want to deny
categorically that any Israel forces are advancing towards
Damascus. The Israel operations which were begun today
were intended, as I stated in the Council this afternoon
/1352nd meeting] and as I informed the President of the
Security Council in the early hours of the morning, to
silence those Syrian gun positions which were shelling
Israel villages. That is what the Israel forces have
undertaken.” [1353rd meeting, para. 87.1

“The Secretary-General has made his report to the
Council. He has stated, quite appropriately, what his
representative in Jerusalem, General Bull, has been told
by representatives of the Governments involved.
“What does it add up to essentially? The senior
delegate from Syria has made the allegation that Kuneitra
has been taken; the Israel representative has denied that
this is so; the Secretary-General-I have made notes and I
can be corrected if I am wrong-has asked observers to go
to those places mentioned in the Syrian Foreign Minister’s complaint: Massadeh, Kuneitra, and some vantage
points; and the Secretary-General says that no first-hand
information has yet been received, and as a result, he is
still awaiting a reply.

This thesis was repeated time and again, even in the
statement given tonight by Mr. Rafael, that what the Israel
forces had undertaken wasto silence the Syrian guns.
177. Then came the question of the occupation of
Kuneitra. Here I quote from the verbatim record of the
1354th meeting:
“We contacted you, Mr. President, at 2 o’clock this
morning, because we had had a telephone call from
Damascus in which we were informed that Israel had
moved its forces and occupied Kuneitra, about thirty-five
miles from the capital city of Damascus, As I address the
Council now, a fierce battle is raging between the Syrian
forces and the criminal hordes coming from Tel-Aviv who
are attempting to reach Damascus as soon as possible. In
fact, their plan was to occupy Damascus before we could
start our meeting today.” [1354th meeting, para. 27.1

“I, as a member of the Council, am also awaiting a reply
from an impartial observer of what is going on. We do not
have it; nor do I have a prepared speech . . .
“This Council can deal only on the basis of evidence,
not on the basis of allegations; and we, in fairness to our
responsibilities, which are very great, must await the
first-hand information which the Secretary-General, quite
appropriately, has asked for.“[Ibid., paras. 60-63.1

178. Again, Mr. Rafael denied this accusation. Here are his
own words, from the same record:

181. Now, it certainly is the legitimate right of every
member of the Council to ask for the testimony of an
impartial observer. I have done so myself. But to refer to
our accusation that Kuneitra has been occupied as an
allegation is certainly not appropriate, to say the least.
Luckily, however, we have received the reports of UNTSO
and of its Chief of Staff, General Odd Bull. What did they
confirm? They confirmed that Kuneitra had been OCcupied, and that the denials made by the representative of
the Tel-Aviv authorities up to our meeting of this very
morning were nothing but lies, to say the least.

“Now the Council has been hurriedly called for a
dramatic meeting at this early hour on the ground that
Israel forces have occupied Kuneitra and are advancing on
Damascus. We have already heard a report from the
Secretary-General that the Israel representative in Jerusalem has denied these allegations, I denied a similar charge
before the Council adjourned last evening (1353rd
meeting], I categorically deny it again now.
“I have just received a report that while the Israel forces
are in the process of establishing and implementing the
cease-fire, the vicious shelling of Israel villages is still
going on. There is no foundation whatsoever for the
allegation that Israel is planning to take Damascus. The
only Israel activity is against the artillery emplacements
which are brutally attacking Israel villages.” /Ibid.,

182. The Secretary-General has read to the Council a cable
[see para. 76 above] addressed to him by Mr. Abba Eban,
which was distributed to us prior to our resuming our
meeting; it states:
“Referring to your cable I wish to inform you that
orders were issued in accordance with the cease-fire

paras. 51 and 52-j

15

arrangement reached with the assistance of your representative, General Odd Bull, with effect from yesterday
evening at 1830 hours local time. The cease-fire went
effectively into force at the appointed hour and has
continued without interruption. The Israel forces are
adhering scrupulously to and maintaining
fully the
cease-fire arrangement.”

overseas requirements. In this connexion I must say that
the Israel invasion which was perpetrated as of the
beginning of this month, was actually planned and carefully
studied and executed as a result of the quarrel that took
place between the Syrian Government and the Iraq Petroleum Company in December 1966. For at that time the
Syrian Government told the countries that have oil interests
in the Arab world that they had been cheating a small
country, Syria. The Syrian Government also declared that
Arab oil should belong to the Arab nation. The new
decision I referred to was taken in view of the support given
to Israel by the United States, United Kingdom and other
Western countries.

Here we have another document, then, which is denied by
the report of the Secretary-Geneqal; for according to the
agreement, the cease-fire order was supposed to become
effective at 1630 hours GMT, and the cable of Mr. Abba
Eban says that they have abided by the cease-fire.
183. But here we have in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (paragraph 1 on page 2) that at 1647 hours GMT,
namely, seventeen minutes after the cease-fire had gone
into effect, air bombing of Damascus was taking place and
that it had commenced at 1639 hours GMT. Secondly,
paratroopers were being dropped by Israel helicopters at
1953 hours GMT, that is to say, two hours and more after
the cease-fire had taken effect. So, what are we to believe:
Mr. Eban’s letter, which claims that they are abiding by the
cease-fire, or the report of General Odd Bull?

188. This morning I spoke of the tremendous; help
extended to Israel by the United States. Now, I should Iike
to speak of the effect of this legitimate Arab measure of
self-defence on the American economy. An article which
appears in The New York Times issue for tomorrow, and
which came out this evening under the headiag “,4n oil
emergency declared by U.S.“, reads as follows:
“The Government declared an oil emergency today
because of the Middle East crisis . . , . The closing of the
Suez Canal and the shutdown of pipelines that terminate
in Lebanon and Syria cut off most of the oil from Arab
countries which feed supplies to Western Europe.”

184. Furthermore, when the letter of Mr. Eban states that
his forces have been ordered to abide by the cease-fire, does
it not mean in effect that they have violated the cease-fire?
This by itself is a confession of guilt. Therefore, it has been
established beyond any shadow of doubt that the denials
perpetrated up to this morning by the Israel representative
that Kuneitra was not occupied, that there was no bombing
of Damascus, were fabrications, and now we have another
specimen of a great lie perpetrated by the so-to-speak
Foreign Minister of Israel when he says that the Israel
forces have abided by the cease-fire.

The article goes on to analyse in figures what this loss
means to the Western economy. But as the shutting of the
Suez Canal was mentioned, I must state that that waspart
of the destruction carried out by the Israel criminals iagainst
this international artery. No voices of protest were heard
either from the United States Government or from the
United Kingdom Government.
189.. When we warned in our various interventions and
speeches against the indiscriminate backing which. Israel
received from the Government of this country, nobody
attached any importance to what we said. We called
attention to the fact that the entire policy pursued by the
United States Government vis-&vis the Arabs, in favour of
would
have disastrous effects on
the Zionists,
Arab-American relations. We declared time and again that
we had no quarrel with the people of this country and that
our quarrel was with the pressure groups whose acts are
leading and have been leading towards these disastrous
results. But now the American Government has started to
feel the effect of these measures, and this effect is ‘but the
beginning of our reaction and the rest will follow, No oil
will be supplied to the United States and its followers, and
other American interests will also be hurt. Let us be frank,
the United States Government because of its policies during
the last twenty years is considered by the Arabs as the main
Power responsible for the tragedy of the Palestine people
and for what has now taken place in the threl: Arab
countries: the United Arab Republic, Jordan and Syria.

185. It would take me a long time to go on uncovering
these cheap manoeuvres. A draft resolution has been
submitted to us by the United States delegation[5/7971].
I could not think of a better analysis of the motives of that
draft resolution than the one made by the representative of
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. The encouragement to Israel aggression now is not concealed; it is stated
in draft resolutions. That is why I regret to say that this
draft resoIution submitted by the United States delegation
constitutes nothing more than a confirmation
of the
occupation by Israel invading hordes of Syrian territory,
186. Let us not forget that the so-called justification of
military action by the Israel authorities was to silence the
Syrian guns along the armistice demarcation line. But does
the military
operation which led to penetrating and
occupying such a vast area of Syria constitute an answer to
the Syrian guns on the armistice demarcation line?
187. It is my duty to tell the Council that this invasion
that we are facing, which is the third invasion in the last six
or seven days committed by the Israelis, is gaining in
proportions and will have far greater repercussions than the
Council or the members are expecting here. For the Arab
countries in legitimate exercise of their right of self-defence
have shut their pipelines and cut off most of the oil which
used to meet the Western European and the American

190. It is regarded as the party most directly responsible
for the slaughter of the Arab population carried out: by the
Israel hordes within the Arab lands. The influence and
prestige of the United States in the Arab countries has
deteriorated to its lowest ebb. The same paper from which I
quoted the article on the oil also has a map of the I~CW
16

Israel showing the areas that have been conquered by the
Israel invaders; the previous armistice lines do not count
any more. The representative of the Soviet Union has
aheady quoted the exact words of the Israel Cabinet
Ministers denouncing the armistice lines.

197. AS for the rest of the polemics, they have been
resorted to so often by the Soviet Union representative that
I shall confine myself to referring to my previous replies. In
view of the lateness of the hour, I shall merely incorporate
those replies by reference.

19 1. But if the Israelis and their supporters are drunk as a
result of their so-called victories, let me state that we are
not facing Israel alone. Our army, small as it is, has
defended itself in the most gallant manner, as did the
Jordanians, and the United Arab Republic forces before it,
against powerful forces equipped with the latest armaments
supplied to Israel by the United States and other Westem
Powers, There is nothing to be proud of in these conquests,

198. Mr. TARABANOV
(Bulgaria) (translated
from
French): Mr. President, you called this meeting of the
Council at the request of the representative of the Soviet
Union whose letter of 10 June states:
“In view of the continuation of military activities by
Israel”-as the Secretary-General has verified-“despite
the adoption of the cease-fire resolutions by the Security
Council, I have the honour to request an immediate
meeting of the Security Council on 10 June 1967 to
consider the question of the flagrant violation by Israel of
the Security Council’s decisions calling for the cessation
of military activities.” (S/7970.]

192. Suppose that today the white minority in Southern
Rhodesia were to conquer Africa, or that the GOT,;,.mment
of South Africa were to start a conquest of the whole
continent of Africa, It could do so in less than 48 or 64
hours, or 100 hours, But is this heroism? I am mentioning
this to warn that the conquest we have faced-and our
countries have seen such conquests by hungry hosts and
hordes-is not by Israel alone, but ultimately and definitely
by the forces that are behind Israel. The repercussions of
this invasion will be reflected not only on Syria but on all
the small countries of the world, where imperialism, having
retreated, is trying to find a way to recuperate and to
conquer again.

199. After lengthy discussions, the Council has not taken
a decision condemning the cease-fire violation, not to
mention the aggression itself. We have witnessed the
diversionary tactics of the Israel representative, who once
again has uttered what must be considered pure lies, as the
Secretary-General’s report has proved, How can the representative of Israel dare to be so arrogant? How can he dare
not only to mislead the Security Council for purely
propaganda purposes but also, at times, to hurl insulting
epithets at members of the Council?

193. In our own land, this reconquest by the imperialist
Power has been effected through this criminal party that is
referred to as Israel. In fact, a mere study of the records of
the meetings that we have held here the last three or four
days will prove beyond any doubt that this aggression
against the United Arab Republic, against Jordan, against
Syria, is nothing but an imperialist onslaught on the Arab
lands and ultimately on the lands of the Third World in
Asia and Africa. I say this in full cognizance of the cause,
because our problem is not only the problem of Syria but
the problem of the forces of liberation throughout the
world.

200. At one point, the United States representative
criticized-and
he raised his voice to do so-what he
described as “name-calling”. But later on, he did not react.
201. I repeat, how can the representative of Israel dare to
be so arrogant? His is the arrogance of the criminal certain
that he has accomplices among the judges who are about to
try him and who will obstruct justice in order to prevent a
conviction. A criminal’s arrogance is unlimited when he
knows there is no power or justice to condemn him and
when, among the judges (and what judges! the very parties
who instigated the crime) are his accomplices (and what
accomplices! accomplices strong enough to block any
Security Council decision and to hinder justice itself).

194. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): It is
2.30 in the morning and I do not intend to take the time of
the Council to review all that has happened in the last
several days. I have a very brief comment to make. My
friend, Ambassador Fedorenko, complains that I have been
silent, He speaks so frequently and at such length that it is
quite difficult to get a word in.

202, What have we here? Instead of a condemnation, we
have a draft resolution which places the victim and the
criminal on an equal footing. However, we know who the
criminal is; and Mr. Rafael, the Israel representative, knows
too. No amendments can possibly salvage such draft
resolutions, or turn them to any good. We cannot consider
such draft resolutions, which are meant to whitewash the
criminal; we might even call it a crime to submit them to
the Security Council, for this shows us how far some parties
would like to push the Security Council. That is why the
criminals are so arrogant wben they address the Security
Council.

195. I have a very brief word to say, In answer to a
question of his, I specifically said that the United States
wiI1 join in a condemnation of any violation of the
cease-fire that is confirmed in reports from the SecretaryGeneral. I, in turn, asked the question whether the Soviet
Union would do so. I did not hear an answer to that
question.
196. We have submitted our draft resolution for the
purpose of condemning any confirmed violations of the
cease-fire, If the draft resolution does not say that
explicitly-and
I think it does-then we should be very glad
to agree to appropriate amendments to it. That is the
intention of the draft resolution, and that is why we have
submitted it,

203. The PRESIDENT: 1 should like to ask the Secretary
General to submit the supplementary information which he
has received.
204. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
I have just received
two reports from General Odd Bull. The first one was
17

toward Kuneitra. (ii) Simultaneously, team from ‘fjber&
will deploy eastward to Kuneitra, which is invest,edby
Israel forces”-that is, occupied by Israel forces,-“and
re-establish Kuneitra control centre.”

dispatched at 0305 hours GMT from Jerusalem, and was
referred to in my report to the Council dated 11 June.3 It
reads as follows:
“‘(a) Details of the bombing incident, which has been
reported earlier, as provided by Chairman of the IsraelSyrian Mixed Armistice Commission, are as follows: ‘TWO
aircraft identified as Delta-wing too high to observe
marking, Bombs were definitely dropped. Heavy antiaircraft put up as result. Impact south of Damascus
estimated seven to ten kilometres. Estimated ten to
fifteen heavy explosions heard. No smoke or dust
observed due to intervening buildings. Absolutely not
sonic boom, These aircraft observed by experienced air
force United Nations military observers and were assessed
as bombers and not photo-reconnaissance aircraft, due to
flight angle of sun. Senior Syrian delegate reported that
there were six aircraft in group although only two were
observed by United Nations military observers.’
“(b)

That is the end of the first report.
205. The second report from General Bull wasdispatcned
at 0447 hours GMT and reads as follows:
“Message reporting details of observed cease-fire
breaches: (a) Deployment of United Nations military
observer team from Tiberias to Kuneitra has been delayed
pending the decision of Israel Minister of Defence
regarding this movement. Decision expected approx.
imately 0800 hours GMT, 11 June. (b) United Nations
military observer team which remained overnight at Sasmoved toward Kuneitra at daylight and at 0330 hour
GMT reported to Damascus to have passed village o
Fania. No further information available.”

No other breaches of cease-fire observed.
That is the end of the second report.

‘ ‘(c) Mr. Sasson”-of the Israel Foreign Office“categorically and repeatedly denied bombing by Israel
aircraft, He stated that such allegation should not be
permitted to distort picture of calm prevailing after
cease-fire time.

206. The PRESIDENT: I thank the Secretary-General fo
his report. I have no more speakers on my list, so I wouk
suggest that the Council adjourn now, and I wili call thd
next meeting after consultations with all the members ant
on the understanding that all members will hold tlremselve
available for an urgent meeting in case of an emergency.II
there is no objection to that procedure, I shall take it that in
is so decided.

“(d) Steps taken to achieve observance of cease-fire on
either side have been reported. Additional information is
as follows: (i) United Nations military observers from
Damascus deployed and remained overnight at Sasa,
where team,s of two will deploy at first light on 11 June

It wassodecided.

3 The report of the Secretary-General, dated 11 June 1967, was
circulated as United Nations Press Release SG/SM/744.

The meetingrose on Sunday, I1 June,at 2.40n.m.

8
Litho in U.N.

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent in other currencies)
