"I have the honour to inform you that your letter dated
29 August 1990 concerning preparatory arrangements
for a United Nations verification mission in El Salvador96 has been brought to the attention of the members
of the Council. They have considered the matter and
concur with the proposal in your letter."

informal consultations on 3 August that it was envisaged
that the United Nations would in due course be formally
requested to carry out a certain number of tasks relating to
the monitoring of a cessation of armed confrontation, the
verification of respect for human rights and the monitoring
of the forthcoming electoral process. As a result of the most
recent round of direct talks just concluded in Costa Rica,
it emerged that the parties shared the wish that preparations
for carrying out the responsibilities envisaged should be
initiated at the earliest possible date. The Secretary-General stated further that his representative, Mr. Alvaro de
Soto, who had been in El Salvador shortly before the last
round, had ascertained in his consultations with a broad
spectrum of representatives of Salvadorian society, as well
as all political parties, that the wish of the Government and
of the Frente Farabundo Marti para la Liberaci6n N acional
was widely shared.

At its 2952nd meeting, on 5 November 1990, the Council discussed the item entitled "Central America: efforts
towards peace-report of the Secretary-General
(S/21909)" .98
Resolution 675 (1990)
of 5 November 1990

The Secretary-General added that while in the absence
of a formal and verifiable cessation of combat there was
no certainty that conditions existed for carrying out those
tasks in a systematic fashion throughout El Salvador, he
believed that the time had come to take steps which would
put the United Nations in a position to assess the local
situation and initiate preparations so as to undertake the
monitoring tasks as soon as circumstances permitted. He
was therefore at that time seeking the concurrence of the
Council with his making the necessary arrangements, as
soon as practicable, including the possible establishment
of a small preparatory office in El Salvador, for the United
Nations verification mission which was to be set up at the
appropriate time. Verification per se would await further
consultation with the members of the Council. The Secretary-General stated that he would appreciate hearing from
the President of the Council on this matter at an early stage.

The Security Council,
Recalling its resolutions 637 (1989) of27 July 1989 and
644 (1989) of 7 November 1989, as well as the statement
made by the President of the Council on its behalf on 7
November 1989,89
1. Approves the report of the Secretary-General of 26
October 1990; 99
2. Decides to extend, under its authority, the mandate
of the United Nations Observer Group in Central America,
as defined in resolution 644 (1989), for a further period of
six months, that is, until 7 May 1991, bearing in mind the
report of the Secretary-General and the need to continue
to monitor expenditures carefully during this period of
increasing demands on peace-keeping resources;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the Security
Council fully informed of further developments and to
report on all aspects of the operations of the Observer
Group before the expiry of the new mandate period.

In a letter dated 6 September 1990,97 the President of the
Security Council informed the Secretary-General as follows:

Adopted unanimously at the
2952nd meeting.

97

98
See Official Records of the Security Council, Forty-fifth Year,
Sufflementfor October, November and December 1990.
Ibid., document S/21909.

S/21718.

UNITED NATIONS PEACE-KEEPING OPERATIONS
Decisions

become a valuable instrument facilitating the settlement
of international disputes. Recent successful peace-keeping operations have, for their part, contributed to the
enhanced standing and effectiveness of the United
Nations.

At its 2924th meeting, on 30 May 1990, the Council
discussed the item entitled "United Nations peace-keeping
operations".

"The members of the Council express their deep satisfaction with the growing support of the international
community for United Nations peace-keeping and, in
particular, with the participation of a growing number
of Member States in the operations. They pay tribute to
the Secretary-General and his staff for their tireless
efforts in the conduct of those operations. They also
commend States which have provided resources for such
operations. Furthermore, they commend the peacekeeping forces for their exemplary and dedicated service
in the cause of international peace and security.

At the same meeting, following consultations with the
members of the Council, the President made the following
statement on behalf of the Council: 100
"The members of the Council note with satisfaction
that the United Nations has in recent years played an
increasingly important and active role in restoring and
maintaining international peace and security. The
peace-keeping operations of the United Nations have
100

S/21323.

17
