S/2013/61

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
28 January 2013
Original: English

Letter dated 25 January 2013 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General
Further to my letter of 3 January, I have the honour to inform you that the
members of the Security Council have agreed to send a mission to Yemen which
would visit Sana’a on 27 January 2013. Ambassadors Mark Lyall Grant of the
United Kingdom and Mohammed Loulichki of Morocco will co-lead the mission.
The members of the Council have agreed on the terms of reference of the mission
(see annex).
Following consultations with the members, it has been agreed that the
composition of the mission is as follows:
Mr. Mario Oyarzábal (Argentina)
Ambassador Gary Francis Quinlan (Australia)
Ambassador Agshin Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan)
Ms. Hua Jiang (China)
Mr. Martin Briens (France)
Ambassador Gert Rosenthal (Guatemala)
Ambassador Sylvie Lucas (Luxembourg)
Ambassador Mohammed Loulichki (Morocco)
Ambassador Raza Bashir Tarar (Pakistan)
Ambassador Shin Dong-ik (Republic of Korea)
Mr. Alexander A. Pankin (Russian Federation)
Mr. Olivier Nduhungirehe (Rwanda)
Ambassador Kodjo Menan (Togo)
Ambassador Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom)
I should be grateful if you could have the present letter and its annex
circulated as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Masood Khan
President of the Security Council

13-21890 (E) 280113

*1321890*

S/2013/61

Annex
Terms of reference for the Security Council mission to Yemen on
27 January 2013
Led by Ambassador Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland) and Ambassador Mohammed Loulichki (Morocco)
1.
To reaffirm the continued support of the Security Council for the ongoing
political transition process in Yemen, in accordance with the Gulf Cooperation
Council implementation mechanism and leading towards elections in February
2014, and for the important roles of President Hadi, the Government of National
Unity, and the people of Yemen within that process.
2.
To assess the implementation of relevant Security Council resolutions, in
particular resolution 2051 (2012), and review the progress the Government of
Yemen has made towards launching the National Dialogue Conference, restructuring
the security and armed forces under a unified professional national leadership
structure, ending all armed conflicts and addressing the economic as well as
humanitarian situation.
3.
To consider the security situation in Yemen, including the ongoing work of the
Yemeni Government to combat Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula and to carry out
security sector reforms.
4.
To meet, discuss and evaluate the transition with a cross section of Yemeni
parties and international partners in Sana’a, including, if possible, the Gulf
Cooperation Council, and Yemeni actors, including civil society representatives.
5.
To assess progress made towards activating pledges made in Riyadh on
4 September 2012 and at the Friends of Yemen Ministerial Meeting in New York on
27 September 2012.
6.
To reiterate the importance of immediate donor coordination and funding in
order to alleviate the critical humanitarian situation in Yemen.
7.
To recognize the many challenges still facing Yemen in the transition process
and highlight the Security Council’s continued concern about those hindering or
interfering in the transition, noting that resolution 2051 (2012) allows for the
imposition of sanctions on spoilers.
8.
To express strong support for the role of the international community in
implementing the Gulf Cooperation Council initiative, including the five permanent
members of the Security Council, the Gulf Cooperation Council, the representative
of the European Union, and the Secretary-General’s Special Adviser and his Good
Offices in Yemen.

2

13-21890
