United Nations

A/54/PV.92

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-fourth session

92nd plenary meeting
Tuesday, 14 March 2000, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Gurirab . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Namibia)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Ingólfsson
(Iceland), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Agenda item 20 (continued)
Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian
and disaster relief assistance of the United
Nations, including special economic assistance
(b) Special economic assistance to individual countries
or regions
Draft resolution (A/54/L.80)
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of Egypt to introduce draft resolution
A/54/L.80.
Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt): I have the honour to
introduce, on behalf of the African Group, under agenda
item 20 (b), the draft resolution contained in document
A/54/L.80, entitled “Assistance to Madagascar following the
tropical cyclones”.
The draft resolution contains six preambular and seven
operative paragraphs. In the preambular section of the draft
resolution, the General Assembly expresses its grave
concern at the extensive damage and the devastation caused
by the tropical cyclones Eline and Gloria and the floods
which have struck Madagascar. It also notes with concern

00-34292 (E)

that these natural disasters have been aggravated by
various epidemics which have resulted in the loss of
human lives. Furthermore, while recognizing the efforts
of the Government and people of Madagascar to provide
relief and emergency assistance to the victims of these
disasters, the General Assembly expresses its awareness
that, to mitigate the consequences of this disaster,
international assistance is required, both for emergency
relief and for rehabilitation and reconstruction of
infrastructure.
In the operative section of the draft resolution, the
General Assembly expresses its solidarity with the
Government and people of Madagascar and notes with
satisfaction the efforts of the Government and people of
Madagascar to provide rapid relief to the victims through
their own means. The General Assembly also expresses
its gratitude to the international community, including
organizations and bodies of the United Nations system,
for the measures it has taken to support the efforts of the
Government of Madagascar to carry out relief operations
and provide emergency assistance and requests States and
international organizations to provide additional
emergency support to Madagascar with a view to
alleviating the economic and financial burden which the
people of Madagascar will have to bear. Finally, the
General Assembly requests the Secretary-General to make
all necessary arrangements to continue mobilizing and
coordinating humanitarian assistance from the specialized
agencies and other organizations and bodies of the United
Nations system with a view to supporting the efforts of
the Government of Madagascar.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of speeches
delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original speeches only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178. Corrections will
be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session

92nd plenary meeting
14 March 2000

I wish at this point to draw members' attention to a
minor revision to operative paragraph 7. That paragraph
would now read as follows:

from the unrelenting floods, to consider yet another draft
resolution, on the dire situation caused by the two recent
cyclones that struck Madagascar.

“Requests the Secretary-General to report to it at
its fifty-fifth session under the item on strengthening
of the coordination of humanitarian and disaster relief
assistance of the United Nations, including special
economic assistance, through the Economic and Social
Council at the next humanitarian segment of its
substantive session in 2000 on the implementation of
this resolution.”

The European Union would like to present its
condolences to the Government and the people of
Madagascar for the loss of life caused by these two
disasters, which hit that country in quick succession last
month and at the beginning of March. The situation is
compounded by the fact that the disaster occurred at a
time when an epidemic of cholera had already claimed
the lives of over 1,000 people.

The exact magnitude of the disaster that has befallen
Madagascar has yet to be seen. The two recent cyclones
have caused severe damage, both to Madagascar's
infrastructure and to its agricultural capacity. It is estimated
that over 10,000 people have been left homeless by the
floods and that more 170 have already lost their lives. The
Government of Madagascar has estimated that 560,000
persons have been affected by the damage resulting from
the cyclones and has launched an emergency aid appeal for
$3.7 million for those who have been affected.

According to the available reports, thousands of
people have been forced out of their homes by the
cyclones, and more information is now starting to emerge
on the number of other people who have also, to varying
degrees, been affected by these natural disasters.

I would like, on behalf of the African Group, to
express our sincere appreciation for the efforts of the
international community, States and organizations alike, to
assist Madagascar in its hour of need and urge it to
continue to provide emergency assistance to mitigate the
severe damage that has resulted from the recent cyclones
and to respond generously to the appeal launched by the
Government of Madagascar in this regard.
It is therefore our fervent hope that the General
Assembly will support the draft resolution contained in
document A/54/L.80.
In this connection, I have the honour to announce that
the draft resolution has been co-sponsored by the following
member States: Algeria, Barbados, Belgium, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba,
Ecuador, Egypt, Germany, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Mexico, Monaco, Morocco, Mozambique,
Nicaragua, Norway, Portugal, Saint Lucia, Senegal,
Seychelles, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Suriname, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Turkey, Uganda, Uruguay and Venezuela.
Mr. Brito (Portugal): The General Assembly is
meeting once again, just a few days after it convened to
hear about the dramatic situation in Mozambique resulting

2

We understand that severe agricultural damage may
also have been sustained in some areas, and that houses
and infrastructure in the path of the storms were
destroyed. Moreover, the destruction of roads and
railroads is hampering the movement of food and other
commodities, delaying the arrival of much-needed
assistance to affected populations.
The European Union and its member States would
like to commend the United Nations agencies already
active on the island for their efforts in bringing assistance
to the populations cut off by the floods, as well as the
active participation in these efforts of other organizations,
including non-governmental organizations, which have
rushed to the areas hit by the disaster and are now
coordinating their activities with the Government of
Madagascar in order to ensure that the assistance they are
providing is as effective and swift as possible.
We understand that assessment missions are already
under way or are being planned, including a mission by
the European Community Humanitarian Office. The full
picture of the disaster will be clear only later on. The
European Union is waiting for the appeal to the
international community, which will be launched soon,
before further deciding on future assistance to
Madagascar.
The European Union attaches great importance to the
humanitarian work of the United Nations, as attested to
by its close involvement with and participation in the
various consultation processes in this area. The European
Union stands ready to contribute constructively to the

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
development of our common and consensual position in the
humanitarian area. However, we wish to point out that this
would be greatly facilitated if we were offered the
opportunity of being involved at an early stage in the work
on all draft resolutions.
The European Union is hopeful that this draft
resolution will contribute to the efforts of the international
community to alleviate the plight of the people of
Madagascar.
Mr. Osio (Nigeria): On behalf of the Group of 77 and
China, Nigeria would like to convey its appreciation for the
convening of this meeting on yet another sad occasion, in
connection with the cyclone that struck Madagascar, a
developing State Member of this Organization. Not very
long ago, we gathered to express our solidarity with
Mozambique.
Natural disasters continue to take their toll. Humanity
is ever united, even in the face of this tragedy. The Group
of 77 and China welcomes the international response, which
Madagascar so direly needs at this time of tragedy. On
behalf of the Group of 77 and China, we pledge the
commitment of every member of the Group to work
towards a concerted universal solution to this problem, even
a solution that would include avoiding a recurrence in the
near future.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/54/L.80, entitled
“Assistance to Madagascar following the tropical cyclones”,
as orally revised.
Before proceeding to take action on the draft
resolution, I should like to announce that since its
introduction, the following countries have become sponsors
of draft resolution A/54/L.80: Andorra, Benin, Bolivia,
Cyprus, the Czech Republic, France, Greece, Guatemala,
the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Lithuania, Malta, New
Zealand, Nigeria, the Philippines, Qatar, San Marino,
Solomon Islands, Ukraine and the United Arab Emirates.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft
resolution A/54/L.80, as orally revised?
Draft resolution A/54/L.80, as orally revised, was
adopted (resolution 54/96 M).
Mr. Morel (Seychelles): Seychelles is also a sponsor
of the draft resolution. We did what was necessary before

92nd plenary meeting
14 March 2000
the meeting was convened. I would like to confirm that
fact, and ensure that we are represented in the records.
The Acting President: We take note of the
statement of the representative of Seychelles.
I call on the representative of Madagascar.
Mr. Bakoniarivo (Madagascar) (spoke in French):
First of all, allow me to thank the President very warmly,
on behalf of the delegation of Madagascar, for having
convened this meeting to adopt resolution 54/96 M,
regarding assistance to Madagascar, which was struck by
the tropical cyclones Eline and Gloria.
The adoption by consensus of this resolution shows
that the entire international community is deeply
concerned by the critical situation of developing countries
that fall prey to natural disasters. This decision bears
witness once again to the international solidarity
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. The
Government of Madagascar is particularly grateful to the
members of the Assembly for this display of sympathy
and solidarity.
My delegation would like to express its gratitude to
Mr. Ahmed Aboul Gheit, Permanent Representative of the
Arab Republic of Egypt, who, in his capacity as
Chairman of the African Group for this month, kindly
introduced the draft resolution. My delegation is also very
touched by the gesture made by all the delegations that
sponsored the resolution. We are also very grateful to the
delegations that by their statements showed their support
for and sympathy with the people and the Government of
Madagascar. Those delegations were Portugal, speaking
on behalf of the European Union, and Nigeria, speaking
on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
I would also like to take this opportunity to reiterate
the very warm thanks and deep gratitude of the
Government of the Republic of Madagascar to the States,
international, governmental and non-governmental
organizations, and associations that have, since the
beginning of the calamities, assisted Madagascar in this
difficult time. Nor can we overlook, in this regard, the
diligent and effective work that the United Nations Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs has done at
Headquarters in New York, in Geneva and in the field.
We also greatly appreciate the efforts of the Resident
Coordinator. Lastly, I would like to once again reiterate
our thanks to the Secretary-General for the appeal for

3

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
support to Madagascar that he launched in the wake of the
tropical cyclones.
Following the example of others committed to the
rebirth of Africa, the Government of Madagascar during
this last decade increased its efforts to emerge from
economic stagnation and to place the country solidly on the
path of sustainable development. With this objective,
difficult and often painful measures were taken to increase
the productive potential of the Malagasy economy. These
efforts are unfortunately now being hindered by the all-toofrequent occurrence — it is almost yearly — of cyclones,
which very rapidly wipe out previous significant
development progress. These cyclones put the country's
food security at risk and also severely affect the national
infrastructure and the resources on which the Madagascar
economy essentially depends. This year, Madagascar was
once again hit in a very short space of time by two
cyclones that took a toll of many victims and caused a
great deal of material damage.
The preliminary figures are that 25 per cent of the
health-services infrastructure in the affected areas was
destroyed and that 560,000 people have suffered losses. In
addition to the cyclones, which affect human and natural
resources, other natural disasters — such as locust invasions
in 1997, 1998 and 1999, drought and marine erosion —
have undermined the development prospects of Madagascar.
My country's Government undertook the necessary
measures to tackle the emergency situation. But given the
scope of the damage and the precariousness of the
economy, Madagascar is not in a position to meet the needs
of the victims on its own. These needs have been estimated
to amount to $3,681,361. This is the provisional estimate in
the latest report of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs.
We are confident that in response to the appeal
contained in the resolution that has just been adopted, a
great number of international actors will participate or
continue to participate significantly in the emergency rescue
and assistance efforts.

4

92nd plenary meeting
14 March 2000
However, we should not overlook the fact that,
notwithstanding the magnitude of emergency assistance
provided in cases of natural disasters — which focuses on
reducing somewhat people's immediate problems — this
type of action has its inherent limits. Once the crisis is
over, the whole problem of rehabilitation remains. This is
why the Government of Madagascar would like to draw
the attention of the international community to the
economic and financial difficulties that my country will
face in its reconstruction effort, which must be carried out
under particularly unfavourable conditions. At the
appropriate time my delegation will take the opportunity
to raise these issues with the appropriate bodies of our
Organization.
Two very important aspects of the problem are
worth raising already. First, rehabilitating equipment and
infrastructure will require increasing public expenditure
beyond sustainable levels, and a significant part of the
resources that had been earmarked for development
projects will have to be diverted. Secondly, the national
economic-growth prospects will be seriously undermined
by the drop in production resulting from the damage done
to the agricultural, transportation, communications and
energy sectors, and the loss of exports will worsen the
balance of payments.
In view of these difficulties, we express the hope
that the international community will consider favourably
and with understanding the extent to which it could
participate in the rehabilitation and reconstruction
programmes. This hope is justified by our belief that the
present and future steps undertaken by my Government
will receive the full attention of the General Assembly
and of the Economic and Social Council.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item
(b) of agenda item 20.
The meeting rose at 3.40 p.m.
