S/2006/626

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
7 August 2006
Original: English

Letter dated 7 August 2006 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
In the presidential statement (S/PRST/2006/35) adopted on 30 July 2006 the
Security Council requested that I report to the Council within one week on the
circumstances of the tragic incident that occurred in Qana earlier that day. This
letter is submitted pursuant to that request.
On 4 August 2006, representatives of the Government of Lebanon, the League
of Arab States and the Non-Aligned Movement called upon my Deputy, Mark
Malloch Brown, to convey their request that a full investigation should be
conducted in respect of the Qana incident.
It should be noted that a proper gathering of all relevant facts and their
presentation in a comprehensive report cannot be completed in seven days,
especially when the area in question is difficult to access because of ongoing
hostilities. Furthermore, although personnel of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) went to Qana following the attack, no United Nations personnel
were present at the scene when the attack occurred.
The following information is thus drawn from the official accounts sought
from and provided by the Governments of Lebanon and Israel and from United
Nations eyewitnesses who visited Qana in the aftermath of the attack, except where
otherwise stated. Copies of the Secretariat’s notes verbales to the Permanent
Missions of Israel and Lebanon and the responses thereto are attached to the present
letter (see annexes).
I would also like to draw to your attention the various reports that have already
been issued by international and local non-governmental organizations in respect of
the incident in Qana.
The situation in Qana prior to the attack
Qana is but one of numerous villages situated throughout southern Lebanon
which have, since the onset of the current hostilities on 12 July 2006, suffered
extensive bombing and shelling, resulting in, inter alia, the killings of civilians and
the massive internal displacement of the civilian population.
In peacetime, Qana has approximately 12,000 inhabitants. They are mainly
small farmers, shopkeepers and traders. Since hostilities began, Qana has been
isolated because of the destruction of roads leading to it. Qana has not been in the
UNIFIL area of operations since the reconfiguration of the mission in 2000. The
06-45784 (E) 080806

*0645784*

090806

S/2006/626

nearest UNIFIL outpost is in Al-Hinniyah, approximately 20 kilometres away by
road.
Qana is not a stranger to tragedy: 10 years ago, on 18 April 1996, more than
100 Lebanese civilians who had sought refuge in a UNIFIL compound located in
Qana were killed as a result of shelling by the Israel Defense Forces (IDF).
Regarding the current incident, in the early morning of 30 July 2006, Qana
was struck by missiles of the Israeli Air Force, causing civilian casualties and
damage to buildings.
The following is excerpted from the attached note verbale provided by the
Government of Israel:
“Qana is the center of Hizbullah’s regional headquarters. It contains
extensive weapons stockpiles, serves as a haven from fleeing terrorists, and is
the source of over 150 missiles launched into northern Israel. In Qana,
Hizbullah, a terrorist organization, maintains a regional command centre
which has been the planning site for numerous attacks against Israel.
“Since the start of hostilities, Israelis in 150 population centers have
faced unprecedented danger from a barrage of missiles and attacks emanating
from areas such as Qana. Like other operations, the goal of the raid was to
defend Israeli citizens.
“Early on the morning of 30 July 2006, the Israeli Air Force attacked
missile launch sites in the village of Qana. Prior to the operation, Israel
publicly called on the residents to move away from the terrorists and flee from
the areas where missiles are being launched. Leaflets were dropped from the
air urging civilians to leave the village on account of their own safety, as
Hizbullah routinely launches rockets in close proximity to residential
buildings. For several days, radio announcements were also made to the public
warning of a strike against Hizbullah. Israeli military activity in this area was
determined on the assumption that residents had heeded the warnings and
cleared out.”
The following quotations are excerpted from the attached documents provided
by the Government of Lebanon:
“On July 30, the Israeli Air Force struck a three-storey building in the
village of Qana where two extended families, the Shalhoubs and the Hashems,
had sought shelter. According to the Mayor of Qana, the civilians had taken
refuge there because the building had a reinforced basement. They were not
able to flee the area because of destroyed roads and the ongoing Israeli attacks.
“...
“None of the bodies recovered showed that there were militants mingled
among the civilians, and the rescuers found no weapons in the building that
was struck.”
“In an investigation conducted by Lebanese military authorities, there
was no indication that rockets were launched next to the building.
“Surveillance drones frequently over fly the village and as a result Israeli
forces must have known about the civilians.”

2

06-45784

S/2006/626

The attack
At 0815 hours on 30 July 2006, the Lebanese authorities informed UNIFIL
that a residential building in the village of Qana had been hit by Israeli air strikes
leading to a number of civilian casualties. According to the Lebanese authorities, at
approximately 0130 hours in the morning of 30 July 2006, a three-storey residential
building with a basement in a residential area in the village of Qana, southern
Lebanon, was struck by a missile or missiles launched by the Israeli Air Force. The
building collapsed, killing and seriously injuring a number of persons.
The Lebanese authorities asked UNIFIL to secure from IDF security clearance
and safe passage to QANA for the Lebanese rescue and medical teams, and to
dispatch UNIFIL medical and engineering teams to assist in the search and rescue
mission. UNIFIL immediately conveyed this request to the Northern Command of
IDF through regular liaison channels.
UNIFIL was informed by the Lebanese Army that the Lebanese police, civil
defence and Army had arrived at the scene at approximately 0700 hours, owing to
difficulties in reaching the site because of the ongoing heavy aerial shelling.
UNIFIL was further informed that the Lebanese Army, police and civil defence were
unable to commence rescue operations until 0900 hours because of the ongoing
aerial shelling. Accompanied by armoured personnel carriers for protection, two
UNIFIL medical teams — each composed of one doctor, two nurses and an
ambulance, and a bus for evacuation of the wounded accompanying the second
medical team — were dispatched to Qana at 0945 hours. The teams arrived in Qana
at 1015 hours and 1100 hours, respectively. At the time of their arrival, between 15
and 20 ambulances belonging to the Lebanese Red Cross, municipalities and
hospitals were present at the scene.
On arrival, both UNIFIL medical teams joined the Lebanese Red Cross,
Lebanese Army and other relief workers in the rescue operation. An unconfirmed
number of bodies had, by this time, been recovered from the debris of the collapsed
building and approximately eight survivors had been evacuated to the nearest
hospital. UNIFIL medical teams assisted in the recovery of 17 additional dead
bodies from the rubble, most of them of women and children. The UNIFIL medical
teams left the scene at 1715 hours. UNIFIL reported that three additional buildings
in the vicinity of the building that was struck were damaged and a number of
vehicles on the street in front of those buildings were either damaged or destroyed.
Later in the day on 30 July 2006, at the request of the Lebanese authorities,
UNIFIL dispatched a rescue and recovery team with an excavator, bulldozer and
other engineering equipment to Qana. That team removed debris and facilitated a
search of the wreckage of the building. After consultation with the Lebanese Army
and the Lebanese Red Cross, the UNIFIL rescue and recovery team left the scene at
1930 hours.
The Government of Lebanon has reported that, thus far, 28 corpses have been
found, including those of approximately 14 children. As recovery efforts have been
suspended for the time being, it is possible that this figure may rise.
On 1 August 2006, UNIFIL armoured personnel carriers escorted a United
Nations humanitarian convoy carrying food supplies, organized by the World Food
Programme, from Tyre to Qana and back. UNIFIL reported that approximately 300
inhabitants remained in Qana.

06-45784

3

S/2006/626

UNIFIL is not in a position to confirm or deny whether Hizbollah was
launching military activities from Qana in the days prior to or on 30 July.
The Government of Lebanon has stated that all 28 persons whose bodies have
been recovered to date were civilians. According to many residents of Qana who
were present at the time of the attack, and with whom UNIFIL personnel
subsequently spoke, the building was used by civilians.
Relief workers, human rights defenders and international journalists who
arrived in Qana after the attack on 30 July have stated that the survivors with whom
they spoke said they had been unable to flee Qana because the village was blocked
by craters and collapsed buildings, or had stayed behind because they were old, sick,
or lacked money or fuel for transport.
Statement of the International Committee of the Red Cross
Attention is drawn to the statement of the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC), issued on 30 July:
“The ICRC is alarmed by the increasing number of civilian casualties
resulting from the ongoing armed conflict.
“In today’s military operations by the IDF against the village of Qana, a
building sheltering civilians was directly hit. At the time of writing, the
Lebanese Red Cross society and the Lebanese civil defence have extracted 28
bodies from the rubble, 19 of whom were children.
“Issuing advance warning to the civilian population of impending attack
in no way relieves a warring party of its obligations under the rules and
principles of international humanitarian law. In particular, the principles of
distinction and proportionality must be respected at all times.
“19 days after the conflict began, the ICRC observes with great concern
the continuous escalation of hostilities and deplores the recurring lack of
respect for international humanitarian law by the warring parties.
“The ICRC once again urgently calls for a distinction to be drawn at all
times between civilians and civilian objects on one hand, and military
objectives on the other. All necessary precautions must be taken to spare
civilian life and objects and to ensure that the wounded have access to medical
facilities.”
Observations
I am gravely distressed by the tragic events in Qana and by the overall effect
of this conflict on the civilian populations of Lebanon and Israel. According to
official Lebanese and Israeli sources, as at 5 August 2006, after 25 days of conflict,
more than 933 Lebanese civilians and 35 Israeli civilians have been killed.
Approximately 915,000 Lebanese, amounting to one quarter of the country’s total
population and including more than 80 per cent of the population living south of the
Litani River, have been displaced by the conflict, and the majority of them are now
in need of assistance. Tens of thousands of Israelis have had to take refuge in air
raid shelters; many more have moved away from northern Israel.

4

06-45784

S/2006/626

The attack on Qana should be seen in the broader context of what could, on the
basis of preliminary information available to the United Nations, including
eyewitness accounts, be a pattern of violations of international law, including
international humanitarian law and international human rights law, committed
during the course of the current hostilities. I have repeatedly condemned all actions
that target civilians and I again call on all parties to the conflict to respect their
obligations under international humanitarian law and, in particular, to take all
necessary precautions to spare civilian life and property.
The effects of the current conflict on civilians in Lebanon and Israel rise to a
level of seriousness that requires further gathering of information, including
information on violations of international humanitarian law and international human
rights law. Accordingly, I support the calls for a more comprehensive investigation.
I should be grateful if you would bring this matter urgently to the attention of
the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

06-45784

5

S/2006/626

Annex III
Note verbale dated 3 August 2006 from the Permanent Mission
of Israel to the United Nations addressed to the Secretariat
The Permanent Mission of Israel to the United Nations presents its
compliments to the Secretariat of the United Nations and has the honour to refer to
the Presidential Statement of the Security Council (S/PRST/2006/35) dated 30 July
2006, concerning the shelling of a residential building by the Israeli Defense Forces
in Kfar Qana.
Qana is the centre of Hizbullah’s regional headquarters. It contains extensive
weapons stockpiles, serves as a haven for fleeing terrorists, and is the source of over
150 missiles launched into northern Israel. In Qana, Hizbullah, a terrorist
organization, maintains a regional command centre which has been the planning site
for numerous attacks against Israel.
Since the start of hostilities, Israelis in 150 population centres have faced
unprecedented danger from a barrage of missiles and attacks emanating from areas
such as Qana. Like other operations, the goal of the Qana raid was to defend Israeli
citizens.
Early on the morning of 30 July 2006, the Israeli Air Force attacked missile
launch sites in the village of Qana. Prior to the operation, Israel publicly called on
the residents to move away from the terrorists and flee from the areas where
missiles were being launched. Leaflets were dropped from the air urging civilians to
leave the village on account of their own safety, as Hizbullah routinely launches
rockets in close proximity to residential buildings. For several days, radio
announcements were also made to the public warning of a strike against Hizbullah.
Israeli military activity in this area was determined on the assumption that residents
had heeded the warnings and cleared out.
A number of raids were conducted on the morning of 30 July 2006, beginning
at 12 midnight and continuing on through 8.30 a.m. One raid, occurring between
midnight and 1 a.m., attacked the vicinity of the building in question. Inquiries into
the attack, including an independent statement by the Lebanese Government
hospital in Tyre, now place the number of civilian casualties at 28 and not 54, as
was initially reported.
Israel focuses on targets that are distinctively terrorist targets. Israel does not
target innocent civilians. While regretting the civilian casualties of this operation,
Israel blames Hizbullah for manipulating and using innocent Lebanese civilians as
human shields. Hizbullah terrorists have repeatedly hijacked the civilian population
of southern Lebanon and taken innocent Lebanese civilians hostage as shields
during terrorist activities. Israel deeply regrets the loss of human life in this conflict.
The same cannot be said for the terrorist group Hizbullah. When a Lebanese child is
killed, Israel mourns; when an Israeli child is killed, Hizbullah celebrates.
Concern for the lives of innocent Lebanese civilians, who are cruelly exploited
by Hizbullah in its aggression against Israel, is an integral part of Israel’s combat
doctrine. Israel takes extreme care to minimize the harm and suffering to the civilian
population, which comes at the cost of operational advantages. The leaflets dropped

8

06-45784

S/2006/626

urging the residents of Kfar Qana to leave reduced Israel’s element of surprise,
giving Hizbullah terrorists prior warning and endangering Israeli troops in the area.
Aggressions against Israel have only intensified. Yesterday, a record 230
missiles flew from southern Lebanon into Israel, bringing the total of missiles fired
to over 2,000. Earlier today, 8 Israelis were killed and another 36 were injured in
continuing attacks.

06-45784

9

S/2006/626

Annex IV
Letter dated 2 August 2006 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i.
of the Permanent Mission of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General
With reference to the note verbale of the United Nations Secretariat, dated
31 July 2006, I have the honour to enclose herewith some early relevant information
pertaining to the Qana massacre which was made available to the Permanent
Mission of Lebanon.
At the same time, I wish to convey the request of the Lebanese Government
that you establish a fact-finding mission to investigate this tragic incident.
The Government of Lebanon expresses its readiness to cooperate fully with
such a mission.
(Signed) Caroline Ziade
Chargé d’affaires a.i.

10

06-45784

S/2006/626

[Original: Arabic]
Lebanese Republic
Ministry of Information
Report on the events of Sunday, 30 July 2006
On Monday, 31 July, day 20 of the open Israeli aggression against Lebanon,
the airforce attacked areas in the south and the Bekaa, and the Lebanese army dealt
with the Israeli attempt to disembark close to Al-Yammoune following three attacks
on the area which targeted a Lebanese army position at Ouadi Al-Zeitouni in
Baalbek as well as a civilian car in Douris.
The Israeli airforce also attacked a Lebanese army position in the area of Iqlim
Al-Taffah (Nabatiye area), setting an armoured personnel carrier on fire.
Late the previous night, a civilian was killed in Tair Haifa as a result of the
Israeli attacks close to the coastal port of Al-Naqoura to the south of Tyre.
Day 19 (Qana massacre) Tyre
On Sunday, 30 July, the south and the whole of Lebanon awoke to the horror
of a massacre carried out by the Israeli enemy in the town of Qana in which 62
people were killed, the majority of the victims — over 40 of them — being children,
including 15 who were physically or mentally handicapped, as stated by Deputy
Bahiya Al-Hariri in the Lebanese Parliament.
On 18 April 1996 Qana had faced the same situation as on day 19 of Israel’s
open war in July 2006, one which conveyed the same “message”: there is no hiding
place from Israeli crimes and savagery — not the premises of the United Nations,
people’s homes, shelters or roads, nor are ambulances or non-military lorries
sacrosanct. The same message protects the criminals from accountability and
punishment and abandons the bodies of children to the most lethal of weapons,
pursuing them in the playground, in the shelter, in their mothers’ embrace, in the
arms of their fathers and on the shoulders of their grandparents, hunting them down
on the road while they attempt to flee to safety within the walls which they believe
will give them protection from the disasters of two centuries, the twentieth and the
twenty-first.
They were children and their families are innocent. Nevertheless, they no
longer believed for, in 1996, the enemy had called on them to leave their homes
under penalty of being bombed, and when they complied the enemy pursued them to
the compound of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and poured down on
them “the Grapes of Wrath”. The enemy ordered the people of Marouahine to
evacuate the town and when they did so, they incinerated 24 of them who were
making their escape on board a lorry. The same had happened earlier in the case of
people from Al-Mansouri in an ambulance which became their coffin. For that
reason, they preferred to stay in their homes and the walls, the toys and the beds
were plastered with their flesh and blood.
The first Qana incident was perpetrated by the Government of Shimon Peres, a
proponent of the “greater Middle East”; the second, by the Government of Ehud
Olmert, ripped the children of Qana to pieces under the slogan the “new Middle

06-45784

11

S/2006/626

East”. Of these words, the children of Qana knew only the “East” and “new”,
thinking of new clothes and new toys; although they were only children they
dismissed middle solutions involving the “east”, and for that reason they perished.
Qana, which suffered the first massacre at noon, awoke to the second one at
dawn when the enemy attacked residential districts, destroying a number of homes,
the largest of which was a three-storey building standing on the Qana-Hay
Al-Kharija road. According to Abbas Hashim, about 60 people from the Hashim and
Shalhoub families were sheltering in the building, thinking that they were safer
there than in their own single-storey homes.
Ambulances and rescue workers rushed to the site and worked to lift up the
debris and pull out the dead and injured but after seven hours, because of the
shattered roads, despite the continuing attacks on the area and the determination to
drive out the innocent, even if they were only dead and injured people, enemy
aircraft attacked a Red Cross ambulance on the Qana-Tyre road and renewed their
attacks on the area around the towns of Qana and Saddiqine. Throughout the hours
before noon, the rescue operations were accompanied by successive attacks on the
two towns and the outskirts of Deir Aamar.
The rescue workers and ambulance men had difficulty in lifting the wreckage
to pull out the victims and the Red Cross called for excavators and lifting
equipment. A Civil Defence official in the Tyre area also appealed for assistance in
lifting the rubble and pulling out the dead and injured from the Hashim building and
other residential buildings.
The victims from the Hashim family are known to include: Mahdi Ahmad
Hashim, Hassan Hashim, Ibrahim Hashim, Fatima Muhammad Hashim, Ali Ahmad
Hashim, Muhammad Mahdi Hashim, Ibrahim Ahmad Hashim and Ja’far Mahdi
Hashim.
The victims from the Shalhoub family are known to include: Lina Muhammad
Shalhoub, Nabila Ali Shalhoub, Ali Ahmad Mahmoud Shalhoub, Taysir Muhammad
Shalhoub, Zeinab Ali Amin Shalhoub, Ali Ahmad Shalhoub and Yahya Ahmad
Shalhoub.
In addition to the victims from those two families, the following were killed:
Khadija Ali Younis, Maryam Hassan Muhsin and Ali Zeid.
The following are known to have been injured: Najru Shalhoub, Zeinab
Mahmoud Yousif, Muhammad Qasim Shalhoub, Muhammad Ali Shalhoub, Hassan
Muhammad Shalhoub, Khadija Ubbeid, Hiyam Hashim, Hala Ahmad Shalhoub,
Zeinab Shalhoub and Iman Hussein.
At that time, the Israeli airforce was stepping up its attacks on the villages in
the Tyre area concentrating on the village of Deir Aamess near Qana in order to
impede the rescue operations. The enemy threatened the remaining villagers with a
similar fate if they did not depart.
In the town of Deir Qanoun Al-Nahr the body of Zeinab Azz Al-Din is still
buried in the rubble of the recently destroyed home of a member of the Azz Al-Din
family. In the town of Saddiqine there are a number of carbonized bodies in cars that
were hit by the enemy on the Al-Aasi road. In the town of Jbal Al-Botm there is still
a dead body in a bombed-out building.

12

06-45784

S/2006/626

Annex V
Letter dated 4 August 2006 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the
Permanent Mission of Lebanon to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General
With reference to my previous letter, dated 2 August 2006, I have the honour
to enclose herewith additional information pertaining to the Qana massacre which
was made available to the Permanent Mission of Lebanon.
(Signed) Caroline Ziade
Chargé d’affaires a.i.

06-45784

13

S/2006/626

The arrow above indicates the location of the house where the Qana massacre took
place.
• The news media showed a picture provided by Israeli television of the location
from which the Israeli Army claimed the missiles were launched. The picture
shown [by the media] is different from the picture above in the following
respects:
1.

The location shown was flatter and not surrounded by valleys.

2.

The location shown had more houses.

• The picture above shows that it would be impossible for a missile launcher to
reach the launch site because of the steepness and narrowness of the roads.
• It is also impossible to launch from the location indicated because it faces to
the west and the supposed launch direction should have been to the South.

06-45784

21

S/2006/626

Location of the Qana massacre/Al-Khariba

22

06-45784

S/2006/626

[Original: Arabic]
No. 1928/MM
2 August 2006
Subject:

Massacre perpetrated by the forces of the Israeli enemy in Qana

1.
At 01:30 hours on 30 July 2006, Israeli warplanes attacked a two-storey
building with a basement. Several citizens had taken shelter in this basement from
the constant Israeli bombardment of the town.
2.
An enemy aircraft fired a missile at the building, striking the roof; the building
collapsed on the cellar. Another missile also struck very close to the building.
3.
At 7:30 on the same day, elements of the Civil Defence, the Red Cross and the
Lebanese Army headed for Qana to rescue and assist citizens. They were unable to
reach the site because of the heavy presence of enemy helicopters and warplanes.
4.
At 9 o’clock, rescue operations began after relief agencies and workers had
contacted Lieutenant-Colonel Castiglioni of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) and they were able to begin rescue operations.
5.

The building that was targeted is located at the edge of a valley.

6.
No missile was launched from Qana or from any place near the targeted site
(according to the available information).
7.

Relief elements from UNIFIL intervened at approximately 14:00 hours.

8.
The Israeli media reported the opinion of the commander of the Israeli Air
Force, Brigadier General Amir Eshel, who attempted to obscure the picture saying:
“It is possible that various things were stored inside the house, things that ultimately
caused an explosion; moreover, the Army issued an estimate that explosives inside
the building exploded 7 hours after the collapse of the building and led to its
collapse”.
9.
On 2 August 2006, the newspaper Ha’aretz revealed doubts about the “facts
presented to the press by the Israeli Army” with regard to the bombardment of the
building in Qana. According to the newspaper, it emerged that no traces of missile
launchers were found in the area of or inside the building targeted by Israeli aircraft.
The newspaper added that the Israeli Army did not have information that Hizbollah
elements were at the location. This information contradicts the claims of the Israeli
Army and the pictures it showed on the media claiming to show a missile-launching
vehicle entering the building in Qana in which children and their parents sheltered.
10. After the Qana massacre, a spokesman for the Israeli Army said that Hizbollah
had fired mortars from near the location of the house that the Israeli Army had
bombarded.
11. In another statement, the commander of the Air Force claimed that a missile
had been launched from a location very near to the house that was bombarded and
that that had led to the Qana massacre.
12. On 2 August 2006 an Israeli military spokesman stated on the Ha’aretz
newspaper’s website “during the course of investigations carried out by the Israeli

06-45784

23

S/2006/626

Army in the last two days (48-hour ceasefire), there were, apparently, no missile
launchers near the site of the house that was targeted in Qana”. The spokesman
reiterated his regret concerning the civilian casualties at Qana.
13.

Coordinates of the targeted house: 108640/142900

For your perusal.

To: The Minister for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates

24

06-45784

S/2006/626

General Directorate of Internal Security Forces
Office of the Director General
Report of the Director General of the Internal Security Forces on the
massacre perpetrated by the Zionist enemy in the town of Qana
At 01:30 hours on 30 July 2006, warplanes of the Israeli enemy repeatedly
attacked the town of Qana in the Khariba district. In two raids the planes targeted a
three-story building with a basement shelter in which there were approximately 62
civilians. The raids either killed or injured the majority of those persons. There were
conflicting initial reports as to the number of dead and wounded.
On 1 August 2006, the final number of dead stood at 27 (16 of whom were
children), 16 wounded (3 of whom were children) and 7 persons missing.
Attachments:
Two tables indicating the number of dead and wounded in the Qana massacre

06-45784

25

S/2006/626

[Original: Arabic]

Lebanese Red Cross
Beirut, 3 August 2006
To whom it may concern:
In accordance with internal report No. 182/7/06, issued on 31 July 2006 by the
Director of the first aid teams of the Lebanese Red Cross (LRC) on the
bombardment of a building in the Qana area, and the testimony of some of the
rescue workers, we can report that at 7:00 a.m. on 30 July 2006, after the artillery
shelling of the Qana area, reports arrived of wounded and dead under the rubble of
the building. Ambulances were dispatched immediately. As they were moving, the
area was again bombarded several times, forcing the ambulances to stop until the
bombardment ceased. The ambulances then started moving again and tried to reach
the location of the building via several access roads, but they were unsuccessful
because of the mass of rubble which prevented them from advancing and the
intensity of the bombardment. We emphasize that we contacted the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) to make arrangements and contacts to facilitate
the rescue operation, but to no avail. However, the ambulances completed their
approach and stopped approximately 600 metres from the building. The rescue
workers proceeded on foot, being assisted initially by some of the residents in their
attempts to remove those wounded people who could be rescued to the place where
the ambulances were parked. At 8 a.m., after security assurances had been received
from ICRC, the LRC ambulances were able to reach the site and evacuated and
rescued eight wounded. They also transported 15 deceased persons (8 of whom were
children). The operation continued until 7 p.m., when the LRC ambulances
departed.

26

06-45784

S/2006/626

Table of the names of those killed in the Qana massacre
Number

06-45784

Name

Age

1

Hasna Hashim

75

2

Hawra’ Muhammad Qasim Shalhoub

12

3

Zahra’ Muhammad Qasim Shalhoub

2

4

Lina Muhammad Mahmoud Shalhoub

30

5

Nabila Ali Amin Shalhoub

40

6

‘Ula Ahmad Mahmoud Shalhoub

25

7

Khadija Ali Younis

31

8

Zeinab Muhammad Ali Amin Shalhoub

6

9

Fatima Muhammad Hashim

4

10

Maryam Hassan Muhsin

30

11

Itaf al-Zabad

45

12

Ruqayya Muhammad Hashim

7

13

Ahmad Mahmoud Shalhoub

55

14

Ibrahim Hashim

65

15

Ali Ahmad Hashim

3

16

Abbas Mahmoud Hashim

9 months

17

Mahdi Mahmoud Hashim

68

18

Ibrahim Ahmad Hashim

7

19

Ja’far Mahmoud Hashim

10

20

Taysir Ali Shalhoub

39

21

Ali Ahmad Mahmoud Shalhoub

17

22

Yahya Muhammad Qasim Shalhoub

9

23

Ali Muhammad Qasim Shalhoub

10

24

Yusif Ahmad Mahmoud Shalhoub

6

25

Qasim Sameeh Shalhoub

9

26

Hussein Ahmad Hashim

12

27

Qasim Muhammad Shalhoub

7

29

S/2006/626

Table of the names of those wounded in the Qana massacre

30

Number

Name of injured

Age

1

Noor al-Houda Muhammad Al-Hashim

13

2

Najwa Ali Shalhoub

35

3

Rabab Mahmoud Yusif

41

4

Noor Muhammad Al-Hashim

13

5

Hiyam Ibrahim Hashim

31

6

Hala Ahmad Shalhoub

26

7

Iman Hussein Dimashq

19

8

Zeinab Ahmad Shalhoub

9

Fatima Kamal Kamal

Unknown

22

10

Muhammad Shalhoub

35

11

Ahmad Ibrahim Hashim

42

12

Muhammad Ali Shalhoub

41

13

Hassan Muhammad Shalhoub

4

14

Muhammad Qasim Shalhoub

37

15

Ali Musa Hashim

23

16

Jawad Ali Hashim

34

06-45784
