S/2019/759

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 September 2019
Original: English

Strengthening the partnership between the United Nations
and the African Union on issues of peace and security in
Africa, including on the work of the United Nations Office
to the African Union
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to the statement of the President of the
Security Council dated 16 December 2014 (S/PRST/2014/27), in which the Council
requested that the Secretary-General submit an annual report on ways to strengthen the
partnership between the United Nations and the African Union on issues of peace and
security in Africa, including on the work of the United Nations Office to the African
Union (UNOAU). The report provides an update on the implementation of the Joint
United Nations-African Union Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace and
Security, the current status of the partnership and efforts to enhance the partnership
between the two organizations. It also provides a description of the activities carried
out by UNOAU since the issuance of my previous report (S/2018/678), in July 2018,
including those carried out on issues reflected in Council resolutions 2378 (2017) and
2457 (2019) and in line with the Sustainable Development Goals.

II. The United Nations and the African Union
strategic partnership
2.
A strong partnership between the United Nations and the African Union is
essential to effectively seek solutions to the increasingly complex peace and security
challenges in Africa. The two organizations are leveraging their respective
comparative advantages towards achieving the common objectives of enhancing peace
and security, promoting human rights and good governance and implementing Agenda
2063: The Africa We Want and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.

United Nations Security Council and African Union Peace and
Security Council
3.
Greater consultation in the decision-making of the United Nations Security
Council and the African Union Peace and Security Council remains critical for

19-15192 (E)

270919

*1915192*

S/2019/759

achieving strategic convergence and coherence in addressing peace and security
challenges in Africa. On 19 July 2018, in New York, the members of the two bodies
held their twelfth annual joint consultative meeting, at which they reviewed peace
and security issues, in particular the situations in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and South Sudan and the progress made on implementing the African Union
flagship initiative, Silencing the Guns by 2020. The two organs have committed
themselves to strengthening cooperation between the United Nations and the African
Union, including through joint missions to conflict areas in Africa.
4.
During the reporting period, my special representatives and envoys continued
to brief the Peace and Security Council and the Security Council, jointly with their
African Union counterparts, enabling the Councils to take into account the
perspectives of both organizations in their decisions. The Peace and Security Council
also conducted field missions to the Central African Republic, Somalia and South
Sudan to gain first-hand insight into the realities on the ground. The field missions
were supported by the United Nations and provided an opportunity for the Peac e and
Security Council to interact with my special representatives and with other officials
in those three countries.
5.
The three African non-permanent members of the Security Council continued to
provide a critical link between the two Councils, increasingly articulating African
perspectives and common positions on issues of concern to the continent. In New
York, they invited the Permanent Observer Mission of the African Union to the United
Nations, the Office of the Assistant Secretary-General for Africa and the Office of the
Special Adviser on Africa to provide monthly briefings on the programme of work of
the Security Council. In Addis Ababa, the African Union Commission and UNOAU
facilitated monthly coordination meetings between representatives of the incoming
President of the Security Council and the Chair of the Peace and Security Council to
share information and, where possible, enhance coordination and synergies between
the agendas of the two Councils.

United Nations Secretariat and African Union Commission
6.
The strategic partnership between the Secretariat and African Union Commission
continued to deepen. The Chairperson of the African Union Commission, Moussa Faki
Mahamat, and I have continued to prioritize the development of a systematic,
predictable and strategic partnership. Since the signing of the Joint United NationsAfrican Union Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security in April
2017 and the African Union-United Nations Framework for the Implementation of
Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development in January 2018, the
partnership has been characterized by more frequent and constructive exchanges, as
well as more systematic coordination. In my address at the thirty-second ordinary
session of the Assembly of the African Union, held in Addis Ababa in February 2019,
I noted that there had been a quantum leap in strategic cooperation and that we were
now better positioned to address our shared challenges.
7.
On 6 May 2019, in New York, the Chairperson of the Commission and I
convened the third African Union-United Nations annual conference, at which
participants welcomed the progress made in the implementation of the two joint
frameworks mentioned above. Conference attendees also agreed to strengthen joint
efforts towards the implementation of the African Union initiative on silencing the
guns in Africa by 2020, in line with the press statement of the 829th meeting of the
Peace and Security Council and with Security Council resolution 2457 (2019).
Meeting participants further welcomed the strengthened cooperation aimed at
promoting gender parity and the leadership of women, including in peace and
mediation processes, as well as at advancing sustainable development and economic
2/17

19-15192

S/2019/759

growth. The Chairperson and I further emphasized the importance of taking decisive
action on climate change and underlined the urgency of the issue and the need for a
significant increase in political will. The meeting highlighted the remarkable
solidarity and leadership shown by African countries in advancing the normative
framework for the protection and assistance of refugees, returnees and internally
displaced persons. Conference attendees also reviewed current challenges to pea ce,
security and development on the continent, including in the Central African Republic,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Libya, South Sudan and the Sudan and in the
Sahel and the Horn of Africa.
8.
On 6 December 2018, in New York, the Chairperson and I signed a joint
declaration to renew our ongoing commitment to peace and security, including
through cooperation for African Union-led peace support operations, and to
promoting good governance, sustainable development and human rights on the
African continent. In the declaration, we recognized the progress made to date in
enhancing those operations, in particular in human rights and conduct and discipline
compliance, in joint planning and reporting and in financial management. We
welcomed the adoption of the Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations
Peacekeeping Operations by States Members of the United Nations and various
intergovernmental organizations in September 2018 and reiterated that African Union
peace support operations were a vital tool in the international peace and security
architecture, including in peace enforcement and counter-terrorism. We made a
commitment to further collaboration to ensure continued progress in that area.
9.
In July 2018, the Deputy Secretary-General conducted a joint high-level
solidarity mission, under the auspices of the African Women Leaders Network, to
Chad, the Niger and South Sudan, together with the Special Envoy of the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission on Women, Peace and Security, the Executive
Director of the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of
Women (UN-Women), the Executive Director of the United Nations Population Fund,
my Special Adviser on Africa, my Special Representative on Sexual Violence in
Conflict and my Special Adviser for the Sahel. They were joined by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Sweden. The mission served to highlight the participation and
leadership of women in peace and security, development and humanitarian issues in
the three countries, with an additional focus on zero tolerance for gender-based
violence and climate security challenges in the Sahel. Members of the delegation
conducted field visits in Bol in Chad, Maradi in the Niger and Wau and Malakal in
South Sudan, where they engaged with women, young people and the wider
population affected by conflict. Joint high-level field visits by the Department of
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and the Department of Peace Operations, and their
counterparts in the African Union Commission, were also carried out in the Central
African Republic, Libya, South Sudan and the Sudan.
10. The fifteenth and sixteenth meetings of the United Nations-African Union Joint
Task Force on Peace and Security were held in New York on 22 September 2018 and
in Addis Ababa on 12 February 2019, respectively. Relevant commissioners of the
African Union and under-secretaries-general of the United Nations discussed progress
made in the implementation of the United Nations-African Union Framework for
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security. At those meetings, Senior officials held
discussions on the most pressing peace and security challenges in Africa, including
the situations in the Central African Republic, Libya and South Sudan, as well as in
the Great Lakes region, in the Horn of Africa, with a focus on Somalia, in the Lake
Chad Basin and in the Sahel, in particular Mali. They underlined the importance of
strengthening collaboration, including in relation to the women and peace and
security agenda, the Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative and the sustainability and
predictability of funding for African Union peace support operations.
19-15192

3/17

S/2019/759

11. The Secretariat and the African Union Commission conducted a technical -level
joint review in August 2018 on the implementation, over the previous two years, of
two pilot knowledge exchange programmes in the areas of operational support,
namely the staff exchange programme and the participation of Commission staff in
the senior mission leadership and resource training programme of the Secretariat. The
review team concluded that the programmes were significantly beneficial for both
organizations and recommended their continuation with minor modifications. The
Deputy Chairperson of the African Union Commission and the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Operational Support subsequently agreed to further institutionalize the
programmes.
12. The twelfth annual United Nations-African Union consultative meeting on the
prevention, management and resolution of conflict was held in Addis Ababa on 11 and
12 March 2019, with technical-level participation from the African Union, the United
Nations and the regional economic communities. Meeting participants discussed
regional dynamics on the continent; ways to prevent conflict, sustain peace, support
mediation processes and implement peace agreements; and support for electoral
processes. In addition, from 20 to 22 March 2019, the African Union Commission and
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) organized a multi-stakeholder
dialogue to discuss collaboration on conflict analysis and early warning mechanisms
at the country and regional levels.
13. It is important to highlight that the restructuring of the peace and security
architecture was also aimed at improving the ability of the United Nations Secretariat
to serve as an effective partner to the African Union. The establishment of the Office
of the Assistant Secretary-General for Africa within the new shared regional structure
of the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and the Department of Peace
Operations brings together the relevant expertise previously found within the former
Department of Political Affairs and Department of Peacekeeping Operations. As a
result, there is now a United Nations Headquarters focal point for issues relating to the
partnership with the African Union on peace and security and a single office responsible
for providing unified strategic, political and operational backstopping for UNOAU.

III. The United Nations and African Union operational partnership
Challenges and opportunities to peace and security in Africa
14. The challenges to peace and security faced in some parts of the continent are
increasingly complex and volatile. While progress was made in resolving the conflicts
in the Central African Republic and South Sudan, those situations have remained
fragile and require continued engagement and support by the international
community. The situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo has also remained
fragile, in particular in the eastern part of the country, and was complicated by the
outbreak of the Ebola virus disease. The situation in Somalia has remained largely
unchanged since my previous report, while the security situations in Libya and the
Sahel have deteriorated significantly.
15. As indicated in my 2018 report, the primary underlying structural challenges to
achieving lasting peace and security in Africa continue to be political and
socioeconomic exclusion and discrimination; weak governance, including with regard
to the rule of law, human rights, the delivery of basic services and the equitable
management of natural resources; and the effects of climate change and food
insecurity. Those weaknesses are compounded by external interference and proxy
conflicts, violent extremism and terrorism, organized crime, corruption and the
absence of effective State authority in some parts of the continent. The impact of
4/17

19-15192

S/2019/759

climate change on peace and security in Africa continues to increase stress on already
vulnerable communities in the Horn of Africa, the Lake Chad Basin and the Sahel. A
comprehensive and coordinated approach involving international, regional and
national stakeholders is required to address those problems.
16. In Libya, the escalation of violence and the increasing reported influx of
sophisticated weapons and ammunition posed a continued threat to peace and security
in the country and the greater Sahel region. The stalled political process and the
current security situation further undermined the prospects of holding elections. On
4 April, the Libyan National Army under General Khalifa Haftar launched a military
offensive to capture Tripoli, resulting in a stalemate between the Army and the United
Nations-recognized Government of National Accord.
17. In Mali and the Sahel, and throughout the Lake Chad Basin region, the increasing
threats of terrorism and violent extremism perpetrated by terrorist groups allied with
Al-Qaida, Islamic State in the Greater Sahara and Boko Haram, as well as the
proliferation of militias, continued to pose major challenges to collective efforts to
achieve lasting peace and sustainable development. The effect of climate change was
also seen on scarce natural resources, notably around Lake Chad, as were the linkages
with intensified conflicts along community lines involving the Fulani pastoralists and
the Tuareg communities, spreading from northern through central Mali.
18. In the Horn of Africa, political transitions continued to pose challenges to
already fragile countries, and political fragility was further complicated by external
interference. The rapprochement between Ethiopia and Eritrea introduced new
dynamics in the region. Moreover, a political breakthrough in the Sudan helped to
initiate a transition to civilian-led rule. Challenges remained, however, including the
slow implementation of the Revitalized Peace Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in South Sudan, the tense relations between the Federal Government of
Somalia and the country’s federal member states, tensions between Kenya and
Somalia and tensions in parts of Ethiopia.
19. In the Central Africa region, the overall political, peace and security situation
remained tenuous. Several countries continued to experience protracted a rmed
conflict, including activities by non-State armed groups, as well as marked
humanitarian crises, often with significant transborder dimensions, and terrorism. At
the same time, the signing of the peace agreement in the Central African Republic, on
6 February, by 14 armed groups, under the auspices of the African Union and with
support from the United Nations and the Economic Community of Central African
States (ECCAS), was an important milestone towards a durable political solution in
the country. Resource mobilization emerged as a major challenge for the
implementation of the agreement.
20. The Southern Africa subregion remained generally stable. At the same time,
there were apparent risks to political stability stemming from public discontent over
the lack of accountability for alleged acts of corruption, the abuse of authority and
the politicization of key institutions of democracy. Recent waves of natural disasters
(Tropical Cyclones Idai and Kenneth), combined with acute economic and financial
crises and the emerging threat of violent extremism, could worsen the plight of
vulnerable communities and undermine the recent gains made through democratic
transitions.
21. The United Nations continued to work with the regions and governments of the
affected countries to address those challenges through conflict prevention, mediation,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts. Both the interconnectedness of the peace and
security situations and the relations between and within States illustrate the
importance of seeking common regional approaches. The Chairperson of the African
Union Commission and I are also exploring ways to strengthen existing mechanisms
19-15192

5/17

S/2019/759

for coordination and an integrated response to challenges relating to peace and
security, development and climate change in the Horn of Africa and the Sahel.

Partnership in conflict prevention and peacemaking
22. The United Nations continued to work closely with the African Union, regional
economic communities and regional mechanisms striving to prevent conflict through
political dialogue and mediation efforts.
23. The African Union increased its efforts to fast-track the implementation of its
Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative, and the United Nations provided advice and
direct support for the initiative, including technical assistance to the African Union
Peace and Security Department in support of its conflict prevention and mediation
initiatives. The Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs supported the
operationalization of the Mediation Support Unit of the African Union, including
through the development of a draft mediation training manual. It also assisted in the
organization of a policy dialogue workshop led by the African Union High
Representative for Silencing the Guns in Africa, held in Addis Ababa on 11 and
12 October 2018, which brought together leading peacemakers in Africa who agreed
to develop an action plan to fast-track implementation. As part of the 2019 Africa
Dialogue Series, the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa, in close cooperation
with the African Union Commission, held a session, on 21 May 2019, on the
contribution of youth to sustaining peace and sustainable development and discussed
their role in implementing the Silencing the Guns initiative.
24. Following the adoption by the Security Council of its resolution 2457 (2019) in
support of the Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative, I asked the Assistant Secretary General for Africa to establish an inter-agency task force to coordinate and enhance
United Nations support for the initiative. On 10 April 2019, the United Nations
launched the Task Force to support the African Union Initiative on Silencing the Guns
in Africa by 2020, which was tasked with developing priority areas for increased
support for implementing the initiative. That effort was carried out in close
consultation with the African Union Commission and in line with the priorities of the
African Union Master Road Map of Practical Steps to Silence the Guns in Africa by
the Year 2020. Subsequently, in May 2019, at United Nations Headquarters, the
African Union Commission presented its “fast-tracking action” strategy and held
consultations with the Secretariat and Member States to galvanize additional support.
On 7 July, the African Union Assembly endorsed the topic, “Silencing the guns:
creating conducive conditions for Africa’s development”, as the African Union theme
for the year 2020.
25. On 10 and 11 July, the Office of Counter-Terrorism and the Government of
Kenya, in cooperation with the African Union, hosted the first African Regional High level Conference on Counter-Terrorism and the Prevention of Violent Extremism
Conducive to Terrorism, which helped to mobilize support for African effo rts in those
areas. In the margins of the Conference, the Department of Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs, together with the African Union Commission, the Government of Kenya and
the United Nations country team in Kenya, organized a side event on the rol e of
African youth in silencing the guns, bringing together over 50 youth representatives
to discuss good practices and proposed actions in support of the initiative.
26. The Secretariat and the African Union Commission continued to conduct regular
conflict prevention and joint horizon-scanning meetings. They also conducted joint
technical visits to regional economic community headquarters to share information,
carry out joint analysis and strengthen working relationships. Support for
strengthening the participation of women in mediation and conflict prevention
6/17

19-15192

S/2019/759

continued, in particular through the Network of African Women in Conflict
Prevention and Mediation (FemWise-Africa), by assisting in the development of
policy documents, outreach strategies and training, capacity-building and field
deployment activities.
27. The key impact of international, continental and subregional alignment was
illustrated in Madagascar, where collaboration among the African Union, the United
Nations, the Southern African Development Community and other partners prevented
the deterioration of the political crisis and facilitated peaceful, free, fair and credible
elections on 7 November and 19 December 2018. In the Comoros, despite efforts led
by the African Union following the controversial referendum of July 2018, challenges
remained, with limited progress made in breaking the political deadlock.
28. In West Africa, the United Nations worked in Guinea-Bissau in close
collaboration with the other members of the group of five international partners
represented in the country, namely, the African Union, the Community of Portuguese speaking Countries, the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and
the European Union, to provide good offices in support of efforts under the C onakry
Agreement on the implementation of the ECOWAS Road Map for the Resolution of
the Political Crisis in Guinea-Bissau. Those actions led to the successful conduct of
the legislative elections on 10 March 2019, the appointment of a prime minister and
the formation of a government, as well as to the decision to set the presidential
elections for 24 November 2019. In Liberia, in May and June 2019, the African Union,
ECOWAS and the United Nations fostered a dialogue between the Government of
Liberia and the opposition group, the Council of Patriots, to create the conditions for
a peaceful protest by the latter, thus guaranteeing respect for the right of citizens to
peaceful demonstration while ensuring the preservation of law and order.
29. Furthermore, the United Nations worked closely with countries of the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G5 Sahel) to strengthen the capacities of public institutions in
cross-border issues, in particular on community safety and social cohesion in the
Liptako-Gourma region (Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger) through a UNDP project.
In helping to address the structural challenges in the Sahel, the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) and the Department of Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs fostered closer ties with regional bodies, especially the
permanent secretariat of the G5 Sahel, not only to create coherence between the
United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel and the G5 Sahel strategy and its
Priority Investment Programme, but also to enhance alignment, synergy and
coordination with partners’ strategies in the region. In that regard, the Department
provided financial and technical support for the establishment of the Sahelian Threat
Analysis and Early Warning Centre in Burkina Faso, while continuing to provide
support to the Sahel Ministerial Coordination Platform. The Platform brings together
countries of the region and international partners to promote coherence between the
17 existing Sahel Strategies and to enhance synergy of action in their implementation.
A technical secretariat, jointly led by UNOWAS and the African Union, has been
established to support the regular work of the Platform along four thematic groups on
security, governance, development and resilience.
30. In the case of Libya, the Chairperson of the African Union Commission and I have
called for an immediate ceasefire and a return to the peace process and continued to
advocate for a single road map, while acknowledging the complementary roles of both
organizations. I visited the country in April 2019, as did the Chairperson. Those visits
followed a joint visit conducted in March by the African Union Commissioner for Peace
and Security and my Under-Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs,
to support United Nations-led efforts aimed at reaching a political settlement to end the
conflict there. My Special Representative for Libya continues to provide weekly written
updates on developments in the country to all members of the Libya Quartet, including
19-15192

7/17

S/2019/759

the African Union, and has honoured all invitations to brief the African Union
intergovernmental mechanisms dealing with Libya, including the Ad Hoc High -level
Committee on Libya. It is imperative that those efforts continue.
31. Through my Special Adviser on the Sudan, the United Nations coordinated with
the African Union and Ethiopia and supported their efforts to facilitate a consensual
and civilian-led transition in the Sudan. I welcomed the signing on 17 August 2019
of the Political Agreement and the Constitutional Declaration, which paved the way
for a transition to civilian-led rule. I also called on all stakeholders to continue the
timely, inclusive and transparent implementation of that Agreement and to resolve
any outstanding issues through dialogue. In Darfur, the African Union and the United
Nations continued to plan for a transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding, with
a view to preventing a conflict relapse following the drawdown of the African Union United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), scheduled to be completed
by the end of 2020. On the basis of the joint strategic review of UNAMID conducted
in April 2019, the Security Council and the Peace and Security Council recommended
the development of a joint political strategy for post-UNAMID engagement to support
Sudanese interlocutors in addressing any remaining conflict drivers.
32. In the Great Lakes region, my Special Envoy for Burundi worked closely with
the African Union and continued to engage the political leadership of the East African
Community in support of efforts aimed at ensuring political inclusivity and respect
for fundamental freedoms ahead of the elections in Burundi, planned for 2020.
Notable to that endeavour was the technical and logistical support provided during
the fifth session of the East African Community-supported inter-Burundian dialogue,
held in October 2018.
33. Both the United Nations and the African Union Commission expressed support
for efforts to solve the crisis in the North-West and South-West regions of Cameroon
through dialogue. In March 2019, the President, Paul Biya, agreed to a Swiss
engagement to facilitate a dialogue process. In April, the 2011 Nobel Peace Prize
laureate from Liberia and member of both my High-level Advisory Board on
Mediation and the African Women Leaders Network, Leymah Gbowee, led a visit to
the country, jointly supported by UN-Women and the Department of Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs and in partnership with the African Union and ECCAS, to
increase the participation and leadership of Cameroonian women in ongoing peace
and reconciliation initiatives and highlight the worsening humanitarian crisis. On
2 July, the Africa Forum also announced that former African Heads of State would
convene a symposium on Cameroon.
34. The United Nations also collaborated with the African Union in the area of
human rights. On 9 February 2019, the African Court on Human and Peoples ’ Rights
and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) signed a memorandum of understanding aimed at increasing cooperation
on the promotion and protection of human rights and the rule of law. OHCHR also
provided support for regional consultations with the newly launched African Union
Youth for Peace Africa Programme and, in cooperation with the African Commission
on Human and Peoples Rights, held a regional consultation on combating racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance in Africa, on 26 April.
35. Cooperation also included the Act to Protect Children Affected by Armed
Conflict campaign, which was launched with the African Union and the European
Union in April 2019. In June, the Office of my Special Representative for Children
and Armed Conflict and the African Union Peace and Security Department, on the
occasion of the Day of the African Child, made a commitment to strengthen their
efforts to prevent and end grave violations against children.

8/17

19-15192

S/2019/759

Partnership in peacekeeping and peace support operations
36. The United Nations continued to cooperate closely with the African Union and
the regional economic communities and regional mechanisms in peace operations
contexts. Beyond operational issues on the ground, joint efforts were focused largely
on the primacy of politics.
37. In the Central African Republic, an African Union-led mediation process, with
key support from the United Nations and involving ECCAS and neighbouring
countries, culminated in African Union-led peace talks in Khartoum and resulted in
the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic,
signed in Bangui on 6 February 2019. The African Union, the United Nations and
ECCAS remained engaged in support of the implementation of the Agreement,
including through a follow-up meeting, held in Addis Ababa from 18 to 20 March,
which led to the formation of an inclusive Government. The Under-Secretary-General
for Peace Operations and the African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security
visited the country from 8 to 10 January and from 15 to 17 April. The Chair of the
Central African Republic configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission also visited
Bangui from 13 to 15 February, accompanied by the Assistant Secretaries-General for
Peacebuilding Support and for Africa. Since then, the Peacebuilding Fund has
developed a new portfolio of projects in support of the implementation of the
Agreement.
38. In South Sudan, the African Union, the United Nations and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) worked jointly to consolidate
the positive developments in the peace process. From 7 to 10 October 2018, the
Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations, the African Union Commissioner for
Peace and Security, one of the co-chairs of FemWise-Africa and the Executive
Director of UN-Women paid a joint visit to the country, to encourage the full
implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in
South Sudan, signed in September 2018, and to advocate and support the role of South
Sudanese women leaders and organizations in line with the 35 per cent mini mum
quota for women in national institutions established under the Agreement. The visit
also promoted a protective environment for women in South Sudan. With growing
uncertainty surrounding the peace process, the Under-Secretary-General for Peace
Operations, the African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security and the IGAD
Special Envoy to South Sudan conducted another joint mission to the country, from
10 to 11 May 2019, demonstrating the collective support of the three organizations
for the full implementation of the Revitalized Agreement, following the decision of
the parties, endorsed by IGAD, to delay the formation of the Revitalized Transitional
Government of National Unity for six months beyond the initially agreed deadline of
12 May 2019. In June and July, both the African Union and IGAD retained a focus on
the situation in South Sudan, convening meetings to consider progress in the
implementation of outstanding pre-transition tasks.
39. In Somalia, a joint African Union-United Nations operational readiness
assessment of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) was conducted in
August 2018, focused on key areas of engagement as specified in Security Council
resolution 2431 (2018). The assessment formed the baseline for the revised concept
of operations for 2018–2021, in which guidance was provided for the implementation
of the mandate in support of the Somali transition plan and the reconfiguration of
AMISOM towards the progressive transfer of the responsibility for security to Somali
security forces. Through the African Union-United Nations review of AMISOM
conducted in March 2019, it was observed that the transition had made limited
progress and that there was a need to regenerate momentum through integrated
planning among security actors. Since then, AMISOM supported operations led by
19-15192

9/17

S/2019/759

the Federal Government of Somalia that resulted in the securing of population centres
from Al-Shabaab in the Shabelle Hoose region near Mogadishu, while the United
Nations coordinated related stabilization activities in the liberated areas. The findings
and recommendations of the review team informed the renewal by the Security
Council of the Mission’s mandate, which was extended to May 2020.
40. The United Nations continued to engage with the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and those of its neighbours, including during my recent visit
to the country, with a view to addressing the threat of foreign armed groups in the
eastern part of the country, through increased joint operations by the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) and the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Since
August 2018, the United Nations, including MONUSCO and the World Health
Organization, has provided extensive support to the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the African Union and regional actors in responding to the
Ebola outbreak. That engagement was further intensified with the appointment, in
May 2019, of a United Nations Emergency Ebola Response Coordinator. MONUSCO
provided significant security and logistical support for overall response efforts,
including to the African Union technical assessment mission to Ebola virus di seaseaffected areas in north-eastern regions of the country.
41. In the Lake Chad Basin, the United Nations, including UNOAU, collaborated
with the African Union and provided technical advice to the Lake Chad Basin
Commission on the operations of the Multinational Joint Task Force against Boko
Haram.
42. In the Sahel, the African Union Commission, together with UNOAU, visited the
headquarters of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel in Bamako, in
February 2019, to review achievements, challenges and opportunities pertaining to
the operationalization of the Joint Force. The visit enabled the African Union to
identify areas of interest with possibilities for more engagement and to provide
support for the full operationalization of the Joint Force, which remains hampered by
equipment and training shortfalls. Such support has allowed the Joint Force to
contribute to broader stabilization efforts in the Sahel, including in support of the
implementation of the G5 Sahel Priority Investment Programme. In Mali, the African
Union and the United Nations, through their respective peace missions and within the
framework of ongoing international mediation efforts, continued to collaborate
closely in using good offices and in engaging with the signatories to th e peace
agreement regarding its implementation, with progress reported notably in an
accelerated disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process.

Partnership in peacebuilding and rule of law
43. The Security Council has repeatedly called for increased international support
for regional stabilization and resilience efforts in the Lake Chad Basin region,
stressing the need to address the root causes of instability and to prevent violent
extremism. In that regard, my Special Representatives for Central Africa and for West
Africa and the Sahel undertook a joint trip to the affected countries in the Lake Chad
Basin region to mobilize political will for a comprehensive solution to the crisis. At
the same time, stabilization efforts continued across the region, including in support
for national disarmament, demobilization and reintegration efforts. The support of the
United Nations in the development and implementation of the African Union
Commission/Lake Chad Basin Commission Regional Strategy for the Stabilization,
Recovery and Resilience of the Boko Haram-affected Areas of the Lake Chad Basin
Region provided a good example of cross-pillar cooperation. Such support included
working with States members of the Lake Chad Basin Commission to develop tailored
10/17

19-15192

S/2019/759

and comprehensive approaches to addressing persons associated with Boko Haram.
UNDP also supported the organization of the annual Lake Chad Basin Governors ’
Forum, held on 17 and 18 July 2019, and launched the multimillion-dollar Regional
Stabilization Facility for Lake Chad to finance and scale up the implementation of
stabilization activities in the region.
44. The Security Council and the Peace and Security Council have recognized the
importance of transitional justice mechanisms to ending impunity, promote
accountability, reconciliation and healing. At their 12th annual joint consultative
meeting, the two Councils expressed their conviction that the impending
establishment of the Hybrid Court for South Sudan would contribute to addressing
impunity and to promoting justice and reconciliation. The complementarity between
Goal 11 of Agenda 2063 of the African Union and Sustainable Development Goal 16
of the 2030 Agenda of the United Nations, which are both aimed at increasing access
to justice and enhancing the rule of law, provides an opportunity to advance existing
collaboration between the African Union and the United Nations in the area of justice
and corrections and the broader area of rule of law in Africa. Strengthening the
capacity of UNOAU with regard to justice and rule of law could lead to stronger and
more sustained engagement between the two organizations in these areas of work.
45. The United Nations continued to support the implementation of the African
Union Policy Framework on Security Sector Reform. That included support for the
second Africa Forum on Security Sector Reform, held in October 2018 under the
theme, “Promoting the continental agenda of security, justice and development ”,
through which security sector reform was emphasized as a key conflict-prevention
and peacebuilding tool, including as an early warning mechanism.
46. Working with the police component of African Union peace support operations,
the United Nations, through UNOAU, continued to support the African Union police
and military strategic support groups. Activities included policy development,
training development and guidance for the planning element of the continental and
regional standby forces on matters relating to military and police aspects of African
Union peace support operations and the African Standby Force. The United Nations
supported the participation of AMISOM police in two inter-mission retreats held for
police components of United Nations missions deployed in Central and East Africa.
UNOAU also supported the African Union in joint assessments of formed police units
and individual police officers for deployment to AMISOM. Moreover, the United
Nations provided technical assistance to the African Union in the development of a
generic police predeployment training manual and supported the African Union from
a police perspective during an assessment for security sector reform in the Gambia.
47. The World Bank, UNOAU and the Department of Peace Operations supported
the African Union Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Capacity
Programme as it entered its third phase, the objectives of which are to: (a) streamline
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration in the overall political and conflict
resolution process across the continent; (b) strengthen the operational response
through urgent technical and capacity support to Member States and for peace support
operations; and (c) foster institutional capacity-building, knowledge management and
cross-institutional learning, in line with national and regional policy frameworks. In
2018, the African Union became a permanent observer of the 25-member
Inter-Agency Working Group on Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration
and, in that capacity, supported the ongoing review of the Integrated Disarmament,
Demobilization and Reintegration Standards.
48. Furthermore, the United Nations, led by its Mine Action Service, continued to
collaborate with the African Union on mine action. That collaboration included the
review and update of the African Union strategic framework on mine action; the
19-15192

11/17

S/2019/759

provision of technical advice in the development of an Africa-wide strategy for
preventing and countering improvised explosive devices; and the development of an
African Union policy on the management of recovered weapons in peace support
operations. UNOAU provided technical information on explosive hazards along the
border areas of Abyei and supported and provided technical expertise to the African
Union in its engagement with the 11 State parties that have yet to fulfil their obligation
pursuant to article 5 of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling,
Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction. In
addition, predeployment training and technical support was provided to the Eastern
African Standby Force and States members of the African Union to ensure the
deployment of trained personnel and relevant equipment to deal with threats relating
to improvised explosive devices.

IV. Support for African Union peace support operations
49. Following the signing of the joint declaration on 6 December 2018, cooperation
on African Union-led peace support operations was strengthened to develop and
implement frameworks on joint planning and decision-making; human rights and
conduct and discipline compliance; and financial management and accountability for
African Union peace support operations, pursuant to Security Council resolutions
2320 (2016) and 2378 (2017).

Update on the operationalization of the Peace Fund
50. Since my previous report, the African Union has made significant progress in
operationalizing its Peace Fund, securing $124 million as at July 2019 , the highest
level of assessed contributions since the establishment of the Fund in 1993. The Board
of Trustees was appointed by the Chairperson of the African Union Commission and
held its inaugural meeting in November 2018. The Board held two further me etings,
in February and May 2019, to review its rules of procedures, elect a Chair and Vice Chair and to review the terms of reference of the Fund Manager. My Special
Representative to the African Union participated, as an observer, in the latter two
meetings of the Board.
51. On 2 May 2018, the Peace and Security Council had requested that the
Chairperson of the Commission develop the financial and procurement rules and
regulations of the Peace Fund, elaborate standard operating procedures and manuals,
establish the Executive Management Committee and commence the recruitment of
staff for the Peace Fund secretariat. A joint working group was established and
developed a work plan to harmonize United Nations and African Union financial rules
and regulations to ensure interoperability and a smooth transition to an African Union
peace support operation, if mandated. The working group participated in the review
of the Peace Fund rules and regulations, together with a broad spectrum of other
interlocutors in May 2019. When the rules and regulations are finalized and agreed
on by the Assembly, the joint working group will be able to formalize the financial
reporting processes and procedures for relevant United Nations and African Union
reporting to their respective Councils; review reporting and accountability
frameworks for the five funding models proposed in the report of the Secretary General on options for authorization and support for African Union peace support
operations (S/2017/454); and develop joint financial planning assumptions and
budgeting, monitoring, oversight and audit arrangements.

12/17

19-15192

S/2019/759

Update on joint planning and mandating
52. The Secretariat and UNOAU continued to provide technical expertise and
advice in the review and development of relevant peace support operations policies,
including doctrines, guidelines and standard operating procedures for AMISOM,
African Union regional ad hoc security initiatives such as the Multinational Joint Task
Force and the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel, as well as the African
Standby Force. The joint review of AMISOM and the joint strategic assessment of
UNAMID are examples of other joint exercises with outcomes owned by both
Organizations.
53. In order to establish physical support requirements and work towards
establishing harmonized processes, the African Union Peace Support Operations
Division and UNOAU conducted joint visits to the Continental Logistics Base of the
African Standby Force, located in Douala, Cameroon; the Global Service Centre of
the United Nations, located in Brindisi, Italy; the Regional Logistics Depot of the
Southern African Development Community Standby Force, located at Rasesa,
Botswana; and the Planning Element of the Eastern African Standby Force, located
in Nairobi. In June 2019, a team of African Union officials with managerial
responsibilities in the areas of human resources, finance and budget, policy and
logistics participated in a support-planning workshop sponsored by the Department
of Operational Support to exchange ideas and best practices and to enhance synergies
between the two organizations.
54. Potential United Nations support to the African Union upon mission start-up and
during subsequent phases of planning and deployment will be further discussed,
including through an envisaged African Union-United Nations regulatory framework.
Developing joint planning and coordination structures on the basis of complimentary
United Nations and African Union roles, responsibilities and accountabilities will be
important in that regard.

Update on the development of a compliance framework
55. The development of a compliance framework for international humanitarian
law, international human rights and conduct and discipline for African Union peace
support operations remains a priority for the partnership and is an essential aspect for
achieving greater accountability, transparency and protection for human rights. The
United Nations worked closely with the African Union to develop key components of
the compliance framework. Those efforts led to the development of policies on
conduct and discipline and on the prevention of and response to sexual exploitation
and abuse, which were adopted by the Peace and Security Council in November 2018
and endorsed by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government in February 2019.
The African Union, with the support of OHCHR and UNOAU, held workshops for
the development of the training curriculum for the African Union compliance and
accountability framework and the validation of harmonized compliance training
standards. A joint workshop was held in Addis Ababa to identify key elements of a
policy and standard operating procedures for the selection and screening of personnel
for African Union peace support operations. At a joint workshop held with the United
Nations in May 2019, the African Union Commission presented ongoing efforts to
enhance its compliance framework, including the development of a compliance
architecture and related staffing requirements.

19-15192

13/17

S/2019/759

Update on the development of a reporting framework
56. The United Nations and African Union have established a practice of joint
reporting to deliver joint reports on AMISOM and UNAMID with regard to mandate
delivery and recommendations. Discussions are currently under way to develop a
joint reporting framework, which will establish clear, consistent and predictable
reporting channels between the Secretariat, the African Union Commission and the
two Councils. The framework would also include standardized reporting requirements
depending on the type of reporting, including for general updates, joint assessment
findings, fiduciary reporting and reporting on the compliance framework.
57. Fiduciary reporting for the African Union will become clearer when the
financial rules and regulations for the Peace Fund have been agreed on by the African
Union Assembly. Thereafter, the African Union-United Nations working group will
consider how the United Nations, African Union and, potentially, European Union
funding rules will apply to the five models mentioned in paragraph 51 above and
develop options for a joint financial reporting framework.

V. Partnership with other regional organizations
and arrangements
58. Recognizing the role of regional economic communities and regional
mechanisms in facilitating the attainment of the objectives of the African Union United Nations partnership, and in line with the ongoing institutional reform of the
African Union, the United Nations prioritized technical-level African Union-United
Nations meetings with representatives of the regional economic communities at their
respective headquarters to identify synergies and areas for cooperation. Furthermore,
in addition to regular interactions with the Peace and Security Council and a briefing
to the African Union Permanent Representatives Committee, my Special
Representative to the African Union also continued to meet with the permanent
representatives to the African Union in their respective regional economic community
configurations, so as to explore options for strengthening collaboration with the
United Nations.
59. On 8 July 2019, the African Union and the regional economic communities held
their first mid-year coordination meeting in Niamey, at which the African Union
Commission, the regional economic communities and States members of the African
Union were requested to prepare more detailed proposals on divisions of labour for
consideration by the African Union Assembly at its upcoming ordinary session,
scheduled to be held in February 2020.
60. I also attach particular importance to trilateral African Union-European UnionUnited Nations cooperation in support of effective multilateralism. On 23 September
2018, in the margins of the General Assembly, I discussed with the Chairperson of
the African Union Commission and the President of the European Commission the
importance of an effective multilateral system, youth empowerment and women’s
leadership, as well as the situations in the Central African Republic, the Democratic
Republic of Congo, Libya, Mali and the Sahel and Somalia. We noted the progress
made since the establishment, in November 2017, of the joint African Union European Union-United Nations Task Force in addressing the situation of migrants in
Libya, including the voluntary return of more than 40,000 migrants and their
reintegration, and pointed out the need for further efforts to dismantle trafficking and
criminal networks. The European Union is also a fundamental partner in the Sahel
region, through the provision of financing for the Joint Force of the Group of Five for

14/17

19-15192

S/2019/759

the Sahel; in Somalia, in support of AMISOM; and in the Central African Republic,
in the implementation of the peace agreement.

VI. Activities of the United Nations Office to the African Union
61. UNOAU regularly engaged with the Peace and Security Council, the Permanent
Representatives Committee, the African Union Commission, the regional economic
communities and regional mechanisms and representatives of partners based in Addis
Ababa. In those interactions, the Office sought to ensure political and operational
synergy and coordination between the African Union and the United Nations. From
August 2018 to July 2019, UNOAU provided 54 briefings to the Peace and Securi ty
Council. The Office also held meetings with representatives of the Security Council
members accredited to the African Union and supported the establishment of the
Group of Friends of the African Union-United Nations Partnership in Addis Ababa.
In close consultation with the African Union, an assessment will be undertaken of
United Nations-African Union cooperation and of the structure and capacity of
UNOAU, as requested in Security Council resolution 2320 (2016), in order to better
meet the demands of the partnership.
62. In conjunction with the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs,
UNOAU continued to strategize and promote progress on the work of the Panel of the
Wise, FemWise-Africa, the PanAfrican Network of the Wise and the African Union
Mediation Support Unit. In November 2018, UNOAU supported the induction of 50
African women mediators into the FemWise-Africa roster, raising the number of
registered African women mediators to 102. UNOAU also lent support to the
deployment of African women mediators, including the first deployment to track-one
negotiations in the Central African Republic in March 2019.
63. Furthermore, UNOAU and the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa continued to work with the African Union to implement the decision of the
Peace and Security Council at its 795th meeting, held on 20 September 2018, on the
Regional Cooperation Initiative for the Elimination of the Lord’s Resistance Army,
exploring modalities for an alternative security arrangement, under the lead of
ECCAS, within the African Standby Force framework.
64. UNOAU and the wider United Nations system continued to support the African
Union in its efforts to enhance the operational readiness of the African Standby Force,
in order to enhance its capacity to respond to conflict. That support included
contributing to the harmonization and revitalization of the structures of the Standby
Force within the African Union Commission.
65. UNOAU, in conjunction with the Department of Operational Support, assisted
the African Union in developing policy; conducting joint visits to United Nations
Headquarters and facilities; planning and supporting logistics exercises with the
African Union and its regions; operationalizing the Continental Logistics Base; and
supporting the development of a regulatory framework within which the African
Union could access United Nations support under certain circumstances. The Office
provided advice in relation to African Union financial planning and reporting
processes, the rules and regulations for the Peace Fund and a costing model to enable
accurate forecasting and budgeting for African Union peace support operations and
for the African Union strategic deployment stocks model, informed by a visit to the
Global Service Centre and a follow-on workshop with the African Union and the
Department of Operational Support. Support for further developing the African
Standby Capacity roster, including through the training of recruiters and by
supporting partners in developing the roster database, was also well received.

19-15192

15/17

S/2019/759

66. The Office also provided support to the African Union in the area of training
delivery and other capacity development initiatives. That support included the
development of regional exercise planning manuals and a training guide for senior
mission leaders. UNOAU assisted in the development of a draft learning and
development policy for staff of the African Union Commission, compliance and
accountability framework training modules for the Multinational Joint Task Force
against Boko Haram and a course on human rights and gender for AMISOM. Work
was initiated to review and develop training curriculums for gender mainstreaming in
peace and security matters at the African Union and within member States, as well as
for the identification of and capacity-building for female police officers for senior
leadership appointments.
67. Acknowledging the challenges with regard to safety and security faced by
civilian staff deployed in African Union missions and in its offices across the
continent, UNOAU initiated discussions and shared United Nations best practices on
how to enhance the safety and security of civilian staff. UNOAU facilitated the visit
by staff from the African Union Safety and Security Services Division to the
Department of Safety and Security of the United Nations in New York, with a view
to identifying good practices and exploring areas of common interest. While UNOAU
and the Economic Commission for Africa (ECA) are the main facilitators and
coordinators of United Nations offices working with the African Union on peace and
security matters and on development work, respectively, they also meet with each
other on a regular basis, to ensure cross-cutting coordination.

VII. Observations and recommendations
68. The United Nations and the African Union have made significant progress in
developing a systematic, predictable and strategic partnership to address complex
peace and security challenges in Africa. The strategic partnership has resulted in joint
approaches and better-coordinated, coherent and effective initiatives to prevent,
resolve and manage conflict on the continent. In that regard, I highlight in particular
the results achieved in the Central African Republic through the close cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union Commission. I look forward to
taking similar joint initiatives, in particular early preventive action that is informed
by joint analyses and early warning data. I also intend to further strengthen our
cooperation in support of African Union-led peace support operations, in particular
on human rights and conduct and discipline compliance, as well as on joint planning
and reporting and on financial management, as agreed in our joint declaration of
6 December 2018.
69. It is imperative that collaboration in the prevention, resolution and management
of conflict include the regional economic communities and regional mechanisms as
important partners in the global peace and security architecture. In that regard, I
welcome the consultations between the peace and security organs of the African
Union and the regional economic communities, including those conducted most
recently in Niamey, in July 2019. I further welcome the discussions currently ongoing
within the African Union to clarify divisions of labour on the basis of comparative
advantages, including in the area of peace and security.
70. I look forward to the implementation of the commitment made by the Security
Council and the Peace and Security Council at their twelfth joint annual consultative
meeting, held in New York on 19 July 2018, in particular their intention to agree on
the modalities for joint visits in Africa. The Secretariat stands ready to provide any
necessary support.

16/17

19-15192

S/2019/759

71. On 7 July 2019, the African Union Assembly endorsed the topic, “Silencing the
guns: creating conducive conditions for Africa’s development”, as the African Union
theme for the year 2020. In that regard, I commend the Security Council for the
adoption of its resolution 2457 (2019) in support of the African Union Silencing the
Guns by 2020 initiative and look forward to the active support of all members of
the Council and the General Assembly in achieving the objectives of the initiative,
which are in line with the Charter of the United Nations, the 2030 Agenda and Agenda
2063. As the next 15 months will be critical to advancing the initiative, I call on the
international community, civil society and the private sector to support efforts aimed
at silencing the guns in Africa. For my part, I will continue to coordinate and scale up
support from the United Nations system to help to advance that central initiative.
72. At least 14 countries in Africa are expected to hold elections in 2020. Beyond
the areas of work described in the present report, UNOAU, in close coordination with
the Electoral Assistance Division of the Department of Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs, intends to explore options to enhance support provided to the African Union
in the area of elections. Cooperation in development, as well as in combating climate
change and epidemics such as the Ebola virus disease, will also be important as a
means to enhance peace and security on the continent.
73. I welcome the increased engagement of UNOAU with the African Union
Commission and its member States. I also recognize the imperative for greater
coherence and coordination within the United Nations system in engaging with the
African Union. In that connection, I have reiterated the role of UNOAU and ECA as the
main facilitators and coordinators of the strategic partnership with the African Union
on peace and security and on development, respectively. In discharging those important
responsibilities, I am mindful of the need to review UNOAU in order to better meet the
growing demands resulting from the strengthened partnership in peace and security. I
will therefore conduct an assessment, in the coming months, of United Nations-African
Union cooperation and of the structure and capacity of UNOAU and will report to the
Security Council on the findings, as requested in its resolution 2320 (2016).
74. I pay tribute to the Chairperson of the African Union Commission, Moussa Faki
Mahamat, for his continued leadership and unwavering commitment to the
partnership with the United Nations. I also express my appreciation to the African
Union, its member States and regional economic communities and regional
mechanisms for their continued cooperation in addressing challenges to peace and
security in Africa. Lastly, I wish to express my appreciation to my Special
Representative to the African Union, Hanna Serwaa Tetteh, as well as the staff of
UNOAU and all United Nations and African Union entities working to advance the
cause of peace and security in Africa.

19-15192

17/17
