132

General Assembly-Forty-second Session

3. Urges the intemational community, in particular
donor countries and multilateral financia! and development organizations, to provide land-locked and transit developing countries with appropriate financia) and technical assistance in the form of grants or concessional loans
for the construction, maintenance and improvement of
their transport and transit infrastructures and facilities
including altemative routes;
'
4. Invites transit countries and the land-locked developing countries to co-operate effectively in harmonizing
transpoi:t pla~ning and in promotingjoint ventures, where
appropnate, m the fields of transport and communications
at the regional, subregional and bilateral levels;
5. Urges the intemational development bodies, in partic~lar the United Nations Development Programme, the
Umted Na!ions Confe~e1;1ce on Trade and Development
and th_e reg1<?nal com~1ss1ons,_ to further expand their support, mcludmg techmcal ass1stance programmes in the
transport and communications sectors of the land-Iocked
developing countries;
6. Appeals to the intemational community to make
ª".ailable to al_l transit and land-locked developing countnes, a~ reqmred and on appropriate terms, including
concess10nal arrang~ments, new_scientific and technological know-how relatmg to spec1fic transit-transport and
communication problems;
. 7. Appeals to the intemational community and, in particular, donor countries, multilateral financia! and development institutions, the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Deve~opment and the regional commissions, to
extend_ al~ pos~1ble suppo~t to land-locked developing
countnes m the1r efforts to 1mplement economic measures
and policies designed to promote a pattem of growth that
renders their economies less vulnerable to adverse consequences of their land-locked situation;
8. Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General of the
United Nati<?ns Co~ference on Trade and Development
on progress m the tmplementation of specific action related to the particular needs and problems of Iand-locked
developing countries, 29 submitted pursuant to resolution
'.1-01!83, and requests him to prepare another report, takmg mto ~c~ount the provisions of the present resolution,
for ~ubm1ss1on to the General Assembly at its forty-fourth
sess1on.
96th plenary meeting
11 December /987

42/175.

Seventh session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1995 (XIX) of 30 December
1964, as amended, 30 on the establishment of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development asan organ ofthe General Assembly, 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)
of 1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New Intemational Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December
1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States, 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development and international economic co-operation and
35/56 of 5 December 1980, the annex to which contains
the_ Intema!ional Development Strategy for the Third
Umted Nat10ns Development Decade, and its decision
29 A/42/537, annex.
30 See resolutions 2904 (XXVII), 3 1/2 A and B and 34/3.

40/438 of 17 December 1985 conceming the review and
appraisal of the implementation of the Strategy,
Recalling also its resolution 41/ 169 of S December 1986,
in which it decided to convene the seventh session of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
Having considered the Final Act adopted by the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development at its seventh session, held at Geneva from 9 July to 3 August
1987, 2
Taking note of Trade and Development Board decision
350 (XXXIV) of 16 October 1987, in which the Board decided that the intergovernmental bodies ofthe Conference
should follow up and keep under review the implementation of the policies and measures in the Final Act falling
within their terms of reference,31
Affirming the commitments made by Member States in
the Final Act to reinvigorate and strengthen multilateral
co-operation to promote and give effect to policies aimed
at revitalizing development, growth and intemational
trade,
l. Welcomes the Final Act adopted by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development at its seventh
session as a step forward in co-operation, negotiation and
the international dialogue on development;
2. Urges all Govemments, bearing in mind their particular contributions, commensurate with their economic
weight, and their commitments as embodied in the Final
Act, to give full and prompt effect to the policies and measures agreed to therein, through continuing action, individually and collectively and in competent intemational
organizations, in pursuit ofthe objective ofrevitalizing development, growth and intemational trade;
3. Requests the Trade and Development Board and the
subsidiary organs of the Conference to take the appropriate necessary action on the Final Act;
4. Invites all organs, organizations and bodies of the
United Nations system to respond positively to the results
of the seventh session of the Conference within their respective fields of competence.
'
96th plenary meeting
11 December 1987

42/176.

Trade embargo against Nicaragua

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 40/ 188 of 17 December 1985
and 41/164 of S December 1986, as well as its resolution
42/1 of 7 October 1987,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the trade embargo against Nicaragua,32
l. Deplores the continuation ofthe trade embargo contrary to its resolutions 40/188 and 41/164 and to the
Judgment of the Intemational Court of Justice of 27 June
1986, 33 and once again requests that those meas u res be immediately revoked;

31 Official Records of the General Assembly. Forty-second Session,
Supp/ement No. 15 (A/42/15), vol. II, sect. 11.B.
Jt A/42/583.
33 See Military a_nd Paramilitary Activities in and against Nicaragua
(Nicaragua v. Umted States of America), Merits, Judgment, J.C.J.
Report., 1986, p. 14.

V.

tries during the 1990s in accordance with their
long-term national social and economic objectives;

2. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-third session on the implementation of the present resolution.
96th plenary meeting
11 December 1987

(b) To accept the generous otfer made by the Government of France to act as host to the Conference;

(c)
42/177.

133

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Second United Nations Conference on the
Least Developed Countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 40/205 of 17 December 1985, in
which it decided to carry out a global review and appraisal
ofthe implementation ofthe Substantial New Programme
of Action for the 1980s for the Least Developed
Countries 28 at a high level in 1990 and to determine the
precise level, mandate, date and venue for such a review,
as well as the preparatory process, at its forty-second session, in the light ofthe consultations that would take place
under the auspices of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, including those of the seventh
session of the Conference,
Bearing in mindthe Substantial New Programme of Action for the 1980s for the Least Developed Countries, in
which it was recommended that the lntergovernmental
Group on the Least Developed Countries of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development should
meet ata high level to carry out the mid-term global review of progress towards the implementation of the Programme of Action, and consider the possibility of holding
a global review at the end of the decade, which might, inter a/ia, take the form of a second United Nations conference on the least developed countries, 34
Recalling also the Final Act adopted by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development at its seventh
session, held at Geneva from 9 July to 3 August 1987, in
which the Conference recommended that a second United
Nations conference on the least developed countries
should be convened at a high level in 1990 to review and
appraise the implementation of the Substantial New Programme of Action, 35
Taking note of Trade and Develorment Board decision
349 (XXXIV) of 16 October 19873 on the preparations
for the global review and appraisal of the implementation
of the Substantial New Programme of Action,
Expressing deep concern at the continuing deterioration
in the overall socio-economic situation of the least developed countries,
l. Decides:
(a) To convene the Second United Nations Conference
on the Least Developed Countries at a high level in 1990.
The mandate of the Conference should be as follows:
(i) To review progress at the country level thus far in
the decade;
(ii) To review progress in international support measures and particularly in official development assistance;
(iii) In the light of (i) and (ii) above, to consider, formulate, and adopt appropriate national and international policies and measures for accelerating the
development process in the least developed coun-

34 Report of the United Nations Conference on rhe Least Developed
Countries, Paris, 1-14 September 1981 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.82.1.8), part one, sect. A, para. 119.
35 TD/351, para. 153.

To hold the Conference in September 1990;

(d) To convene one session ofthe Meeting ofGovemmental Experts of Donor Countries and Multilateral and
Bilateral Financia! and Technical Assistance Institutions
with Representa ti ves of the Least Developed Countries in
the spring of 1989 followed by one session ofthe Intergovemmental Group on the Least Developed Countries, as
Preparatory Committee for the Second United Nations
Conference on the Least Developed Countries, early in
1990 in order to prepare for the Conference; the duration
of these two meetings will be one and a half weeks and two
weeks respectively; the terms of reference of these meetings are annexed to the present resolution;

2. Decides to designate the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development as the focal point for the
preparations for the Second United Nations Conference
on the Least Developed Countries, and requests the Secretary-General ofthe United Nations to designate the Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development to serve as Secretary-General ofthe Second United Nations Conference on the Least Developed
Countries and, in that capacity, to make ali necessary arrangements for the holding of the Conference;
3. Calls upon ali Governments, intergovernmental and
multilateral institutions and others concemed to take appropriate steps to ensure that adequate preparations are
made for the Conference and to participate effectively in
the two above-mentioned preparatory meetings;
4. Requests ali concerned organs, organizations and
bodies of the United Nations system to submit, before the
first preparatory meeting, reports containing a review of
the implementation ofthe Substantial New Programme of
Action for the 1980s for the Least Developed Countries
within their fields of competence and proposals for further
action as input to the preparations for the Conference;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, with the assistance
of the Director-General for Development and International Economic Co-operation and the Secretary-General
ofthe United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, to ensure the full mobilization and co-ordination of
ali organs, organizations and bodies ofthe United Nations
system in the preparations for the Conference;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to obtain, as has
been the past practice, extrabudgetary resources to ensure
the effective participation of the representatives of the
least developed countries through provision of the resources necessary to finance the travel expenses of at least
two representatives from each least developed country to
attend the preparatory meetings referred to in paragraph 1
above;
7. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit a
report to the General Assembly at its forty-third session
on the state of preparations for the Second U nited N ations
Conference on the Least Developed Countries.
96th plenary meeting
11 December 1987
