A/RES/72/244

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
22 January 2018

Seventy-second session
Agenda items 14 and 117

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 24 December 2017
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/72/L.9)]

72/244.

Modalities for the Intergovernmental Conference to Adopt the
Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 71/1 of 19 September 2016, entitled “New York
Declaration for Refugees and Migrants”, and the launch of a process of
intergovernmental negotiations leading to the adoption of a global compact for safe,
orderly and regular migration at an intergovernmental conference to be held in 2018 ,
Recalling also its resolution 71/280 of 6 April 2017 on the modalities for the
intergovernmental negotiations of the global compact for safe, orderly and regular
migration,
Reaffirming that the global compact for safe, orderly and regular migration
would set out a range of principles, commitments and understandings among Member
States regarding international migration in all its dimensions, make an important
contribution to global governance and enhance coordination on international
migration, present a framework for comprehensive international cooperation on
migrants and human mobility, deal with all aspects of international migration,
including the humanitarian, developmental, human rights-related and other aspects of
migration and be guided by the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development 1 and the
Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing for
Development 2 and informed by the Declaration of the High-level Dialogue on
International Migration and Development adopted in October 2013, 3
Acknowledging with appreciation the voluntary contributions received to date
by the United Nations multi-partner trust fund to support the global compact for safe,
orderly and regular migration,
__________________

Resolution 70/1.
Resolution 69/313, annex.
3
Resolution 68/4.
1
2

17-23327 (E)

250118

*1723327*

Modalities for the Intergovernmental Conference to Adopt the
Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration

A/RES/72/244

1.
Takes note with appreciation of the note by the Secretary-General on the
proposed organization of work of the intergovernmental conference to adopt a global
compact for safe, orderly and regular migration; 4
2.
Takes note of the appointment by the Secretary-General of a SecretaryGeneral of the intergovernmental conference to serve as focal point within the
Secretariat for providing support to the organization of the conference; 5
3.
Requests the Secretary-General to provide appropriate support from all
relevant parts of the Secretariat, and in cooperation with other relevant parts of the
United Nations system, in particular the International Organization for Migration, to
the work of the conference and to facilitate inter-agency cooperation to that end, as
well as to ensure the efficient use of resources, so that the objectives of the conference
can be achieved;
4.
Decides
that
the
intergovernmental
conference,
entitled
“Intergovernmental Conference to Adopt the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and
Regular Migration”, shall be held in Morocco on 10 and 11 December 2018;
5.
Welcomes the offer of the Government of Morocco to host the
Intergovernmental Conference;
6.

Reaffirms its decision that the Intergovernmental Conference:

(a) Shall be held at the highest possible political level, including Heads of
State or Government;
(b) Shall result in the adoption of an intergovernmentally negotiated and
agreed outcome, entitled “Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration”,
the scope of which is defined in annex II to its resolution 71/1, the negotiations for
which shall be concluded by July 2018, in accordance with its resolution 71/280, and
that the outcome shall be transmitted by the President of the General Assembly, during
its seventy-second session, to the Intergovernmental Conference for adoption;
(c) Shall also result in summaries of the plenary meetings and other
deliberations of the Intergovernmental Conference, to be included in the report of the
Conference;
(d)
71/280;

Shall apply the modalities for participation as stated in its resolution

7.
Decides that the Intergovernmental Conference shall elect from among the
representatives of participating States the following officers: two Presidents, and 13
Vice-Presidents, 6 one of whom shall be designated as Rapporteur-General, as well as
a Chair of the Main Committee, if established;
8.
Recommends the provisional rules of procedure, set forth in annex to the
present resolution, for adoption at the Intergovernmental Conference;
9.
Decides that the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration
shall be adopted at the opening plenary meeting of the Intergovernmental Conference,
on Monday, 10 December 2018;

__________________

A/72/271.
See letter dated 6 April 2017 from the Secretary-General to the President of the General
Assembly at its seventy-first session.
6
Three from each of the following groups: African States; Asia -Pacific States; Eastern European
States; Latin American and Caribbean States; and Western European and other States. The election
of the Presidents will, however, have the effect of reducing by one the number of Vice -Presidents
allocated to the regions from which each of the Presidents is elected.
4
5

2/16

17-23327

Modalities for the Intergovernmental Conference to Adopt the
Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration

A/RES/72/244

10. Also decides that the Intergovernmental Conference shall be organized
in accordance with the arrangements set forth in the note by the Secretary -General,
taking into account paragraphs 7, 8 and 9 of the present resolution;
11. Further decides that statements made at the opening plenary meeting, on
10 December, and at the closing plenary meeting, on 11 December, will be delivered
as proposed in paragraphs 11 and 12 of the note by the Secretary-General;
12. Decides that the Intergovernmental Conference shall comprise eight
consecutive plenary meetings and two dialogues, to be held on 10 and 11 December;
13. Also decides that four running plenary meetings shall be held each day,
as follows:
Monday, 10 December: from 9 a.m. to 1 p.m.; from 1 p.m. to 3 p.m.; from
3 p.m. to 6 p.m.; and from 6 p.m. to 8 p.m.;
Tuesday, 11 December: from 9 a.m. to 1 p.m.; from 1 p.m. to 3 p. m.; from
3 p.m. to 6 p.m.; and from 6 p.m. to 8 p.m.;
14. Further decides that two dialogues shall be held in parallel with the
plenary meetings, except during the opening and closing plenary meetings, as
follows:
Monday, 10 December: from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 p.m. to 6 p.m.;
Tuesday, 11 December: from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 p.m. to 6 p.m.;
15. Decides that the dialogues, building upon the adoption of the Global
Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration, have the purpose to exemplif y
ways and means to support the implementation of the Global Compact, and that
they shall be interactive and multi-stakeholder in nature:
Dialogue 1: “Promoting action on the commitments of the Global Compact for
Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration”;
Dialogue 2: “Partnerships and innovative initiatives for the way forward ”;
16. Invites Member States and relevant stakeholders, in the dialogues, to
consider sharing their perspectives on all dimensions of international migration,
including promotion and protection of human rights of all migrants, contributions
of migrants to sustainable development, shared responsibilities and opportunities,
cooperation on data collection and analysis and governance;
17. Decides that each dialogue shall be co-chaired by two Chairs, to be
appointed by the Presidents of the Intergovernmental Conference from among the
high-level representatives attending the Conference, in consultation with regional
groups and with due regard for geographical and gender balance;
18. Also decides that the dialogues shall consist of introductory remarks by
the co-Chairs, a keynote address, interventions from participating States and at least
three interventions from stakeholders, giving due regard to gender balance as well
as situations in countries of origin, transit and destination, and requests the
Secretary-General to organize the keynote speakers and stakeholders who will
participate;
19. Urges Member States and other potential donors to consider contributing
to the United Nations multi-partner trust fund to support the global compact for
safe, orderly and regular migration, primarily to support the travel and participation
of representatives from developing countries, in particular the least developed
countries, and also to support the activities involved in the preparations of the
Intergovernmental Conference if any surplus funds remain in the voluntary trust fund.

17-23327

3/16

Modalities for the Intergovernmental Conference to Adopt the
Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration

A/RES/72/244

76th plenary meeting
24 December 2017

Annex
Provisional rules of procedure for the Intergovernmental
Conference to Adopt the Global Compact for Safe,
Orderly and Regular Migration
I.

Representation and credentials
Rule 1
Composition of delegations
The delegation of each State participating in the Conference and that of the
European Union shall consist of a head of delegation and such other representatives,
alternate representatives and advisers as may be required.
Rule 2
Alternates and advisers
The head of delegation may designate an alternate representative or an adviser
to act as a representative.
Rule 3
Submission of credentials
The credentials of representatives and the names of alternate representatives and
advisers shall be submitted to the Secretary-General of the United Nations, if
possible, not less than one week before the date fixed for the opening of the
Conference. The credentials shall be issued either by the Head of the State or
Government or by the Minister for Foreign Affairs or, in the case of the European
Union, by the President of the European Commission.
Rule 4
Credentials Committee
A Credentials Committee of nine members shall be appointed at the beginning
of the Conference. Its composition shall be based on that of the Credentials
Committee of the General Assembly of the United Nations at its seventy-third session.
It shall examine the credentials of representatives and report to the Conference
without delay.
Rule 5
Provisional participation in the Conference
Pending a decision of the Conference on their credentials, representa tives shall
be entitled to participate provisionally in the Conference.

4/16

17-23327

Modalities for the Intergovernmental Conference to Adopt the
Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration

II.

A/RES/72/244

Officers
Rule 6
Elections
The Conference shall elect from among the representatives of participating
States the following officers: two Presidents, each of whom shall preside separately.
The Conference shall also elect 13 Vice-Presidents, 7 one of whom shall be designated
as Rapporteur-General, as well as a chair for the Main Committee established in
accordance with rule 46. The officers shall be elected with a view to ensuring the
representative character of the General Committee. The Conference may also elect
such other officers as it deems necessary for the performance of its functions.
Rule 7
General powers of the presiding President
1.
The Presidents shall take turns in presiding at the plenary meetings of the
Conference. In addition to exercising the powers conferred upon him/her elsewhere
by these rules, the presiding President shall declare the opening and closing of each
meeting, put questions to the vote and announce decisions. The presiding President
shall rule on points of order and, subject to those rules, shall have complete control
over the proceedings and the maintenance of order thereat. The presiding President
may propose to the Conference the closure of the list of speakers, a limitation on the
time to be allowed to speakers and on the number of times each representative may
speak on a question, the adjournment or closure of the debate and the suspension or
adjournment of a meeting.
2.
The presiding President remains, in the exercise of their functions, under the
authority of the Conference.
Rule 8
Acting President
1.
If both Presidents are to be absent from a meeting or any part thereof, they may
designate one of the Vice-Presidents to preside.
2.
A Vice-President acting as President shall have the same powers and duties as
the President.
Rule 9
Replacement of President or the Presidents
If either of the Presidents is unable to perform his or her functions, a new
President shall be elected. If both Presidents are unable to perform their functions,
new Presidents shall be elected.
Rule 10
Voting rights of the presiding President
The presiding President, or a Vice-President acting as a presiding President,
shall not vote in the Conference, but may appoint another member of his or her
delegation to vote in their place.

__________________
7

17-23327

Three from each of the following groups: African States; Asia-Pacific States; Eastern European
States; Latin American and Caribbean States; and Western European and other States. The election
of the two Presidents will, however, have the effect of reducin g by one the number of VicePresidents allocated to the regions from which each of the Presidents is elected.
5/16

Modalities for the Intergovernmental Conference to Adopt the
Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration

A/RES/72/244

III.

General Committee
Rule 11
Composition
The two Presidents, the Vice-Presidents, the Rapporteur-General and the Chair
of the Main Committee shall constitute the General Committee. One of the two
Presidents, as agreed between them, or, in their absence, one of the Vice -Presidents
designated by them, shall serve as Chair of the General Committee. The Chair of the
Credentials Committee and other committees established by the Conference in
accordance with rule 48 may participate, without the right to vote, in the General
Committee.
Rule 12
Substitute members
If the President or a Vice-President of the Conference is to be absent during a
meeting of the General Committee, he/she may designate a member of his/her
delegation to sit and vote in the Committee. In case of absence, the Chair of the Main
Committee shall designate the Vice-Chair of that Committee as his/her substitute.
When serving on the General Committee, a Vice-Chair of the Main Committee shall
not have the right to vote if he/she is a member of the same delegation as another
member of the General Committee.
Rule 13
Functions
The General Committee shall assist both Presidents in the general conduct of
the business of the Conference and, subject to the decisions of the Conference, shall
ensure the coordination of the work of the Conference.

IV.

Secretariat of the Conference
Rule 14
Duties of the Secretary-General of the United Nations
1.
The Secretary-General of the United Nations or her/his designated
representative shall act in that capacity in all meetings of the Confere nce and its
subsidiary organs.
2.
The Secretary-General of the United Nations may designate a member of the
secretariat to act in her/his place at these meetings.
3.
The Secretary-General of the United Nations or her/his designated
representative shall direct the staff required by the Conference.
Rule 15
Duties of the secretariat of the Conference
The secretariat of the Conference shall, in accordance with the present rules:
(a)

Provide simultaneous interpretation of speeches made at meetings;

(b) Receive, translate, reproduce and circulate the documents of the
Conference;

6/16

(c)

Publish and circulate the official documents of the Conference;

(d)

Prepare and circulate records of public meetings;
17-23327

Modalities for the Intergovernmental Conference to Adopt the
Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration

(e)

A/RES/72/244

Make and arrange for the keeping of sound recordings of meetings;

(f) Arrange for the custody and preservation of the documents of the
Conference in the archives of the United Nations;
(g)

Generally perform all other work that the Conference may require.

Rule 16
Statements by the Secretariat
The Secretary-General of the United Nations, or any member of the Secretariat
designated for that purpose, may, at any time, make either oral or written statements
concerning any question under consideration.
V.

Opening of the Conference
Rule 17
Temporary President
The Secretary-General of the United Nations or, in her/his absence, any member
of the Secretariat designated by her/him for that purpose, shall open the first meeting
of the Conference and preside until the Conference has elected its Presidents.
Rule 18
Decisions concerning organization
The Conference shall, at its first meeting:
(a)

Adopt its rules of procedure;

(b)

Elect its officers and constitute its subsidiary organs;

(c) Adopt its agenda, the draft of which shall, until such adoption, be the
provisional agenda of the Conference;
(d)
VI.

Decide on the organization of its work.

Conduct of business
Rule 19
Quorum
The presiding President may declare a meeting open and permit the debate to
proceed when at least one third of the States participating in the Conference are
present. The presence of a majority of the States so participating shall be required for
any decision to be taken.
Rule 20
Speeches
1.
No representative may address the Conference without having previously
obtained the permission of the presiding President. Subject to rules 21, 22 and 25 to
27 of the Conference, the presiding President shall call upon speakers in the order in
which they indicate their desire to speak. The secretariat shall be in charge of drawing
up a list of speakers.
2.
Debate shall be confined to the question before the Conference and the presiding
President may call a speaker to order if his/her remarks are not relevant to the subject
under discussion.

17-23327

7/16

Modalities for the Intergovernmental Conference to Adopt the
Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration

A/RES/72/244

3.
The Conference may limit the time allowed to each speaker and the number of
times each participant may speak on any question. Permission to speak on a motion
to set such limits shall be accorded to only two repr esentatives in favour of and two
opposing such limits, after which the motion shall be immediately put to the vote. In
any event, with the consent of the Conference, the presiding President shall limit each
intervention on procedural matters to five minutes. When the debate is limited and a
speaker exceeds the allotted time, the presiding President shall call him/her to order
without delay.
Rule 21
Points of order
During the discussion of any matter, a representative may at any time raise a
point of order, which shall be immediately decided by the presiding President in
accordance with the present rules. A representative may appeal against the ruling of
the presiding President. The appeal shall be immediately put to the vote, and the
presiding President’s ruling shall stand unless overruled by a majority of the States
present and voting. A representative may not, in raising a point of order, speak on the
substance of the matter under discussion.
Rule 22
Precedence
The Chair or the Rapporteur of the Main Committee, or the representative of a
subcommittee or working group, may be accorded precedence for the purpose of
explaining the conclusions arrived at by the body concerned.
Rule 23
Closing of the list of speakers
During the course of a debate, the presiding President may announce the list of
speakers and, with the consent of the Conference, declare the list closed.
Rule 24
Right of reply
1.
Notwithstanding rule 23, the presiding President shall accord the right of reply
to a representative of any State participating in the Conference or of the European
Union who requests it. Any other representative may be granted the opportunity to
make a reply.
2.
The statements made under the present rule shall normally be made at the end
of the last meeting of the day, or at the conclusion of the consideration of the relevant
item if that is sooner.
3.
Representatives of a State or of the European Union may make no more than
two statements under the present rule at a given meeting on any item. The fir st shall
be limited to five minutes and the second to three minutes; representatives shall, in
any event, attempt to be as brief as possible.
Rule 25
Adjournment of debate
A representative of any State participating in the Conference may at any time
move the adjournment of the debate on the question under discussion. In addition to
the proposer of the motion, permission to speak on the motion shall be accorded to
only two representatives in favour and to two opposing the adjournment, after which
the motion shall, subject to rule 28, be immediately put to the vote.
8/16

17-23327

Modalities for the Intergovernmental Conference to Adopt the
Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration

A/RES/72/244

Rule 26
Closure of debate
A representative of any State participating in the Conference may at any time
move the closure of the debate on the question under discussion, whether or not any
other representative has signified his/her wish to speak. Permission to speak on the
motion shall be accorded to only two representatives opposing the closure, after
which the motion shall, subject to rule 28, be immediately put to the vote.
Rule 27
Suspension or adjournment of the meeting
Subject to rule 38, a representative of any State participating in the Conference
may at any time move the suspension or the adjournment of the meeting. No
discussion on such motions shall be permitted and they shall, subject to rule 28, be
immediately put to the vote.
Rule 28
Order of motions
The motions indicated below shall have precedence in the following orde r over
all proposals or other motions before the meeting:
(a)

To suspend the meeting;

(b)

To adjourn the meeting;

(c)

To adjourn the debate on the question under discussion;

(d)

To close the debate on the question under discussion.

Rule 29
Submission of proposals and substantive amendments
Proposals and substantive amendments shall normally be submitted in writing
to the Secretary-General or his/her designated representative, who shall circulate
copies to all delegations in the languages of the Conference. Unless the Conference
decides otherwise, substantive proposals shall be discussed or put to a decision no
earlier than 24 hours after copies have been circulated to all delegations. The
presiding President may, however, permit the discussion and consideration of
amendments, even though those amendments have not been circulated or have been
circulated only the same day.
Rule 30
Withdrawal of proposals and motions
A proposal or a motion may be withdrawn by its sponsor at any time befo re a
decision on it has been taken, provided that it has not been amended. A proposal or a
motion thus withdrawn may be reintroduced by any representative.
Rule 31
Decisions on competence
Subject to rule 28, any motion calling for a decision on the competence of the
Conference to adopt a proposal submitted to it shall be put to the vote before a
decision is taken on the proposal in question.

17-23327

9/16

Modalities for the Intergovernmental Conference to Adopt the
Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration

A/RES/72/244

Rule 32
Reconsideration of proposals
When a proposal has been adopted or rejected, it may not be reconsidered unless
the Conference, by a two-thirds majority of the States present and voting, so decides.
Permission to speak on a motion to reconsider shall be accorded to only two speakers
opposing reconsideration, after which the motion shall be immedi ately put to the vote.
VII.

Decision-making
Rule 33
General agreement
1.
The Conference shall adopt an intergovernmental negotiated and agreed
outcome, entitled “Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration”, and
make its best endeavour to ensure that all of the other work of the Conference is
accomplished by consensus.
2.
Notwithstanding any measures that may be taken in compliance with
paragraph 1, a proposal before the Conference shall be voted on if a representative of
any State participating in the Conference so requests.
Rule 34
Voting rights
Each State participating in the Conference shall have one vote.
Rule 35
Majority required
1.
Subject to rule 33, decisions of the Conference on all matters of substance shall
be taken by a two-thirds majority of the States present and voting.
2.
Except as otherwise provided in the present rules, decisions of the Conference
on all matters of procedure shall be taken by a majority of the States present and
voting.
3.
If the question arises whether a matter is one of procedure or of substance, the
presiding President of the Conference shall rule on the question. An appeal against
that ruling shall be immediately put to the vote, and the presiding President ’s ruling
shall stand unless overruled by a majority of the States present and voting.
4.

If a vote is equally divided, the proposal or motion shall be regarded as rejected.

Rule 36
Meaning of the phrase “States present and voting”
For the purpose of the present rules, the phrase “States present and voting”
means States casting an affirmative or negative vote. States which abstain from voting
shall be regarded as not voting.
Rule 37
Method of voting
1.
Except as provided in rule 44, the Conference may vote by show of hands,
except that a representative may request a roll call, which shall then be taken in the
English alphabetical order of the names of the States participating in the Conference,
beginning with the delegation whose name is drawn by lot by the presiding P resident.

10/16

17-23327

Modalities for the Intergovernmental Conference to Adopt the
Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration

A/RES/72/244

The name of each State shall be called in all roll calls, and its representative shall
reply “yes”, “no” or “abstention”.
2.
When the Conference votes by mechanical means, a non-recorded vote shall
replace a vote by show of hands and a recorded vote shall replace a roll call. A
representative may request a recorded vote, which shall, unless a representative
requests otherwise, be taken without calling out the names of the States participating
in the Conference.
3.
The vote of each State participating in a roll-call or a recorded vote shall be
inserted in any record of or report on the meeting.
Rule 38
Conduct during voting
After the presiding President has announced the commencement of voting, no
representative shall interrupt the voting, except on a point of order in connection with
the process of voting.
Rule 39
Explanation of vote
1.
Representatives may make brief statements, consisting solely of explanations of
vote, before the voting has commenced or after the voting has been compl eted. The
presiding President may limit the time to be allowed for such explanations. The
representative of a State sponsoring a proposal or motion shall not speak in
explanation of vote thereon, except if it has been amended.
2.
When the same matter is considered successively in several organs of the
Conference, a State should, as far as possible, explain its vote only in one such organ,
unless its vote in one organ is different from that in another organ.
Rule 40
Division of proposals
A representative may move that parts of a proposal be decided on separately. If
a representative objects, the motion for division shall be voted upon. Permission to
speak on the motion shall be accorded to only two representatives in favour of and to
two opposing the division. If the motion is carried, those parts of the proposal that
are subsequently approved shall be put to the Conference for decision as a whole. If
all operative parts of the proposal have been rejected, the proposal shall be considered
to have been rejected as a whole.
Rule 41
Amendments
A proposal is considered an amendment to another proposal if it merely adds to,
deletes from or revises part of that proposal. Unless specified otherwise, the word
“proposal” in these rules shall be regarded as including amendments.
Rule 42
Order of voting on amendments
When an amendment is moved to a proposal, the amendment shall be voted on
first. When two or more amendments are moved to a proposal, the Conference shall
vote first on the amendment furthest removed in substance from the original proposal
and then on the amendment next furthest removed therefrom, and so on, until all the
amendments have been put to the vote. Where, however, the adoption of one
amendment necessarily implies the rejection of another amendment, the latter shall
17-23327

11/16

Modalities for the Intergovernmental Conference to Adopt the
Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration

A/RES/72/244

not be put to the vote. If one or more amendments are adopted, the amended proposal
shall then be voted upon.
Rule 43
Order of voting on proposals
1.
If two or more proposals, other than amendments, relate to the same question,
they shall, unless the Conference decides otherwise, be voted on in the order in which
they were submitted. The Conference may, after each vote on a proposal, decide
whether to vote on the next proposal.
2.
Revised proposals shall be voted on in the order in which the original proposals
were submitted, unless the revision substantially departs from the original proposal.
In that case, the original proposal shall be regarded as withdrawn and the revised
proposal shall be treated as a new proposal.
3.
A motion requiring that no decision be taken on a proposal shall be put to the
vote before a decision is taken on the proposal in question.
Rule 44
Elections
All elections shall be held by secret ballot unless, in the absence o f any
objection, the Conference decides to proceed without taking a ballot when there is an
agreed candidate or slate of candidates.
Rule 45
Balloting
1.
When one or more elective places are to be filled at one time under the same
conditions, those candidates, in a number not exceeding the number of such places,
obtaining in the first ballot a majority of the votes cast and the largest number of votes
shall be elected.
2.
If the number of candidates obtaining such majority is less than the number of
places to be filled, additional ballots shall be held to fill the remaining places, the
voting being restricted to the candidates obtaining the largest number of votes in the
previous ballot, to a number not more than twice the places remaining to be fille d.
VIII.

Subsidiary organs
Rule 46
Main Committee
The Conference may establish a Main Committee.
Rule 47
Representation on the Main Committee
Each State participating in the Conference and the European Union may be
represented by one representative on the Main Committee established by the
Conference. They may assign to the Committee such alternate representatives and
advisers as may be required.

12/16

17-23327

Modalities for the Intergovernmental Conference to Adopt the
Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration

A/RES/72/244

Rule 48
Other committees and working groups
1.
In addition to the Main Committee referred to above, the Conference may
establish such committees and working groups as it deems necessary for the
performance of its functions.
2.
Subject to the decision of the plenary of the Conference, the Main Committee
may set up subcommittees and working groups.
Rule 49
Members of committees, subcommittees and working groups
1.
The members of the committees and working groups of the Conference, referred
to in rule 48, paragraph 1, shall be appointed by the two Presidents, subject to the
approval of the Conference, unless the Conference decides otherwise.
2.
Members of the subcommittees and working groups of committees shall be
appointed by the Chair of the committee in question, subject to the approval of that
committee, unless the committee decides otherwise.
Rule 50
Officers
Except as otherwise provided in rule 6, each committee, subcommittee and
working group shall elect its own officers.
Rule 51
Quorum
1.
The Chair of the Main Committee may declare a meeting open and permit the
debate to proceed when at least one quarter of the States participating in the
Conference are present. The presence of a majority of the States so participating shall
be required for any decision to be taken.
2.
A majority of the members of the General Committee or the Credentials
Committee or of any committee, subcommittee or working group shall constitute a
quorum.
Rule 52
Officers, conduct of business and voting
The rules contained in sections II, VI (except rule 19) and VII above shall be
applicable, mutatis mutandis, to the proceedings of committees, subcommittees and
working groups, except that:
(a) The Chairs of the General Committee and the Credentials Committee and
the Chairs of the committees, subcommittees and working groups may exercise the
right to vote, provided that they are representatives of participating States;
(b) Decisions of committees, subcommittees and working groups shall be
taken by a majority of the members present and voting, except that the reconsideration
of a proposal or an amendment shall require the majority established by rule 32.

17-23327

13/16

Modalities for the Intergovernmental Conference to Adopt the
Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration

A/RES/72/244

IX.

Languages and records
Rule 53
Languages of the Conference
Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish shall be the languages
of the Conference.
Rule 54
Interpretation
1.
Speeches made in a language of the Conference shall be interpreted into the
other five languages.
2.
A representative may speak in a language other than a language of the
Conference if the delegation concerned provides for interpretation into one of t he
languages of the Conference.
Rule 55
Languages of official documents
Official documents of the Conference shall be made available in the languages
of the Conference.
Rule 56
Sound recordings of meetings
Sound recordings of the plenary meetings of the Conference and of the meetings
of the Main Committee shall be made and kept in accordance with the practice of the
United Nations. Unless otherwise decided by the Conference or the Main Committee,
no such recordings shall be made of any of the other meetings of the Conference.

X.

Public and private meetings
General principles
Rule 57
The plenary meetings of the Conference and the meetings of any committee
shall be held in public unless the body concerned decides otherwise. All de cisions
taken by the plenary of the Conference at a private meeting shall be announced at an
early public meeting of the plenary.
Rule 58
As a general rule, meetings of the General Committee, Credentials Committee,
subcommittees or working groups shall be held in private.
Rule 59
Communiqués on private meetings
At the close of a private meeting, the presiding officer of the organ concerned
may issue a communiqué through the Secretary-General of the United Nations or
her/his designated representative.

XI.

14/16

Other participants and observers

17-23327

Modalities for the Intergovernmental Conference to Adopt the
Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration

A/RES/72/244

Rule 60
Intergovernmental organizations and other entities having received a standing
invitation to participate as observers in the sessions and work of the
General Assembly
Representatives designated by intergovernmental organizations and other
entities having received a standing invitation to participate as observers in the
sessions and work of the General Assembly have the right to participate as observers,
without the right to vote, in the deliberations of the Conference, the Main Committee
and, as appropriate, any other committee or working group.
Rule 61
Associate members of regional commissions 8
Representatives designated by the associate members of regional commissions
listed in the footnote below may participate as observers, without the right to vote, in
the deliberations of the Conference, the Main Committee and, as appropriate, any
other committee or working group.
Rule 62
Representatives of the specialized agencies and related organizations 9
Representatives designated by the specialized agencies and related
organizations may participate as observers, without the right to vote, in the
deliberations of the Conference, the Main Committee and, as appropriate, any other
committee or working group on questions within the scope of their activities.
Rule 63
Representatives of other intergovernmental organizations
Save where otherwise specifically provided with respect to the European Union
in these rules of procedure, representatives designated by other intergovernmental
organizations invited to the Conference may participate as observers, without the right
to vote, in the deliberations of the Conference, the Main Committee and, as
appropriate, any other committee or working group on questions within the scope of
their activities.
Rule 64
Representatives of interested United Nations organs
Representatives designated by interested organs of the United Nations may
participate as observers, without the right to vote, in the deliberations of the
Conference, the Main Committee and, as appropriate, any other committee or working
group on questions within the scope of their activities.
Rule 65
Representatives of non-governmental organizations
__________________

American Samoa, Anguilla, Aruba, Bermuda, the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, the
Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, Curaçao, French Polynesia, Guadeloupe, Guam,
Martinique, Montserrat, New Caledonia, Puerto Rico, Sint Maarten, the Turks and Caicos Islands
and the United States Virgin Islands.
9
For the purpose of the present rules, the term “related organizations” includes the International
Atomic Energy Agency, the International Criminal Court, the International Organization for
Migration, the International Seabed Authority, the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea,
the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemic al Weapons, the Preparatory Commission for the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization and the World Trade Organization.
8

17-23327

15/16

Modalities for the Intergovernmental Conference to Adopt the
Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration

A/RES/72/244

1.
Non-governmental organizations accredited to participate in the Conference
may designate representatives to attend public meetings of the Conference and the
Main Committee as observers.
2.
Upon the invitation of the presiding officer of the Conference and subject to the
approval of the Conference, such observers may make oral statements on questions
in which they have special competence. If the number of requests to speak is too large,
the non-governmental organizations shall be requested to form themselves into
constituencies, such constituencies to speak through spokespersons.
Rule 66
Written statements
Written statements submitted by the designated representatives referred to in
rules 60 to 65 shall be circulated by the secretariat to all delegations in the quantit ies
and the languages in which the statements are made available to it at the site of the
Conference, provided that a statement submitted on behalf of a non -governmental
organization must be related to the work of the Conference and be on a subject in
which the organization has a special competence. Written statements shall not be
made available at United Nations expense and shall not be issued as official
documents.
XII.

Suspension and amendment of the rules of procedure
Rule 67
Method of suspension
Any of these rules may be suspended by the Conference provided that 2 4 hours’
notice of the proposal for the suspension has been given, which may be waived if no
representative objects. Any such suspension shall be limited to a specific and stated
purpose and to a period required to achieve that purpose.
Rule 68
Method of amendment
These rules of procedure may be amended by a decision of the Conference taken
by a two-thirds majority of the representatives present and voting, after the General
Committee has reported on the proposed amendment.

16/16

17-23327
