VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(a) A study of the existing modes of co-ordination, co-operation and communication in the field of
human rights within the United Nations system;
( b) Suggestions and proposals which the Commission might deem appropriate to make in this respect.
84th plenary meeting
14 December 1978

8. Decides to continue to consider as a matter of
high priority, at its thirty-fourth session, the item entitled "Implementation of the Programme for the
Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination".
86th plenary meeting
16 December 1978
33/99.

33/98.

Implementation of the Programme for
the Decade for Action to Comhat Racism
and Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3057 (XXVIII) of 2 November 1973, to which is annexed the Programme for
the Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial
Discrimination, and 32/10 of 7 November 1977 on
the Decade,
Noting that, at the mid-term of the Programme for
the Decade, the evils of apartheid, racism and racial
discrimination, including the denial of the right to
self-determination, continue to prevail in southern
Africa and elsewhere,
Convinced that the withdrawal of foreign investments and the termination of the activities of the
transnational corporations in southern Africa will contribute significantly to achieving the goals and objectives of the Programme for the Decade,
1. Condemns once again the policies of apartheid,
racism and racial discrimination which prevail in
southern Africa and elsewhere, including the denial
of the right to self-determination;
2. Urges all States to continue to co-operate fully
with the Secretary-General in the implementation of
the Programme for the Decade for Action to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination;
3. Reaffirms its strong support for oppressed peoples struggling to liberate themselves from racism, racial discrimination, apartheid, colonialism and alien
domination;
4. Calls once again upon all the Governments
whi~h have not yet done so to take legislative, administrative or other measures in respect of their nationals
and the bodies corporate under their jurisdiction that
own and operate enterprises in southern Africa, in
order to put an end to such enterprises;
5. Urges once again United Nations organs, the
specialized agencies and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations to strengthen and enlarge
the scope of their activities in support of the objectives
of the Programme for the Decade, in particular by
taking the measures specified in paragraph 6 of General Assembly resolution 32/10;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
give the utmost publicity to the Programme for the
Decade;
7. Urges once again all Governments and private
organizations to make available adequate resources
to enable the Secretary-General to undertake the activities entrusted to him under the Programme for the
Decade and in support of the activities envisaged
during the Decade;

145

World Conference to Combat Racism ancl
Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,

I
Recalling its resolution 3057 (XXVIII) of 2 November 1973, in which it designated the ten-year period beginning on 10 December 1973 as the Decade for
Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination
and adopted the Programme for the Decade,
Recalling also its resolution 32/129 of 16 December 1977, in which it decided to convene the World
Conference to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the work of the World Conference to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination,42 held at Geneva
from 14 to 25 August 1978,
Noting that the Conference, by the adoption of the
Declaration and the Programme of Action, 43 focused
the attention of the international community on the
problems of racism, racial discrimination, decolonization, foreign domination and apartheid and provided
the international community with an opportunity to
review and evaluate the activities undertaken during
the first half of the Decade,
Stressing the importance of continuous action at all
levels to eradicate the evils of racism, racial discrimination, colonial and alien domination and apartheid,
Inspired by the spirit of the thirtieth anniversary
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
of the International Anti-Apartheid Year to redouble
the efforts of the international community to eliminate
all forms of racism and racial discrimination,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the work of the World Conference to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination;
2. Approves the Declaration and the Programme
of Action adopted by the Conference;
3. Reaffirms that all forms of racism racial discrimination and apartheid are abhorrent 'to the conscience and dignity of mankind and must be eradicated
by effective international action;
4. Further reaffirms the special responsibility of
the United Nations and the international community
for the victims of racial discrimination as well as for
peoples subjected to colonial or alien domination;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to circulate his
r~pc_irt on the _work of the Conference to States, specialized agencies, regional intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental organizations with a
12 A/33/262.
4 ~ Report

of the World Conference to Combat Racism and
Racial Discrimination, Genn·a. 14-25 Au{?ust 1978 (United
Nations publication. Sales No. F.79.XIV.2).' chap. II.

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

146

request to utilize their best endeavours in striving
for the universal elimination of racism, racial discrimination and apartheid;
6. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
carry out an evaluation of the activities undertaken
in connexion with the Decade, in accordance with
paragraph 18 of the Programme for the Decade,44
taking into account the results of the Conference set
out in the Declaration and the Programme of Action
adopted by the Conference;
II
Stressing the importance of action at the international, regional and national levels for the effective
elimination of racism and racial discrimination,
1. Recommends to all States and intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations to co-operate in
making concerted and determined efforts at the national, regional and international levels to combat
racism, racial discrimination and apartheid, in accordance with the Programme for the Decade for Action
to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination and in
light of the report of the Secretary-General on the work
of the World Conference to Combat Racism and
Racial Discrimination;
2. Appeals to all States to continue to co-operate
with the Secretary-General in the implementation of
the Programme for the Decade, inter alia by submitting
their reports in compliance with the provisions of
paragraph 18 (e) of the Programme for the Decade;
3. Further appeals to all States:
(a) To deny all military, economic, political,
diplomatic or other assistance to racist regimes which
enables and encourages these regimes to enforce and
perpetuate their racist policies;
( b) To ensure the fullest implementation of
United Nations resolutions relevant to the complete
eradication of racism, racial discrimination and apartheid in southern Africa;
4. Reiterates its appeal to all States, intergovernmental organizations, private institutions and non-governmental organizations to continue to render political
and material assistance to the oppressed peoples of
southern Africa and the liberation movements recognized by the Organization of African Unity;
5. Calls upon all States and intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations to work for the speedy
release of all political prisoners imprisoned by the
racist regimes for their fight against apartheid, racism
and racial discrimination and for the right of their
people to self-determination and independence;
III
Recognizing the importance of concerted and coordinated action by the United Nations system to implement the Programme for the Decade for Action
to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination,
Bearing in mind the report of the Secretary-General
on the work of the World Conference to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination,
Commending the steps already taken by various
organs and bodies within the United Nations system,
including the specialized agencies, to implement the
Programme for the Decade,
44 Resolution

3057 (XXVIII), annex.

Aware of the need for further interagency coordination and co-operation within the United Nations
system in the implementation of the Programme for
the Decade,
Reiterating the importance of publicity as an instrument for furthering the goals and objectives of the
Decade,
1. Stresses the urgent need for organizations within
the United Nations system to continue to intensify
their efforts to arouse world public opinion on a
continuous basis against the evils of racism, racial
discrimination and apartheid;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to direct the
Department of Public Information of the Secretariat to
continue to make every effort to generate publicity and
disseminate information with a view to mobilizing
public support for the goals and objectives of the
Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial
Discrimination;
3. Further requests the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to continue
its efforts in the field of education and information,
especially by organizing multi-media campaigns to
combat racism and racial discrimination;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to undertake
during the year 1979 the following activities:
(a) The convening of a regional seminar on recourse procedures available to victims of racial discrimination and activities to be undertaken at the
regional level;
( b) The convening of a round-table of university
professors and directors of race relations institutions
on the teaching of problems of racial discrimination;
( c) The undertaking of a study on education activities and activities of the mass media in the fight
against racial discrimination;
5. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit to the Economic and Social Council at its first
regular session in 1979 a report containing concrete
and detailed suggestions on the following points:
(a) Specific activities which could be undertaken
during the second half of the Decade, on a yearly basis,
in order to implement fully the programme for the
Decade;
(b) The drawing up of the agenda of the Economic and Social Council and the General Assembly,
as regards the Decade, in a way that permits separate
and detailed consideration of the various aspects of
the Programme for the Decade;

6. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
consider the report of the Secretary-General referred
to in paragraph 5 above and to take the necessary
decisions in order to enhance the implementation of
the Programme for the Decade;
7. Invites the Economic and Social Council, in
order to evaluate the activities of the Decade, to consider the possibility of setting up a working group
to assist it in this task;
8. Urges United Nations organs and the specialized agencies to strengthen and enlarge the scope
of their activities in support of the objectives of the
Programme for the Decade, in light of the report
of the Secretary-General on the work of the World

VI.

Conference to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination;
9. Requests the United Nations Institute for Training and Research to organize an international colloquium on the prohibition of apartheid, racism and
racial discrimination and the achievement of selfdetermination in international law, with special attention to the principles of non-discriminati?n and. selfdetermination as imperative norms of mternational
law;
10. Invites the Secretary-General to provide the
necessary staff and resources to ensure the effective
implementation of the Programme for the Decade,
bearing in mind the provisions of the present resolution;
11. Decides to consider at its thirty-fourth session,
as a matter of high priority, the item entitled "Implementation of the Programme for the Decade for Action
to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination".
86th plenary meeting
16 December 1978
33/100.

Results of the World Conference to
Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3057 (XXVIII) of 2 November 1973 proclaiming the Decade for Action to
Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, to which
is annexed the Programme for the Decade,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the work of the World Conference to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination,4 5 held at Geneva
from 14 to 25 August 1978,
Recalling the im~"rtance of the attainment of the
objectives of the Deca,le with a view to the strengthening of international peace and security,
Taking into account the provisions of the Charter
of the United Nations whereby Member States undertake to take action separately and in co-operation with
the United Nations to ensure respect for and universal
observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion,
Convinced that the Conference, by the adoption of
the Declaration and the Programme of Action, 46 has
made a valuable and constructive contribution to the
achievement of the objectives of the Decade,
Resolved to take all appropriate measures to bring
about the total elimination of racism, racial discrimination and apartheid,
Inspired by the spirit presiding over the observance
of the thirtieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights and of the International AntiApartheid Year to redouble efforts to put an end to
all forms of racism and racial discrimination,
1. Takes note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the work of the World Conference to
Comtat Racism and Racial Discrimination;
45 A/33/262.
46 Report of the

147

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

World Conference to Combat Racism and
Racial Discrimination, Geneva, 14-25 August 1978 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.79.XIV.2), chap. II.

2. Endorses the Declaration and the Programme
of Action adopted by the Conference;
3. Proclaims that the elimination of all forms of
racism and of prejudices and discrimination based on
race is a matter of high priority for the international
community and, accordingly, for the United Nations;
4. Invites all States, the specialized agencies and
other organizations in the United Nations system, as
well as intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations particularly concerned with action against
racism and racial discrimination, to give priority to
the full implementation of the provisions of the Declaration and the Programme of Action adopted by the
Conference;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary measures to ensure that the maximum publicity
is given to the final documents of the Conference in
view of the need to combat racism, racial discrimination and apartheid;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to take the
following measures in accordance with the Programme
of Action:
(a) To prepare several studies analysing the struggle against all forms of racial discrimination;
(b) To organize during the second half of the
Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial
Discrimination, at the level of each region of the
United Nations, regional seminars on action against
racism and racial discrimination;
( c) To study the possibility of establishing an
international fund on the basis of voluntary contributions with a view to assisting peoples and national
liberation movements in their struggle against racism
and apartheid;
7. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
carry out an evaluation of the activities undertaken
in connexion with the Decade, in accordance with
paragraph 18 of the Programme for the Decade, taking
into account the results of the Conference set out in
the Declaration and the Programme of Action adopted
by the Conference.
86th plenary meeting
16 December 1978
33/101.

Status of the International Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of
Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3057 (XXVIII) of 2 November 1973, 3135 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973,
3225 (XXIX) of 6 November 1974, 3381 (XXX) of
10 November 1975, 31/79 of 13 December 1976 and
32/11 of 7 November 1977,
1. Takes note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral47 on the status of the International Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination;48
2. Expresses its satisfaction with the increase in
the number of States which have ratified the Convention or acceded thereto;
47 A/33/147 and Corr.I.
4 8 Resolution 2106 A (XX),

annex.
