S/PV.8811

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8811th meeting

Wednesday, 30 June 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jürgenson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Estonia)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Mr. Maman Sani
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. Prince
Mr. Ben Lagha
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. DeLaurentis
Mrs. Nguyen

Agenda
Non-proliferation
Letter dated 16 June 2021 from the Security Council Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2021/578)
Eleventh report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2021/582)
Letter dated 24 June 2021 from the Security Council Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2021/602)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-17267 (E)
*2117267*

Non-proliferation

S/PV.8811

Mr. Olof Skoog and Ambassador Geraldine Byrne
Nason, Permanent Representative of Ireland, in
her capacity as Security Council Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

I give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.

Non-proliferation

Ms. DiCarlo: Thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to brief on the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA) and the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015).

Letter dated 16 June 2021 from the
Security Council Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231
(2015) addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2021/578)
Eleventh report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolution
2231 (2015) (S/2021/582)
Letter dated 24 June 2021 from the
Security Council Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231
(2015) addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2021/602)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Germany and the Islamic Republic of
Iran to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs; and His Excellency Mr. Olof
Skoog, Head of the Delegation of the European Union
to the United Nations.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
the following documents: S/2021/578, which contains
the text of a letter dated 16 June 2021 from the Security
Council Facilitator for the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015) addressed to the President of the Security
Council; S/2021/582, which contains the eleventh
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of Security Council resolution 2231 (2015); and
S/2021/602, which contains the text of a letter dated
24 June 2021 from the Security Council Facilitator for
the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) addressed
to the President of the Security Council.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, His Excellency
2/24

30/06/2021

The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action on the
Iranian nuclear issue is the outcome of 12 years of
intense diplomatic effort and technical negotiations.
The Secretary-General has always regarded the JCPOA
as the best way to ensure that the nuclear programme
of the Islamic Republic of Iran remains exclusively
peaceful. He therefore considers it — and resolution
2231 (2015), which endorsed the Plan — to be crucial
to the global nuclear non-proliferation architecture and
regional and international security. Since July 2015,
the Secretary-General has consistently and repeatedly
underscored the importance for the international
community of preserving the JCPOA. He has called
for concerns with regard to its implementation to be
addressed constructively by its participants and for
issues outside the Plan to be addressed without prejudice
to preserving the agreement and its accomplishments.
The context for the implementation of the JCPOA
and resolution 2231 (2015) has improved considerably
since the Security Council last met in December 2020
to discuss the Iranian nuclear issue (see S/2020/1324).
As noted in the eleventh report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015)
(S/2021/582), through its 18 February letter addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/2021/158),
the United States withdrew previous letters sent to the
Council in August 2020 (S/2020/822) and September
2020 (S/2020/927), respectively. This was a first and
necessary step to heal a divided Council and to pave
the way for the Vienna talks. The continued diplomatic
efforts in Vienna offer a critical opportunity for both
the United States and the Islamic Republic of Iran to
return to the full and effective implementation of the
Plan and of the resolution. This would be a welcome
and crucial development. It is therefore essential that
all Member States promote a conducive environment
and avoid any action that may have a negative impact
on these ongoing diplomatic efforts, as well as on
regional stability. Likewise, all initiatives in support
21-17267

30/06/2021

Non-proliferation

of trade and economic relations with the Islamic
Republic of Iran remain important, especially given the
current economic and health challenges posed by the
coronavirus disease pandemic.
Furthermore, I echo the Secretary-General’s appeal
to the United States to lift or waive its sanctions outlined
in the Plan, extend the waivers with regard to the trade
in oil with Iran, and to once again facilitate nuclearrelated activities consistent with the Plan and the
resolution. These activities relate to non-proliferation
projects, including at the Bushehr nuclear power plant,
the Fordow facility and the Arak reactor. These are
steps needed to facilitate the full implementation of
the Plan and resolution 2231 (2015) and to enable the
Iranian people to secure the tangible benefits foreseen
by the Plan.
A return to the full and effective implementation
of the JCPOA and the resolution is all the more
important in the light of the additional steps taken
by the Islamic Republic of Iran to reduce its nuclearrelated commitments under the Plan, following the
withdrawal of the United States from the JCPOA. The
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) informed
the Council that Iran has installed new and advanced
centrifuges and begun research and development
activities for the production of uranium metal. Iran
has also enriched uranium up to 60 per cent and has
now an estimated total enriched uranium stockpile
of 3,241 kilograms — further surpassing JCPOAstipulated limits in both cases. Iran has stated that these
measures, as previous measures taken since 1 July
2019, are reversible. Furthermore, as of 23 February
2021, Iran decided to suspend voluntary transparency
measures envisaged by the JCPOA, including the
Additional Protocol to its Comprehensive Safeguards
Agreement. However, later in February the IAEA and
the Atomic Energy Organization of Iran reached a
temporary bilateral technical understanding, allowing
the Agency to continue with its necessary monitoring
and verification activities. This understanding expired
on 24 June, and Iran has not indicated whether it intends
to maintain the current arrangement.
The Agency’s monitoring and verification
activities in the Islamic Republic of Iran, including
the uninterrupted collection and storage of data
by its monitoring and surveillance equipment, are
essential to helping to build international confidence
in the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear
programme. I call on the Islamic Republic of Iran to

S/PV. 8811

resume the temporary technical understanding with
the Agency without delay, refrain from taking further
steps to reduce its commitments and return to full
implementation of the Plan. Iran should also carefully
consider the other concerns raised by participants in
the Plan and by other Member States in relation to
resolution 2231 (2015).
I will now turn to the measures set out in annex B
to the resolution, as outlined in the Secretary-General’s
eleventh report on the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015). First, on the nuclear-related provisions,
we have not received any report on the supply, sale or
transfer to Iran of nuclear and nuclear-related dual-use
items contrary to paragraph 2 of annex B. The Security
Council continued its consideration of requests for
the supply, sale or transfer of nuclear and nuclearrelated dual-use items to Iran through the procurement
channel. One new proposal was submitted through the
channel in the reporting period, bringing the total to 52
proposals received since 16 January 2016. The Council
has received eight notifications submitted pursuant
to paragraph 2 of annex B for certain nuclear-related
activities consistent with the Plan.
Secondly, with regard to the ballistic-missile-related
provisions of the resolution, information was provided
to the Secretary-General and the Security Council by
France, Germany, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel,
the Russian Federation and the United Kingdom on
ballistic-missile launches and a space-launch-vehicle
test by Iran in January and February 2021. The
information provided reflects divergent views among
those Member States as to whether those launches are
inconsistent with the resolution.
Thirdly, on the asset-freeze provisions, the
Secretariat did not receive any official information
alleging action inconsistent with the assetfreeze provisions.
Let me conclude by stressing again the importance
and value of the JCPOA to the international
non-proliferation architecture and for regional and
international security. In this defining moment, it is
therefore critical for all parties to seize this opportunity
to put the JCPOA back on the right track as soon as
possible. In so doing, the JCPOA would, again, serve
as a powerful example of successful multilateral
diplomacy and as proof that even the most contentious
issues can be effectively addressed through dialogue,
understanding and reciprocity.

21-172673/24

S/PV.8811

Non-proliferation

Finally, I would like to acknowledge the leadership
of Ms. Geraldine Byrne Nason, in her role as Facilitator
for the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) and to
assure her of our full support. I would also like to thank
the Coordinator of the Procurement Working Group of
the Joint Commission for our continued cooperation.
The President: I thank Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Skoog.
Mr. Skoog: This is the first time I address the
Security Council during the Estonian presidency,
Sir. Protocol holds that I should congratulate you on
assuming the presidency, Mr. President, but given
that today is the last day of your presidency, I should
congratulate you, Sir, on a very successful presidency.
It is an honour to be addressing the Council today
on behalf of the High Representative of the European
Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Mr. Josep
Borrell Fontenelles, in his capacity as Coordinator of
the Joint Commission of the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action (JCPOA). I also want to thank the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. António Guterres, and Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo and the Secretariat, for their steadfast
dedication and professionalism in preparing the eleventh
report on the implementation of the Security Council
resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2021/582). I also want to
express my appreciation to Ms. Geraldine Byrne Nason,
Ambassador of Ireland, for her work as Facilitator for
the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) and for
the excellent cooperation during the past period, and I
look forward to our continued collaboration.
Since my previous statement, six months ago (see
S/2021/1324), a new level of optimism can be discerned
given that the diplomatic environment surrounding the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action has improved. At
the same time, there are serious concerns despite that
new optimism.
The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, now almost
six years of age, is the fruit of effective multilateralism
and a token of the important work done by members
of the international community and by this Chamber
in particular. The JCPOA has withstood significant
pressure over the past years since the withdrawal of
the United States from the agreement in 2018 and the
reinstatement of sanctions, as well as the successive
steps by Iran inconsistent with the agreement. During
that time, the remaining JCPOA participants have
demonstrated their conviction to work diplomatically
4/24

30/06/2021

to preserve the deal. However, the agreement is still at
a critical stage and needs to be urgently restored and
fully implemented. That is a common responsibility
that needs to be nurtured and protected by all of us.
Since our last discussion on the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015) in the Council, our efforts
to ensure the full implementation of the JCPOA by all
sides have intensified. To that end, we welcome the
engagement of all JCPOA participants since early April
in Vienna under the auspices of the Joint Commission,
which the High Representative coordinates, as well as
the separate contacts with the United States. Let me also
take this opportunity to thank the Austrian authorities
for providing the facilities and a conducive environment
for our diplomatic efforts, in line with all the necessary
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) protocols.
Beyond that, the High Representative has spared
no efforts and has been in close touch with all JCPOA
participants and the United States, calling for the
necessary flexibility to take the difficult political
decisions needed to bring the JCPOA back on track. It
is clear that time is not on our side and that what might
be possible still today may prove impossible in the near
future. We have a limited window ahead of us that we
should not miss. The efforts of all relevant parties speak
to the importance and the value of the JCPOA. They
are solid evidence of the need to vigorously pursue
diplomacy and to sustain and support multilateral
agreements and institutions.
In that context, the European Union (EU) welcomes
the declared intention of the United States to rejoin
the JCPOA, and we feel encouraged by its expressed
readiness to lift the JCPOA-related sanctions, in line
with the provisions of the nuclear deal.
The EU remains fully committed to the JCPOA and
is determined to continue working with the international
community to preserve it. At the same time, we remain
deeply concerned about Iran’s continued accumulation
of low-enriched uranium in excess of the JCPOA
thresholds. At the moment, Iran is the only non-nuclearweapon State to produce 60 per cent enriched uranium.
Also of particular concern are Iran’s continued research
and development with advanced centrifuges, as well
as activities with uranium metal. Those activities are
inconsistent with the JCPOA. They also raise serious
non-proliferation concerns, particularly following
Iran’s decision to suspend the implementation of
the Additional Protocol and JCPOA transparency
21-17267

30/06/2021

Non-proliferation

provisions, which has substantially decreased access
by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
to key information about Iran’s nuclear programme.
We therefore call on Iran to reverse such activities and
return to the full implementation of its commitments
without delay.
It is crucial that Iran fully cooperate with the
International Atomic Energy Agency. The necessary
verification and monitoring activities, including
transparency measures, foreseen under the JCPOA
need to be restored. In addition, Iran should fully
and promptly cooperate with the IAEA on the four
outstanding safeguards-related issues, which have
been raised to the attention of the IAEA Board of
Governors and provide the necessary clarifications.
Let me stress the EU’s deep appreciation for the work
and the professionalism of the IAEA. Its impartial and
technical work is of the utmost importance and is a
cornerstone of the credibility of the JCPOA.
We take note of Iran’s reaffirmed position that
it is ready to return to full JCPOA implementation. I
remain optimistic that sufficient space for diplomacy
will continue to be granted in order to be able bring
the JCPOA back on a path of full implementation in the
very near future.
We need to acknowledge the strain put on the JCPOA
by the lack of concrete economic benefits expected by
Iran in exchange for agreeing and implementing the
JCPOA. The United States withdrawal from the JCPOA
in 2018 and its reimposition of JCPOA-related sanctions
created a significant challenge for Iran, as well as
economic operators worldwide, to continue to engage
in business relations, not least to maintain banking
and payment channels. For its part, the EU lifted all
its nuclear-related sanctions upon the conclusion of
the deal in 2015 and spared no effort to maintain and
promote economic and trade relations with Iran. That
includes support for setting up and making operational
the Instrument in Support of Trade Exchanges, set up
by European countries to allow for legitimate trade
exchanges to continue.
The work of the procurement channel remains
important as an independent and transparent Security
Council mechanism. I am pleased to note that the
channel continues to be used and that one new
proposal has been transmitted to the Security Council
for decision and endorsement during the reporting
period, while another proposal that was under review

S/PV. 8811

during the preceding reporting period has also been
recommended for approval. The eleventh report of
the Joint Commission to the Security Council on the
status of the Procurement Working Group’s decisions
and on any implementation issues (see S/2021/578)
provides evidence of the channel as an important
confidence-building measure that gives assurances to
Member States and private-sector actors that transfers
of goods and services for civil nuclear purposes are
fully in line with resolution 2231 (2015). The EU will
continue to promote the use of the procurement channel,
which, while enabling the trade of relevant items with
Iran, ensures the consistency of relevant transfers with
the JCPOA.
At the same time, I am also pleased to note that EUIran cooperation in the civil nuclear field under annex
III of the JCPOA, particularly in the area of nuclear
safety, continues despite the challenges of COVID-19.
Civil nuclear cooperation not only helps build a better
understanding of Iran’s civil nuclear needs but also
promotes cooperation in areas, such as nuclear safety,
that are critical for the safety of Europe and the region.
While
the
JCPOA
addresses
nuclear
non-proliferation aspects, a series of events outside the
nuclear domain are increasingly worrisome. The EU
continues to urge all actors to refrain from activities
and escalatory rhetoric that enhance regional and
international tensions and fuel a military build-up in
the region. The EU has repeatedly urged Iran to desist
from activities that could deepen mistrust, such as
ballistic missile tests and space vehicle launches, which
are inconsistent with resolution 2231 (2015).
In conclusion, let us make the best of the ongoing
diplomatic efforts aimed at a return by the United
States to the JCPOA and a full implementation of
the JCPOA by all sides. Continued perseverance,
flexibility and pragmatism provide the basis for a solid
and sustainable framework that is a cornerstone for
effective multilateral diplomacy. The JCPOA continues
to be a key component of the global non-proliferation
architecture that helps reduce regional and global
security risks.
The President: I thank His Excellency Mr. Skoog
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Byrne Nason.

21-172675/24

S/PV.8811

Non-proliferation

Ms. Byrne Nason: I speak in my capacity as
Security Council Facilitator for the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015).
As this is my first briefing as Facilitator, I wish to
express my appreciation to the members of the Council
for their trust in appointing me to that role. I will do my
utmost to support the implementation of the agreement
in an impartial and transparent manner. I will continue
to listen to, and work closely with, all Council members
as we meet our shared responsibility to ensure the full
and effective implementation of resolution 2231 (2015)
and the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA),
which it underpins. I will continue to maintain an active
dialogue with Member States, including the Islamic
Republic of Iran, on issues related to the implementation
of that resolution.
I would like to thank my predecessor, His
Excellency Phillippe Kridelka of Belgium, and his team
for their outstanding contribution over the previous two
years. His efforts and those of previous Facilitators
provide a strong foundation for our work and decisions
going forward. I would also like to thank the staff of
the Secretariat for their invaluable advice and support.
I now come to the eleventh report of the Facilitator
(see S/2021/578), which was approved by all the
members of the Council. I would like to thank each of
them for their constructive engagement in that process
in a spirit of compromise and flexibility. The report
provides a factual account of the activities that took
place in the 2231 format, covering the period from
17 December 2020 to 24 June 2021. It includes relevant
communications, summarized in my report, as well as
key aspects of the workings of the procurement channel.
Council members may refer to the report for details, but
I wish to mention three points in particular.
First, I would like to report that one meeting of the
Security Council in the 2231 format was held during this
reporting period, on 24 June, at which representatives
of the Security Council for the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015) discussed the findings and
recommendations contained in the eleventh report of
the Secretary-General (S/2021/582) on resolution 2231
(2015), prior to its public release. Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo has already referred to some of those
points in her briefing. The 2231 format held an open
discussion on the ongoing talks in Vienna in and around
the Joint Commission, on ballistic missile launches by
6/24

30/06/2021

Iran and broader developments related to resolution
2231 (2015).
Secondly, during the reporting period a total of 35
notes were circulated in the 2231 format. In addition,
I sent 26 official communications to Member States
and the Coordinator of the Procurement Working
Group of the Joint Commission. I received a total of
26 communications from Member States and the
Coordinator. Among the communications circulated
were the two regular quarterly reports issued by the
International Atomic Energy Agency in February
and May 2021, as well as 19 updates across the whole
reporting period. I cannot emphasize enough the
central, impartial and professional role played by the
Agency as it continues to carry out its verification and
monitoring activities in the Islamic Republic of Iran as
requested under resolution 2231 (2015).
Also, on 18 February, the United States notified the
Security Council (see S/2021/158) that it had withdrawn
its letters of 20 August 2020 (see S/2020/815),
21 August 2020 (S/2020/822) and 21 September 2020
(S/2020/927). That made clear the understanding of all
Council members that resolution 2231 (2015) remains
in effect in all its parts.
Thirdly, only one new proposal was submitted
to, and approved by, the Security Council during the
reporting period through the procurement channel.
That channel represents a key transparency and
confidence-building mechanism under the JCPOA. I
note that the channel is operational and effective and
join the Secretary-General’s encouragement of all
participants in the JCPOA, Member States and the
private sector to fully support and utilize that channel.
As Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo recalled,
the JCPOA is a major achievement in nuclear
non-proliferation. It is a successful example of how we
can work together to resolve protracted and difficult
issues through dialogue and diplomacy. It remains the
best way to guarantee the exclusively peaceful nature
of the Iranian nuclear programme.
As the Secretary-General states in his report, we
are in a new environment as compared to where we
were six months ago. Talks in Vienna offer the prospect
of a return to the JCPOA by the United States and the
full and effective implementation of the agreement by
all parties. I hope that the talks in Vienna will soon
reach a positive conclusion. We in turn must continue
21-17267

30/06/2021

Non-proliferation

to play our part in demonstrating that resolution 2231
(2015) is working as it should.
In conclusion, I underline the call set out in
paragraph 2 of resolution 2231 (2015) to all
“Member States, regional organizations and
international organizations to take such actions as
may be appropriate to support the implementation of
the JCPOA, including ... by refraining from actions
that undermine implementation of commitments
under the JCPOA”.
The President: I thank Ambassador Byrne Nason
for her briefing.
I would like to draw the attention of speakers to
paragraph 22 of note S/2017/507 by the President of the
Security Council, which encourages all participants
in Council meetings to deliver their statements
in five minutes or less, in line with the Security
Council’s commitment to making more effective use of
open meetings.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
thank our briefers for their remarks.
The United States appreciates the importance the
United Nations places on ensuring that the eleventh
report of the Secretary-General (S/2021/582) on
resolution 2231 (2015) fairly reflects the political
environment we are currently in, as well as the
Secretary-General’s positive reflection of our ongoing
discussions regarding a potential mutual return to
compliance with the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA). We also appreciate that the information in the
report on activities inconsistent with the resolution is
of high credibility. The report is another testament to
the critical role the Secretariat performs for the 2231
format. I would also like to express our gratitude for
Ireland’s leadership as the Security Council Facilitator
for the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) and its
efforts in supporting the resolution’s implementation.
The report underscores what has been apparent for
some time: Iran continues to disregard the provision
of resolution 2231 (2015) that calls upon Iran not to
undertake any activity related to ballistic missiles
designed to be capable of delivering nuclear weapons,
including launches using such ballistic missile
technology. We share the concerns stated by the E3 and

S/PV. 8811

Israel in their letters regarding Iran’s ballistic missile
activities, and we reject Russia’s and Iran’s assertions
that those activities are not covered by resolution
2231 (2015). Those activities are clearly in defiance of
the resolution.
As the reports of both the Secretary-General
(S/2021/582) and the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) (see
S/2021/558) make clear, Iran continues its escalatory
steps, including many that exceed the JCPOA’s nuclear
limits. In particular, Iran continues installing and
operating numbers and types of centrifuges beyond
JCPOA limits; producing quantities and enrichment
levels of uranium well beyond the deal’s limits,
including enrichment of uranium-235 up to 60 per cent;
and producing uranium metal. We urge Iran to refrain
from taking further escalatory steps and to return to
the full implementation of all its JCPOA commitments,
including those related to IAEA verification, monitoring
and implementation of the Additional Protocol.
We note with great concern that, as stated in the
report of the IAEA Director General, Iran has not
replied to his letter requesting Iran’s position regarding
the possible continued collection, recording and
retention of data necessary for JCPOA verification by
IAEA monitoring and surveillance equipment, and the
maintenance and retention of related records. We urge
Iran to allow that temporary arrangement to proceed so
that the continuity of those verification measures can
be maintained. We also call on Iran to fully cooperate
with the IAEA, in accordance with its Comprehensive
Safeguards Agreement required under the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, to resolve the
outstanding safeguards issues without further delay.
Beyond Iranian nuclear activity, Iran’s support for
terrorism threatens United States forces, diplomatic
personnel and our partners in the region and elsewhere.
It drives instability and negatively impacts millions
of civilians. We will continue to use all the tools at
our disposal to counter Iran’s destabilizing activities
in the region and to promote the implementation
of other Security Council resolutions to address
Iranian conventional-weapons proliferation, including
the prohibition of resolution 1701 (2006) on the
unauthorized transfer of arms and related materiel to
Hizbullah in Lebanon and the prohibition of resolution
2216 (2015) on the transfer of arms and related materiel
to the Houthis in Yemen.

21-172677/24

S/PV.8811

Non-proliferation

The United States is committed to ensuring Iran
never acquires a nuclear weapon and we believe
diplomacy, in coordination with our allies and regional
partners, is the best path to achieve that goal. The last
few rounds of discussions in Vienna have helped to
crystallize the choices that need to be made by Iran and
by the United States in order achieve a mutual return to
compliance with the JCPOA.
In closing, we appreciate the continued work of the
Secretary-General and Secretariat and look forward to
working alongside Member States to fully implement
our commitments.
Mr. Maman Sani (Niger) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I wish to welcome the convening of this
briefing on the eleventh report of the Secretary-General
(S/2021/582) on the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015).
I would like to thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo,
Under-Secretary-General
for
Political
and
Peacebuilding Affairs; Ambassador Geraldine Byrne
Nason, Permanent Representative of Ireland, in her
capacity as Facilitator; and Mr. Olof Skoog, observer
of the European Union, in his capacity as Coordinator
of the Joint Committee to the Security Council, for
their presentations.
My delegation has taken note of the conclusions and
recommendations contained in the eleventh report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015) and calls on Member States and all parties
to the agreement to comply with their obligations.
I would like to reaffirm the attachment of the Niger
to the full implementation of resolution 2231 (2015),
which approved, in 2015, the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action (JCPOA) on the Iranian nuclear programme.
My delegation welcomes the discussions under
way in Vienna on the return of the United States to the
JCPOA in order to revitalize it and ensure its full and
transparent implementation by all parties.
In that regard, the procurement channel continues
to be a key transparency and confidence-building
mechanism, ensuring that the transfer of nuclear and
dual-use nuclear-related goods and related services to
the Islamic Republic of Iran is in line with resolution
2231 (2015), as well as with the provisions and
objectives of the JCPOA. My delegation therefore
calls on States not party to the JCPOA to refrain from
taking measures that would hamper the ability of the
8/24

30/06/2021

remaining parties to fully meet their commitments and
calls on all JCPOA, Member States and relevant sectors
to support and make full use of that channel.
The importance of the full and effective
implementation of the JCPOA by all parties was
underlined during the ministerial meeting among
China, France, Germany, the Russian Federation, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
Islamic Republic of Iran, held virtually on 21 December
2020 and chaired by the High Representative of the
European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy.
The expiration on 24 June of the temporary bilateral
technical agreement concluded on 24 May between the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and Iran
and its non-renewal constitute a source of concern and
a setback for the mechanism for monitoring nuclear
programme activities in Iran. My delegation calls on
the Islamic Republic of Iran to consider positively the
IAEA’s extension requests, including that relating to
the continuous collection and storage of data by its
monitoring and surveillance equipment, and to enable
the Agency to continue its work beyond 24 June.
In conclusion, my delegation remains concerned at
the prevailing tensions in the Persian Gulf region and
reiterates the call made by the Secretary-General to
ease, for humanitarian reasons, all unilateral economic
measures that could prevent Iran from mobilizing the
resources required to fight the coronavirus disease
pandemic. That gesture of flexibility could also have
the benefit of helping move certain positions in the
context of the negotiations under way.
Ms. Nguyen (Viet Nam): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and Ambassador
Skoog for their comprehensive briefings.
I take this opportunity to thank Ambassador
Geraldine Byrne Nason, as Facilitator of the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), for her able
leadership and tireless efforts in ensuring the timely
adoption of the report of the Joint Commission to the
Security Council on the status of the Procurement
Working Group’s decisions and on any implementation
issues (see S/2021/578).
I also welcome the representatives of Germany and
of Iran to this meeting.
It was encouraging to witness positive developments
in the negotiations to revive the full and effective
implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
21-17267

30/06/2021

Non-proliferation

Action (JCPOA) and resolution 2231 (2015) over the
past six months.
Despite differences and challenges, the ongoing
efforts of the concerned parties through six rounds of
talks in Vienna have offered a valuable opportunity
for progress on this matter. Therefore, we join
other Member States in welcoming such diplomatic
engagements and calling on the concerned parties to
refrain from hardening rhetoric that may undermine the
negotiation on the landmark agreement and resolution
2231 (2015).
We take note of the findings of the eleventh report of
Secretary-General (S/2021/582) on the implementation
of the Security Council resolution 2231 (2015) and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) Board’s
reports on verification and monitoring in the Islamic
Republic of Iran in the light of resolution 2231 (2015).
We also share the views of Member States on the
information contained in the reports on activities that
exceed the limits set out in the JCPOA.
Against this backdrop, we urge all stakeholders to
comply with the obligations set out in the resolution.
We call for continued cooperation between Iran and
IAEA for monitoring purposes, as transparency is an
important element of the confidence-building aspect of
the JCPOA.
We also call on relevant parties to continue dialogue
and negotiations to resolve differences. It is necessary
for all parties to exercise self-restraint and refrain from
any acts that may exacerbate the situation, erode trust
and escalate tension.
In that process, we applaud all constructive
contributions made by the international community and
the countries of the regional to the ongoing diplomatic
efforts with the aim of avoiding negative impacts on the
current negotiating process and regional stability.
We have always considered the JCPOA and
resolution 2231 (2015) as the best instruments to
ensure a comprehensive, long-term and proper solution
to the Iranian nuclear issue, as well as to contribute
to regional and international peace and security. We
share the assessment of the Secretary-General that
those two documents remain a successful example of
multilateral diplomacy and nuclear non-proliferation
and continue to enjoy the full support of the broader
international community.

S/PV. 8811

With
regard
to
the
implementation
of
non-proliferation obligations, we advocate the
promotion of balanced implementation of the three
pillars of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons: disarmament, the non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and the peaceful use of
nuclear energy.
As we have stated time and again, Viet Nam
has relentlessly pursued the policy of upholding
international law, including the Charter of the United
Nations and its purposes and principles. We stress the
utmost importance of the principles of the settlement of
disputes by peaceful means and the fulfilment in good
faith of obligations under international law.
In closing, we would like to reiterate our full
support for all meaningful contributions that help foster
an environment conducive to dialogue and cooperation
within and beyond the Security Council for peace,
stability and development in the Middle East.
Mr. Ben Lagha (Tunisia): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo, the Head of the
Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations and the Permanent Representative of Ireland,
in her capacity as Facilitator for the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015), for their detailed briefings.
Tunisia welcomes the resumption of discussions to
revive the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA),
and we hope an agreement will soon be reached. We
indeed share the view that the JCPOA constitutes an
important addition to the global non-proliferation
architecture and that its full restoration remains the
best way to guarantee the exclusively peaceful nature
of Iran’s nuclear programme. We therefore renew our
call for the full and effective implementation of that
agreement and of resolution 2231 (2015) by all parties.
We take note of the continuing differences in
interpretation regarding the implementation of the
provisions of annex B of resolution 2231 (2015), in
particular with regard to ballistic missile-related
activities. We also reaffirm the importance of giving
due consideration to legitimate security concerns in
the region that were left unaddressed by the JCPOA.
In the meantime, we urge all parties to refrain from
any activities that can deepen mistrust and engage
in dialogue and negotiations to reduce tensions and
resolve differences.

21-172679/24

S/PV.8811

Non-proliferation

Lastly, I would like to again underline the critical
importance for peace and stability of the establishment
of a zone free of nuclear weapons and other weapons
of mass destruction in the Middle East. The United
Nations Conference aiming at elaborating a legally
binding treaty establishing such a zone, which held its
first session in 2018 and in which all Arab countries and
Iran participated constructively, represents a positive
step towards that goal and deserves full support. In that
regard, we encourage all the parties concerned to take
part in the forthcoming sessions of that Conference.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): I would like to begin by
thanking Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo
and Ambassador Olof Skoog, Head of the Delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations in New
York, for their briefings. I would like in particular to
thank Ambassador Geraldine Byrne Nason, Facilitator
for the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), for
her briefing and express appreciation for her efforts
in finalizing the Facilitator’s semi-annual report (see
S/2021/602).
India supports the full and effective implementation
of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) and
resolution 2231 (2015). We have always maintained that
all JCPOA-related issues should be resolved peacefully
through dialogue and diplomacy and have extended our
support to all such efforts that help in constructively
addressing and resolving outstanding issues. All
participants should adhere to their respective obligations
under resolution 2231 (2015). We hope that the ongoing
engagement will result in a positive outcome.
Let me also use this opportunity to commend the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) for its role
and continued efforts towards ensuring the exclusively
peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear programme. We
urge Iran to continue to cooperate with the IAEA in
the performance of its verification activities and in
addressing all outstanding issues.
We count on the full implementation of the JCPOA
by all parties, which will serve the shared and longterm interests of all countries.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo, Ambassador
Skoog and Ambassador Byrne Nason for their briefings.
The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA)
is a diplomatic outcome achieved through hard
work by all parties that engaged in the consultations
10/24

30/06/2021

and negotiations. It is an example of successful
multilateralism. It is an essential safeguard for the
international nuclear non-proliferation architecture, as
well as for peace and stability in the Middle East. In
total disregard for the opposition of the international
community, the United States made the obstinate and
unilateral decision to withdraw from the agreement and
has continued to apply maximum pressure on Iran. That
is the root of the current dilemma regarding the Iranian
nuclear issue. As the Chinese say, let the one who tied
the bell on the tiger’s neck take it off. It is incumbent
upon the United States, which is responsible for this
dilemma, to take the lead in returning to the JCPOA
with no preconditions. On that premise, Iran should
subsequently also return to full compliance. That is the
right way to put the Iranian nuclear deal back on track
and de-escalate the situation in the region.
Since the beginning of this year, the parties
concerned have actively implemented the consensus
reached at the Foreign Ministers’ meeting in December
in order to facilitate the return to compliance by
the United States and Iran as soon as possible. At
present, important progress was made in the relevant
negotiations in Vienna, although much remains to be
done before consensus can be reached. We hope that
all parties will have a greater sense of urgency, take
a political decision as soon as possible, demonstrate
flexibility and commit to working towards the same
goal. At the same time, they must exercise restraint,
refrain from making moves that may further complicate
the situation and strive to reach consensus on a swift
return to compliance.
In particular, I would like to point out here that the
United States has indicated on several occasions its
willingness to return to the deal. It has declared that
multilateralism is back. That being the case, the United
States should make a greater effort and demonstrate
greater sincerity in arriving at consensus. Whether or
not the United States can reach an agreement with Iran
and other relevant parties on a return to compliance
will be the ultimate litmus test to prove whether or not
the United States practices multilateralism.
The withdrawal of the United States from the
JCPOA has led to a serious trust deficit between the
United States and Iran, which considerably hinders
a return to compliance negotiations between the two
sides. Out of concern that the United States may again
withdraw from the agreement, Iran has requested that
the current United States Administration provide some
21-17267

30/06/2021

Non-proliferation

guarantee that another unilateral withdrawal will not
occur. The request is completely understandable, and
the United States should respond to it. It is our hope that
all parties will adopt a positive posture and demonstrate
political wisdom in finding a solution.
As a member of the international community, Iran
has the right to use outer space for peaceful purposes.
Parties have different understandings with regard
to the nature of Iran’s missile programme and space
programme. If deemed necessary, the parties may
establish a new platform, or use other suitable forums,
to discuss the matter so as to avoid any confusion in
negotiations on the return to compliance, as that would
complicate and impede the negotiations process.
Unilateral sanctions undermine mutually beneficial
cooperation among countries. Such measures are at
variance with international equity and justice, are in
flagrant breach of international law and have an adverse
impact on international relations. The international
community has time and again called upon the United
States to lift sanctions against Iran, and the SecretaryGeneral repeatedly emphasized that point in his report
(S/2021/582). We hope the United States will pay
attention and respond positively in the negotiations.
China categorically rejects all illegal unilateral
sanctions imposed by the United States. All illegal
measures by the United States — be they sanctions
against Iran or long-arm jurisdiction targeting thirdparty entities and individuals, including Chinese entities
and individuals — should be lifted immediately. That
will help ensure that Iran enjoys legitimate economic
dividends, create the conditions for all parties to resume
normal economic and trade cooperation with Iran and
pave the way for negotiations to finalize a return to
compliance with the agreement.
The Iranian nuclear issue has an impact on the
situation in the Middle East. Preserving the JCPOA
is conducive to maintaining regional security and
stability. That is in line with the interests of all parties,
including those in the Gulf region. Nevertheless,
regional security issues should not be directly linked to
the JCPOA. China has proposed that, on the premise of
upholding the JCPOA, a multilateral dialogue platform
be established in the Gulf region as a way to encourage
countries of the region to reach consensus on regional
security issues through dialogue and consultation.
The Chinese State Councillor and Foreign
Minister, Mr. Wang Yi, paid a visit to the region in

S/PV. 8811

March this year. During the visit, he put forward
a five-point proposal, which includes advocating
for mutual respect, upholding equity and justice,
achieving non-proliferation, jointly fostering collective
security and accelerating development cooperation.
That proposal reflects China’s sincerity in promoting
regional peace and its strong sense of responsibility as
a permanent member of the Security Council.
Preserving the JCPOA means upholding
multilateralism, safeguarding international equity and
justice and defending the authority of the Security
Council. China has always participated in the relevant
JCPOA negotiations in a constructive manner and
has played an important role in promoting consensus
and resolving differences among the parties. China
will continue playing a constructive role to facilitate
the earliest conclusion of the compliance resumption
talks, move the Iranian nuclear issue towards a
political settlement, safeguard the international nuclear
non-proliferation regime and promote peace and
stability in the Middle East.
Ms. Prince (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
I also thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo,
Ambassador Skoog and Ambassador Byrne Nason,
in her capacity as Security Council Facilitator for
the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), for
their briefings.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines remains
committed to the full implementation of resolution 2231
(2015), and we continue to strongly support the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). The JCPOA
is undoubtedly a triumph of multilateral diplomacy and
a central pillar of the global nuclear non-proliferation
architecture. Its preservation and revival are critical
to safeguarding peace and stability in the Middle East
and, indeed, the wider world.
We deeply regret the United States withdrawal
from the Agreement in May 2018, as well as its
subsequent decisions to re-impose sanctions and
terminate waivers. Those actions are antithetical to the
requirements and goals of resolution 2231 (2015) and
the JCPOA. We continue to urge the United States to
rejoin the Agreement and, furthermore, we appeal for
the lifting of all unilateral coercive measures. Those
measures not only contravene resolution 2231 (2015) and
conflict with the objectives of the JCPOA but have also
debilitated Iran’s economy and considerably impeded

21-1726711/24

S/PV.8811

Non-proliferation

its ability to effectively respond to the coronavirus
disease pandemic.
We have taken note of the United States notification
in February indicating its withdrawal of letters to the
Security Council issued in August and September 2020.
We welcome that decision. It is our hope that it will foster
an environment conducive to international cooperation.
We regret Iran’s decision to cease performing
several of its nuclear-related commitments under
the JCPOA. Iran has indicated that those steps are
reversible, having undertaken them subsequent to the
United States withdrawal from the Agreement. We
therefore urge Iran to return to full compliance to fulfil
the totality of its obligations.
The International Atomic Energy Agency’s
mandate to promote the safe, secure and peaceful
use of nuclear science and technology is vital to
maintaining international peace and security, and
we remain in support of it. The recent halting of the
Agency’s verification and monitoring activities in
Iran is concerning, as it inhibits the Agency’s ability
to assess the implementation of Iran’s nuclear-related
commitments, thereby undermining transparency
and confidence. We strongly urge Iran to extend
the monitoring agreement and restore access to the
Agency in accordance with resolution 2231 (2015) and
the JCPOA.
Resolution 2231 (2015) and the JCPOA were not
only conceived to guarantee the peaceful nature of Iran’s
nuclear programme but are also intended to cultivate
an environment that facilitates the development of
normal trade and economic relations with the country.
In that regard, the continued effective functioning of
the procurement channel and the Instrument in Support
of Trade Exchanges is essential.
Only through a commitment to dialogue and
negotiation and the effective fulfilment of all obligations
will the current differences be resolved. We therefore
support the ongoing diplomatic process in Vienna, and
we welcome the progress made thus far. We implore
the parties to remain committed to preserving the
Agreement and to continue to engage constructively in a
spirit of mutual respect and compromise. Furthermore,
we urge the entire international community to refrain
from provocative actions and rhetoric that may inflame
tensions and deter positive engagement.
12/24

30/06/2021

The JCPOA remains the only viable path to
ensure a peaceful, comprehensive and long-term
solution to the Iranian nuclear issue. The international
community must therefore support it and all similar
multilateral instruments.
As a member of the Community of Latin America
and the Caribbean’s Zone of Peace and a party to the
Treaty of Tlatelolco, the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons and the Treaty on the Prohibition
of Nuclear Weapons, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
reaffirms its commitment to achieving a world
free of nuclear weapons and remains steadfast in
its commitment to disarmament — a goal that is
inextricably linked to non-proliferation.
In conclusion, we congratulate Estonia on a wellorganized and successful presidency.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I would like to start by welcoming the SecretaryGeneral’s eleventh report on the implementation of
Security Council resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2021/582)
and thanking the Secretariat for its continued
professionalism and the support provided to the
Secretary-General in enabling the production of the
report. We also thank the Security Council Facilitator
for the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) and
her team for their work on a balanced and accurate
Facilitator’s report (see S/2021/602).
We support the Secretary-General’s findings and
remain committed to the full implementation of the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) and
resolution 2231 (2015). That is why we are engaging in
talks in Vienna aimed at finding a diplomatic solution
to revitalize and restore the benefits of the JCPOA. Our
priority is for the United States to return to the deal,
for Iran to return to compliance with its commitments
and to restore the benefits of the deal for all. The talks
cannot be open-ended, and the time for reaching a
decision is fast approaching. We cannot guarantee
that the same terms for a deal will be on offer later in
the year.
We remain deeply concerned by Iran’s continued
violations of its nuclear-related commitments,
including the escalatory steps taken since January.
Collectively, those steps present a significant nuclear
proliferation risk. They have irreversible consequences
for Iran’s nuclear capabilities and undermine the
non-proliferation benefits of the JCPOA. In that
context, we are also concerned by the continued limits
21-17267

30/06/2021

Non-proliferation

placed on the monitoring and surveillance activities
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in
Iran. Iran must cooperate fully with the IAEA and grant
unimpeded access to all relevant sites and activities
to ensure that the Agency can continue to fulfil its
reporting mandate under resolution 2231 (2015).
The year 2021 has also seen a continuation of
Iran’s destabilizing activity around the Middle East,
including activities that are inconsistent with resolution
2231 (2015). Iran’s ballistic missile technologies pose
a threat to regional security, including as a potential
delivery system for weapons of mass destruction.
We welcome the talks between Saudi Arabia and
Iran. Dialogue is the cornerstone for the de-escalation
of regional tensions. We note Iranian Presidentelect Raisi’s comments on 18 June stating that his
Administration is open to continuing dialogue with
Saudi Arabia. We urge all regional partners to engage
constructively to improve the security and prosperity
of the region.
We call upon President-elect Raisi to set Iran
on a different course. He can do that by addressing
concerns about Iran’s nuclear programme, putting an
end to Iran’s destabilizing activity and human right
abuses and releasing British nationals detained in
Iran. Upholding the nuclear non-proliferation regime,
ensuring the authority and integrity of the Security
Council and improving regional security should remain
our shared objectives.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I am grateful to Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo and Ambassador Olof Skoog for
their briefings. I am also grateful for the report of
Ambassador Geraldine Byrne Nason, in her capacity as
Security Council Facilitator for the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015) (see S/2021/602). I also welcome
the presence of the representatives of Iran and Germany.
Since the adoption of the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA), reached in 2015 between Iran
and the permanent members of the Security Council,
accompanied by Germany, Mexico has supported
the Plan in its belief that it is a successful example
of multilateral diplomacy and a key component to
ensuring the stability of the international nuclear
non-proliferation architecture. The agreement in and of
itself represented a major shift in the way the Security
Council would deal with the issue of Iran’s nuclear

S/PV. 8811

programme by opting for a collaborative approach over
a sanctions regime and confrontation.
Mexico believes that it is important to acknowledge
that there are no preconditions for a return to the
JCPOA. It would require of the United States that it
lift its unilateral sanctions against Iran and of Iran that
it resume upholding all the commitments it made in
2015. While we understand the position of those who
believe that addressing the broader security dynamics
in the region is a priority, my country believes that it
would be preferable to conduct another dialogue and
decide on separate agreements that do not limit the full
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) or hinder the
prospect of a return to the JCPOA.
We are concerned about the activities referred to
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2021/582) and
the report of the Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) (see S/2021/239), in
particular concerning the enrichment of uranium-235
up to 60 per cent, as well as research in more technical
areas, such as the production of uranium metal and the
installation of new and advanced of centrifuges, not
foreseen in the JCPOA. The restriction of access to
undeclared facilities and sites for inspectors under the
Additional Protocol to IAEA Safeguards Agreement
gives reason for further concern.
While transparency and cooperation are crucial
elements for the proper functioning of the Plan of
Action, Iran must undo actions that are out of bound
of the agreements reached in the JCPOA, and we call
for renewing the temporary agreement with the IAEA
to continue monitoring and verification. With regard
to missile-related activities — rather than levelling
mutual recriminations — we must acknowledge that the
launches and the responses they lead to are moving us
increasingly farther away from a climate of trust, which
is needed at this time. We therefore urge all actors to
exercise maximum restraint and avoid actions that are
unhelpful to achieving de-escalation.
Mexico is committed to achieving and maintaining
a world free of nuclear weapons by upholding the
commitments and obligations under the various legal
instruments at our disposal, including the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and
the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons.
My country seeks to strengthen and maintain the
non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament regime
established by the NPT. It therefore consistently

21-1726713/24

S/PV.8811

Non-proliferation

defends the right of all countries to benefit from the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. It is clear, however,
that this right goes hand in hand with the obligation
to comply with all the commitments and obligations
under the NPT, in particular full cooperation with the
International Atomic Energy Agency.
It is a question of restoring a climate of complete
trust and, in that regard, we are optimistically looking
forward to the outcome of the discussions in Vienna.
We believe that the return to full compliance with
resolution 2231 (2015) is key to resolving disputes
through multilateral solutions, as well as to ensuring
the peaceful development of Iran’s nuclear programme
and stability in the Middle East. We therefore urge the
parties to the JCPOA to resolve their differences and
promptly resume upholding their commitments under
the agreement.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and Ambassador
Skoog for their briefings. We welcome the eleventh
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2021/582), as well as
the report of the Joint Commission on the status of
the Procurement Working Group’s decisions (see
S/2021/578). We have taken due note of both reports,
their findings and recommendations.
Ireland remains strongly committed to the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). As
the three reports before us today make clear, the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action is an important
achievement in multilateral diplomacy and nuclear
non-proliferation, and, fully implemented, it remains
the best way to guarantee the exclusively peaceful
nature of the Iranian nuclear programme.
We welcome positive steps over the past six months,
including the United States withdrawal of its claims of
snapback. We strongly support the ongoing talks in
Vienna under the framework of the Joint Commission.
We welcome the commitment of the United States to
return to the JCPOA, as well as that of all parties to the
talks. We hope that the negotiations, under the European
Union chairmanship, will soon reach an agreement on
the United States return to the JCPOA and the full and
effective implementation of commitments under the
JCPOA by all sides, notably a return to compliance by
Iran. It is vital that this opportunity be seized.
Ireland is deeply concerned about actions taken by
Iran with regard to its nuclear commitments under the
14/24

30/06/2021

JCPOA. As the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) has reported, that includes uranium enrichment
up to 60 per cent, the installation of new and advanced
centrifuges and the production of uranium metal. We are
seriously concerned about those activities, particularly
around the irreversibility of the knowledge being
acquired by such activities. We once again urge Iran
to fully implement its commitments under the JCPOA.
We are deeply concerned about Iran’s decision
to suspend, as of 23 February, the implementation of
transparency measures as envisaged in the JCPOA. It
is essential that Iran cooperate fully with the IAEA to
ensure the full implementation of all monitoring and
verification measures, in particular the Additional
Protocol to its Safeguards Agreement. In that regard,
we call on Iran to return to full cooperation with the
IAEA without delay. That is important not only to
meet its commitments under the JCPOA, but it is
essential for the international community to have
confidence in the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran’s
nuclear programme.
We regretted the decision of the previous United
States Administration to leave the JCPOA and impose
sanctions. We call on the United States to take all steps
necessary to facilitate the full and proper implementation
of the JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015), including the
removal of sanctions. It is important that the Iranian
people see tangible benefits from the Plan.
It was intended that the JCPOA would provide space
to build trust and confidence between the parties, which
might allow cooperation to address other challenges
in the region. We also stress that all parties should
refrain from any actions, including missile launches,
that undermine trust and stability in the region. Ireland
supports the Secretary-General’s call on all States,
including those in the region, to support the Plan.
It is important that we here in New York demonstrate
that resolution 2231 (2015) is working as it should.
Ireland will continue to support all efforts to that end.
Finally, as I conclude, I wanted to offer sincere
congratulations to you and your excellent team on
such an effective and efficient presidency during the
month of June. As a fellow European Union member
State, we are proud of the manner in which Estonia has
presided over our business this month, and I wanted to
wish you a sincere comhghairdeas leat, which means
“congratulations” in my own Irish language.
21-17267

30/06/2021

Non-proliferation

Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
thank the Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, the Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, and the
Security Council Facilitator for the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015) for their briefings.
Since the most recent meeting of the Security
Council on the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015), in December 2020 (see S/2020/1324), we
have noted both a constructive dynamic towards the
return to the Iranian nuclear agreement and a series of
disquieting developments.
France echoes the support expressed for the
negotiation process under way in Vienna on the
resumed implementation by the United States and
Iran of all commitments under the Iranian nuclear
agreement and resolution 2231 (2015). France is actively
involved, notably with its E3 partners, in an exacting
manner, in particular with respect to preserving
the non-proliferation benefits of the agreement,
and pragmatic, given that the priority is the early
stabilization of the nuclear situation in Iran. After six
negotiating sessions, the parameters of a return to the
agreement have been clearly identified, and the most
difficult questions remain pending.
It is now crucial for the necessary courageous
decisions to be taken so as to conclude the negotiations
and allow for the swift return of all parties to the
agreement. We shall continue to mobilize all efforts to
expedite the conclusion of the negotiations. That process
cannot drag on indefinitely, because the parameters and
benefits of a return to the agreement will no longer be
the same if too much time goes by.
Despite the launch of that process, almost three
months ago now, the nuclear situation has continued
to deteriorate in Iran. Iran is developing particularly
sensitive nuclear activities, in violation of the provisions
of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action: research and
development on uranium metal production; uranium
enrichment first at 20 per cent, since the beginning
of the year, and now at 60 per cent, in the absence of
any civilian need in Iran for such enrichment rates; the
accumulation of advanced centrifuges at enrichment
facilities; and so on. As a result, Iran has never been so
close to a nuclear threshold.
In addition, Iran has suspended for more than
four months now the implementation of the voluntary
transparency and verification measures laid down in

S/PV. 8811

the Vienna agreement, in particular the Additional
Protocol. The International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) informed the Council that its activities had
been hampered by that decision. A mechanism was
implemented to make it possible for the IAEA to
maintain its knowledge of the nuclear programme in the
context of a future return to the agreement; however,
that mechanism expired on 24 June, and Iran has not
yet confirmed to the IAEA that it intends to continue
implementing those provisions.
It is deeply worrisome to note that the IAEA is no
longer able to fully comply with the monitoring and
verification mission with which the Security Council
entrusted it in the framework of resolution 2231 (2015).
We therefore call on Iran to resume cooperation with
the IAEA and to immediately restore all its access.
The nuclear developments in Iran are also worrisome
given the continuation of ballistic activities during
the past six months, which run counter to resolution
2231 (2015). France is particularly concerned at the
proliferation of missile activities and technologies in the
region, notably ballistic missiles, whose consequences
are particularly destabilizing.
France believes that the full implementation of the
Iranian nuclear agreement and resolution 2231 (2015)
is an imperative both for non-proliferation and for the
stability of the Middle East. Our priority is to rapidly
seek a conclusion to the current negotiations on a return
to the agreement, so as to resume full implementation
as soon as possible.
But we cannot stop here. Above and beyond that
nuclear agreement, there are other areas of concern in
terms of regional and international security that will
have to be addressed with our partners and the States
of the region.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): This being the first biannual
briefing, I congratulate Ireland on its role as Facilitator
of the implementation of the resolution 2231 (2015)
process. I also thank the Under-Secretary-General,
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, and His Excellency Olof Skoog,
Head of the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations. We also recognize the presence of the
representatives of Germany and the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Kenya strongly believes that global nuclear
disarmament and the non-proliferation of nuclear
weapons constitute the core guarantee against the use

21-1726715/24

S/PV.8811

Non-proliferation

or threat of use of nuclear weapons. We see the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) and resolution
2231 (2015) as critical multilateral achievements and
mechanisms in the area of nuclear non-proliferation
and disarmament.
Kenya commends the ongoing diplomatic
engagements that began in Vienna on 6 April focusing
on the revival of the JCPOA. The decision by the United
States Government to reaffirm the measures and
provisions contained in resolution 2231 (2015) early
this year was an important preamble to those efforts.
We encourage the affected neighbouring countries in
the region to engage constructively in support of the
implementation of the JCPOA and resolution 2231
(2015).
We also urge all the JCPOA members to ensure that
the outcome of the ongoing talks addresses the gaps
and loopholes of that 2015 mechanism. Specifically,
the talks should provide clear and practical steps and
arrangements that situate the outcome road map within
the current imperatives, which include the following.
First, the United States and the Islamic Republic of
Iran must return to the full and effective implementation
of the JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015); secondly,
all parties must adhere to their commitments under
the 2015 Iran nuclear deal, including the lifting of
additional sanctions and all retaliatory measures, which
are in violation of the principles and procedures laid
out in the JCPOA; thirdly, a strengthened utilization of
the JCPOA’s dispute-resolution mechanisms to address
differences and preserve the Plan’s agreements; and, last
but not least, the important verification and monitoring
work of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) must continue unhampered on the ground.

30/06/2021

and confidence-building approach of the procurement
channel to enable the continuation of trade with the
Islamic Republic of Iran and relevant transfers within
the JCPOA framework.
Let me reiterate that adherence to the provisions
of the JCPOA and agreed mechanisms by all parties is
a critical first step that will further enhance trust and
build confidence among all parties and neighbouring
States for the long-term stability of the Middle East
region. Indeed, the usefulness of the JCPOA will
become evident only through the full implementation
of its provisions. Its utility cannot and should not be
measured on the basis of non-compliance.
In conclusion and as part of the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015) and in alignment with the JCPOA
framework and the role of the IAEA, Kenya urges the
Security Council to integrate in its considerations the
potential of strengthening the peaceful application of
nuclear technology in industrial development projects,
including in the areas of food and agriculture, health,
energy planning and water management for the benefit
of the Iranian people and the holistic stability of
the subregion.
Let me take this opportunity to congratulate you,
Mr. President, and the entire Estonian team, on a
successful presidency of the Council during the month
of June.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I would like to start by
thanking the briefers for their briefings.

We encourage Iran to fully implement, as before, its
Safeguards Agreement with the IAEA and the voluntary
transparency and implementation measures, which
includes Iran taking ownership of and committing
to the JCPOA through non-violation of the Plan and
refraining from further acting on irreversible measures
it has undertaken.

Norway welcomes the eleventh report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015) (S/2021/582) We share his view and that of
other Council members that the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA), as endorsed by the Security
Council through resolution 2231 (2015), remains
a success of multilateral diplomacy. The JCPOA
strengthened global nuclear non-proliferation and is
important for regional and international stability and
security. Its full implementation, supported by the
broader international community, is vital.

Resolution 2231 (2015) notes that the political and
diplomatic efforts that went into the establishment of
the JCPOA were geared towards, inter alia, ensuring
the economic and technological development of
Iran in the area of peaceful nuclear activities. We
therefore urge that the Joint Commission remains
committed to upholding the integrity, transparency

Over the past few years, the JCPOA has been put
under increasing strain. We remain of the view that
the full and effective implementation of the JCPOA is
the best opportunity available to build international
confidence in the exclusively peaceful nature of
Iran’s nuclear programme. In this regard, we join the
Secretary-General and other Council members in

16/24

21-17267

30/06/2021

Non-proliferation

commending the professional, factual and impartial
work of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA).
We also remain committed to efforts to facilitate
legitimate trade with Iran, and we echo the SecretaryGeneral in calling on Member States to work effectively,
including by supporting the INSTEX mechanism to
allow economic operators to engage in trade with Iran.
Norway regrets the decision of the United States to
withdraw from the JCPOA in 2018 and to unilaterally
reimpose sanctions. We also deeply regret the worrying
series of steps taken by Iran since 2019 that go against
its nuclear-related commitments. As the SecretaryGeneral’s report notes, the IAEA has documented
Iran’s activities in relation to the installation of new
and advanced centrifuges, research and development
for uranium metal production and enrichment of
uranium up to 60 per cent. The Secretary-General’s
report further shows that Iran’s decisions have affected
the IAEA’s verification and monitoring activities,
including reporting provided for in resolution 2231
(2015). Such actions are a direct challenge to the
international community.
The continuing escalation is deeply unsettling
and must be reversed. We urge Iran to return to full
compliance with the JCPOA, resume its provisional
application of the Additional Protocol and other
transparency measures, and renew full cooperation
with the IAEA without delay. We stress the importance
of an urgent and clear solution for the Agency’s ability
to recover and re-establish the necessary continuity
of knowledge. We share the concerns brought to
the Secretary-General’s attention relating to several
ballistic-missile launches and a space-launch-vehicle
test and encourage Iran to address these concerns. As
several States have pointed out, these activities are not
consistent with paragraph 3 of annex B of resolution
2231 (2015).
The security situation in the region remains tense
and unpredictable. We call on all stakeholders to show
restraint and avoid action that might contribute to
escalation. Norway remains a steadfast supporter of the
constructive diplomatic dialogue to decrease tensions
and increase trust and cooperation.
I would like to conclude by emphasizing that we
welcome ongoing efforts by the remaining JCPOA
participants and United States on the possible return
of the United States to the agreement and the return

S/PV. 8811

of Iran to full JCPOA implementation. The full and
effective implementation of the JCPOA by all parties
will contribute positively to building confidence,
stability and security in the region and beyond.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Rosemary DiCarlo, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations Olof Skoog,
and the Facilitator for the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015) and Permanent Representative of Ireland
Geraldine Byrne Nason, for their briefings.
Today’s meeting is taking place in a situation that
is completely different from that of six months ago.
We have left behind us the illegitimate attempts by
the United States to restore United Nations sanctions
against Iran and use the Security Council to set up
an arms embargo of unprecedented strictness. The
Council unanimously rejected these destructive moves.
At the beginning of this year, our American colleagues
officially withdrew their illegitimate claims to trigger a
snapback. We have therefore turned the page once and
for all on this issue.
A diplomatic process is in full swing in Vienna
to restore the full-fledged functioning of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), and we are
already seeing the profile of a future agreement. There
is a general understanding of how to move forward to
attain the goals set before us.
The current report of the Secretary-General
(S/2021/582) is another signal that the overall dynamic
compared to last year is moving in the right direction.
It confirms that the regime set up in resolution 2231
(2015) continues to operate. Any extraordinary events
that might have influenced this were not mentioned in
the report.
I wish to separately note the Secretary-General’s
conclusion that during the reporting period there were
no violations identified in terms of
“the supply, sale, transfer or export to the Islamic
Republic of Iran of nuclear-related items undertaken
contrary to paragraph 2 of annex B to resolution
2231 (2015)” (S/2021/582, para. 7).
Further, according to paragraph 9 of the report,
the Secretary-General did not receive any official
information regarding transfers undertaken contrary
to paragraph 4 of annex B to resolution 2231 (2015),

21-1726717/24

S/PV.8811

Non-proliferation

including on ballistic missile-related transfers from the
Islamic Republic of Iran.
I want to stress that those are the conclusions of
the Secretary-General, not the Russian Federation. In
our letter drafted in connection with the statements
of several countries, we explained in detail that the
accusations of our Western colleagues regarding
Iran’s ballistic missile programme were unfounded.
They are simply statements based on the notion of
“highly likely”. No single fact was mentioned in their
accusations. That is also confirmed by the SecretaryGeneral. It is strange and doubly unacceptable to hear
about violations of the ballistic-missile provisions of
resolution 2231 (2015) from the representative of the
United States of America, which themselves continue
to violate that resolution.
The report of the Facilitator for the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015) (see S/2021/578) is also balanced
overall. For that, we should pay tribute to the efforts of
the Irish Facilitator, Ambassador Byrne Nason, and her
team. Although there were certain comments on that
document, in a constructive spirit and with a view to
agreement on the format of resolution 2231 (2015), we
decided to support the consensus forming around it.
Any stabilization process clearly requires time and
is not easy. It would be naive to expect that the detritus
left behind by the United States unilateral withdrawal
from the JCPOA and its subsequent steps to destroy
the deal can somehow be magically cleared up in a few
days or weeks. We all need to be realistic. Restoring
the normal functioning of the JCPOA requires patience,
perseverance and the political will of all participants.
For many years now, we have been appealing to
the common sense of our partners, trying to convey a
simple logic: if the objective is to reach an agreement,
then we should not demonize Iran and make it the
source of all evil. Iran is an equal partner with its own
interests, concerns and perception of national security
risks. As a sovereign State, it is fully entitled to all
that. In international relations, countries do not have to
like each other. However, they are obliged to treat each
other with respect. As we all remember, par in parem
non habet imperium. If that principle is respected in
relations with Iran, the resolution process will go
much faster.
Let me recall that the purpose of the JCPOA was
precisely to acknowledge that the Iranian nuclear
programme was no different from that of any other
18/24

30/06/2021

non-nuclear-weapon State party to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. Other
provisions of the deal, including the now expired
special procedure for conventional arms transfers
to and from Iran, also pursued the same goal of
gradually restoring the same cooperation regime with
Iran as with any other State Member of the United
Nations. It is important that the call for Member States
to strengthen normal trade cooperation with Iran,
including through the mechanism of the Instrument
in Support of Trade Exchanges and the JCPOA Joint
Commission’s procurement channel, is also mentioned
in the Secretary-General’s current report.
However, we hear from some colleagues the
opposite call, that is, to extend the restrictions on
Iran’s nuclear activities and maintain the unilateral
sanctions on conventional arms transfers that
violate resolution 2231 (2015), and even veiled
hints that the JCPOA should be revised or somehow
expanded to include aspects of regional security.
I would like to recall that the purpose of resolution 2231
(2015) has never been to contain Tehran. It was always
about the ultimate normalization of international
economic, scientific and technical cooperation with
the Islamic Republic of Iran, including in the area of
peaceful nuclear energy, after the earlier issues with the
IAEA had been resolved. The final report on that topic
was prepared in December 2015, and its conclusions
were endorsed in the relevant resolution of the IAEA
Board of Governors. It was the resolving of issues
concerning Tehran and the resulting transparency
regime for the Iranian nuclear programme, primarily
through the implementation of the Protocol Additional
to the Agreement between Iran and the IAEA for
the Application of Safeguards, that became the key
non-proliferation achievement of the JCPOA.
The tensions in that area that we have seen today
are the direct result of the destructive actions of
the United States in undermining the JCPOA. The
cause-and-effect correlation is exactly that. All Iran’s
steps to temporarily freeze its commitments are not
some arbitrary violations, as some colleagues are now
trying to portray it, but were a legitimate response to
the non-compliance on the part of the United States
with the deal. That conclusion, albeit, in our view,
presented somewhat obliquely, is also reflected in the
report of the Secretary-General.
Unfortunately, we have not yet seen a real revision
of the decisions taken by the previous United States
21-17267

30/06/2021

Non-proliferation

S/PV. 8811

Administration. In practice, the United States continues
its policy of maximum pressure on Iran and violation
of resolution 2231 (2015), including by maintaining
the unilateral sanctions and the arms embargo against
Iran, while all United Nations sanctions in that regard
have ceased to apply. Of course, it is regrettable that the
escalation has led, among other things, to a significant
reduction in the IAEA verification activities in the
Islamic Republic of Iran. However, it is significant that
all of Iran’s steps are reversible, as has been repeatedly
confirmed by the IAEA. Equally important is the fact
that Iran continues its dialogue with the Agency without
reneging on its non-proliferation commitments.

that the United States must immediately return to full
compliance with the requirements of resolution 2231
(2015) and the JCPOA, and that Iran must immediately
respond to those steps and ensure the unfreezing of
all the obligations it previously suspended, first and
foremost in terms of the transparency of its nuclear
programme and cooperation with the IAEA.

I will now say a few words on regional security in
the Persian Gulf. That is a very important topic, but it
goes beyond the JCPOA. Rather, it is a discussion for
the future once the deal is fully restored.

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Estonia.

Our idea of launching a regional dialogue on
security issues in the Persian Gulf is well known. We
talked about it in detail last October during a separate
meeting of the Security Council on this topic under
the Russian presidency that month (see S/2020/1037).
We believe that there is a need for concrete steps
towards strengthening mutual trust, preventing
crises and reducing the risk of military clashes,
misunderstandings and escalation. We could consider
the experience of other regions in developing a system
of confidence-building measures. In doing so, security
issues in the Persian Gulf should be resolved primarily
by regional States. We noted a similar appeal by the
Secretary-General in his report with regard to creating
a conducive environment for diplomatic efforts in
Vienna and refraining from provocative rhetoric and
actions that could undermine them, as well as his point
that issues related to the broader context of regional
security should be considered without being linked to
the task of preserving the JCPOA and its achievements.
A calm, pragmatic discussion is needed now
more than ever. There is no need to raise the stakes
or fuel emotions. In any case, there is no alternative
to the JCPOA. That needs to be clearly understood. I
urge everyone to imagine for a moment a world where
there is no deal. Would it be safer for someone than the
current one?
Fortunately, understanding the value of the JCPOA
seems to unite us all. That is why all efforts should now
be focused on restoring it. That is what the SecretaryGeneral calls for in his report. In practice, that means

The task of other parties to the agreement is to
cooperate to ensure the convergence of positions. Our
primary duty now is to help our colleagues in Vienna.
Russia is ready to do everything necessary to achieve
that. We are counting on the common sense and support
of the other members of the Council.

I thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary
DiCarlo, Ambassador Olof Skoog and Ambassador
Geraldine Byrne Nason for their briefings.
As we have heard from many Council members today,
this is a crucial moment for the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA) — an agreement that six years
ago was created to ensure the exclusively peaceful
nature of Iran’s nuclear programme.
Estonia has repeatedly emphasized the importance
of and its support for the Plan. We continue to
consider the JCPOA a key element in global nuclear
non-proliferation architecture and crucial for regional
and wider international security.
No doubt the past few years have been challenging
to the agreement, but we have now reached a new
and hopefully positive milestone. Like the SecretaryGeneral, we are encouraged by the diplomatic
engagements that have taken place in Vienna since
April, offering an opportunity for the United States and
Iran to return to the full and effective implementation
of the JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015). Indeed,
this is a unique moment to preserve and revitalize the
agreement that is in the collective security interests of
us all. In that regard, it is more important than ever to
refrain from actions that further violate and undermine
the agreement and are counterproductive to the ongoing
diplomatic efforts.
Estonia deeply regrets Iran’s decision of 2019 to
start reducing its nuclear-related commitments under
the Plan. Unfortunately, those worrying developments
have not stopped even during the Vienna negotiations.
As the Secretary-General points out in his latest report

21-1726719/24

S/PV.8811

Non-proliferation

(S/2021/582) on the implementation of the Security
Council resolution 2231 (2015), in recent months Iran
has considerably increased its uranium enrichment
capabilities and stockpile. Those activities present
serious nuclear proliferation risks. We urge Iran to stop
them and return to compliance with its commitments.
Full cooperation with the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) remains crucial in averting the
prospect of a nuclear-armed Iran. Estonia commends
the impartial and professional work of the Agency in
verifying and monitoring Iran’s nuclear commitments
under the JCPOA.
We are concerned about the limits placed on the
IAEA’s access to all relevant sites and activities in Iran.
The temporary technical understanding between Iran
and the Agency expired on 24 June and we understand
that to date the question of its extension remains open.
In order to ensure that the IAEA can fulfil its reporting
mandate under resolution 2231 (2015) to retain the
international community’s confidence in the peaceful
nature of Iran’s nuclear activities, as well as to seize
the opportunity of the Vienna talks, the Agency must
be granted unimpeded access to all relevant sites and
activities in Iran.
Finally and very briefly with respect to annex B to
resolution 2231 (2015), we consider Iran’s developing
and testing of nuclear-capable ballistic missiles and
related technologies as inconsistent with its paragraph
3. We note that several such ballistic missile launches
were undertaken during the reporting period and find
them destabilizing for regional security.
We hope that with the help of strong political will
the negotiations in Vienna can conclude soon. Estonia
believes that a full restoration of the Plan is the best way
to uphold the nuclear non-proliferation regime, prevent
Iran from developing a nuclear weapon and eventually
bring greater security to the region and the world.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran.
Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
would like to thank the briefers for their reports. The
Council’s message today on the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA) and resolution 2231 (2015) is
loud and clear: the JCPOA must be implemented and
there is no better alternative.
20/24

30/06/2021

Despite
such
encouraging
statements,
we have recently heard — including in this
meeting — discouraging statements from a few Council
members pointing their fingers at the victim instead of
demanding that the culprit act responsibly. They have
deliberately ignored the fact that Iran’s steps in ceasing
the implementation of some of its commitments are
remedial in nature. They have called on Iran to come
to full compliance with its JCPOA commitments as if it
were Iran that withdrew from the JCPOA; as if it were
Iran that reimposed or introduced countless inhumane
sanctions with the publicly declared objective of
starving an entire nation; as if it were Iran that brazenly
threatened all States either to violate resolution 2231
(2015) or face punishment; as if it were Iran that pursued
a maximum pressure policy; and as if it were Iran that
made every attempt to kill the JCPOA and resolution
2231 (2015) forever.
Our record and that of the United States with respect
to the JCPOA are clear. The challenges of the JCPOA’s
implementation cannot be assessed in isolation. Those
challenges arose when President Trump started to
demonize the JCPOA even before coming to office and
to harass Iran’s business partners, and later in 2018,
when he unilaterally and unlawfully withdrew from the
JCPOA and by reimposing sanctions waged an all-out
economic war against Iran with the deliberate objective
of starving the Iranian people. Weaponizing food and
medicine is prohibited, even in wartime, and is indeed
a manifestation of crimes against humanity.
Nevertheless, instead of taking immediate remedial
measures allowed by the JCPOA, we exercised strategic
patience for one year, but to no avail. Our maximum
restraint was responded to with the so-called maximum
pressure policy of the United States and the appeasement
policy of Europe.
Only one year after the United States withdrawal,
we took certain remedial steps authorized by the
JCPOA’s paragraphs 26 and 36, according to which,
in case of “a re-introduction or re-imposition of the
sanctions” (resolution 2231 (2015), annex A, para. 26),
Iran has the right to cease performing its commitments
in whole or in part.
At the same time, Iran’s response was applied in a
reasonable and incremental manner in order to provide
more time for common sense to prevail. Yet while
Iran’s steps are reversible, the sufferings of our people
are not. Of course, we cannot and will not overlook
21-17267

30/06/2021

Non-proliferation

hundreds of billions of dollars of damages inflicted
upon the Iranian economy. But unfortunately, precious
lives lost due to sanctions are irreversible.
How can the pain, grief and emotional problems
throughout the life of a kid for the loss of his or her mother
due to the lack of certain medicines, the import of which
was prevented by sanctions, be compensated? How will
the lifelong suffering of mothers and fathers who have
lost their children owing to the lack of medicines for
rare diseases be relieved and compensated? That is the
factual context in which the current implementation
status of the JCPOA must be evaluated.
We must recall that the JCPOA is not a one-way
street. It is founded on two pillars: Iran’s nuclearrelated commitments and the reciprocal commitments
for the lifting of all sanctions by the United Nations, the
European Union and the United States of America, as
well as promoting normal economic and trade relations
with Iran. All those commitments are meticulously
worded and explained in detail in the JCPOA and in
resolution 2231 (2015).
Since the Council’s previous meeting on resolution
2231 (2015) (see S/2020/1324), nothing has changed
except the verbal declaration of the United States of its
intention to return to compliance with the JCPOA. In
reality, until this very moment the maximum pressure
policy and the draconian sanctions against our people
still continue, and the United States remains in violation
of the JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015).
Even despite the unanimous order of the
International Court of Justice, on 3 October 2018,
obliging the United States to remove impediments
to humanitarian trade with Iran, all humanitarian
goods, including much-needed medicine and medical
equipment, have been subjected to sanctions.

S/PV. 8811

(EU/E3) to make difficult decisions to return to full
compliance with the JCPOA.
We fully proved our sincerity during the JCPOA’s
negotiation, conclusion and implementation. We have
demonstrated our resolute determination to keep it alive
by exercising strategic patience and maximum restraint
for years. We did that while we were not — and still are
not — receiving the intended benefits from the deal.
Those who broke their promises are the ones who must
prove their sincerity and genuine political will. They
are the ones who must take hard decisions.
Therefore, they are not in a position to criticize Iran
for taking remedial measures that are fully authorized
under the deal, are in no way inconsistent with our
obligations under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and our Safeguards Agreement
and do not lead to any alleged proliferation concerns,
contrary to what certain countries attempt to portray,
as our nuclear programme has been under the Agency’s
most robust monitoring and verification mechanism.
The Islamic Republic of Iran continues to cooperate
with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
in line with its international obligations.
IAEA reports, including in the past six months,
confirm that there is no safeguards-related issue
regarding Iran’s ongoing nuclear activities, and there
is no evidence of diversion of nuclear materials to
non-peaceful purposes. It should be added that, contrary
to what has been declared, the uranium enriched up
to 60 per cent and the uranium metal have legitimate
civilian applications, and none of them are prohibited
under the NPT.

The general authorization by the United States
Treasury Department on 17 June 2021 of certain
coronavirus-related transactions with Iran clearly and
conclusively refutes the previous claims by the United
States that such items were exempted from sanctions.

The law passed by our Parliament was indeed a
calibrated response to the dismal record of unlawful
measures by the United States and the impotence of the
EU/E3 to withstand such measures for well over three
years. The objective of that law is to retrieve the lost
balance in the JCPOA’s implementation, as it clearly
states that Iran’s remedial measures are reversible if the
JCPOA is fully implemented by others in practice and
all sanctions are fully removed.

In contrast to certain remaining JCPOA participants,
which have only paid lip service to the JCPOA in the
past years, Iran is the country that has paid a heavy
price to preserve that agreement. Therefore, it is high
time for the United States and of course the European
Union and France, Germany and the United Kingdom

At the same time, to give more room for diplomacy,
a temporary technical understanding was reached
between Iran and the IAEA in February and extended
in May. Nevertheless, after four months of negotiations
nothing has changed in practice, and the Iranian nation
continues to suffer from the unlawful sanctions.

21-1726721/24

S/PV.8811

Non-proliferation

In the past few months, certain attempts have
also been made to establish a possible link between
paragraph 3 of annex B to resolution 2231 (2015) and
the launches by Iran of certain ballistic missiles or
space-launch vehicles and consequently to draw an
arbitrary conclusion. Paragraph 3 of annex B does not
concern space-launch vehicles, for a number of obvious
reasons, including their different design, technical
nature and mission. In addition, Iran’s ballistic missiles
are designed to deliver conventional warheads and
are not designed to be capable of delivering nuclear
weapons; accordingly, they are outside the purview of
resolution 2231 (2015).
To develop a conventional missile programme is
an inherent right under international law and is neither
prohibited nor limited by resolution 2231 (20105). The
Islamic Republic of Iran, like every other country, will
not compromise on its security and its conventional
defensive capability.
We are also determined to pursue the realization
of our inalienable right to develop research, production
and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes despite
all plots, sabotage and terrorist acts. The latest such
unlawful measures were the assassination of martyr
Fakhrizadeh, an outstanding Iranian nuclear scientist,
as well as the 11 April terrorist act at the Natanz Fuel
Enrichment Plant, with clear indications pointing to
the Israeli regime’s responsibility for both cases, as
was also recently acknowledged by the former head of
Mossad. The Council must hold the Israeli regime to
account for such adventuristic practices.
Iran’s decision to negotiate and conclude the JCPOA
was based on our principled policy to make the best use
of dialogue and diplomacy in advancing our foreignpolicy objectives. We have always been steadfast in
applying this policy. Iran will remain consistent and
resolute in pursuing that approach regarding the JCPOA
as long as other parties put an end — completely and
without any precondition or further delay — to their
bullying policies, violating their obligations and
disregarding their promises.
The JCPOA is a deal made to secure the interests
of all sides. While we are sincere and serious in current
negotiations, our ultimate goal is only to ensure the
implementation of the deal as is by all — no more,
no less.
Given years of serious violations of the JCPOA by
other sides, it is essential to secure enough assurances
22/24

30/06/2021

that all sanctions are removed verifiably and that the
United States will not once again withdraw from the
JCPOA or abuse its mechanisms to create another
implementation crisis to deprive Iran of its benefits
from the deal. This is vital for establishing confidence
in the full and continued adherence of the United
States and E3/EU to their commitments, and thereby
creating the calm and stable atmosphere required for
promoting and facilitating the development of normal
economic and trade contacts and cooperation with Iran,
as expressly stated in resolution 2231 (2015). That is
of particular importance for Iran’s business partners
to conclude agreements with Iran with peace of mind.
It is also critical for Iran to fully benefit from the
deal’s dividends.
Finally, our observations on the eleventh report of the
Secretary-General (S/2021/582) on the implementation
of the resolution 2231 (2015) are contained in my letter
already submitted to the Council.
In reaction to what has been said in this meeting, I
would like to say a few words about our region. We are
living in a volatile region. The challenges are enormous,
and at the same time the opportunities for better
relations among regional countries are great. However,
there are forces that do not want to see rapprochement,
reconciliation and good neighbourliness established in
this region.
The United States, with its interventionist policies
in the Middle East, including its unbridled export of
sophisticated ordnance and advanced weaponry to the
region and its blind support for the Israeli regime, has
thrown this sensitive region into chaos and turmoil. The
United States cannot distract attention from its military
adventurism and destabilizing role in our region by
baselessly accusing Iran of violating resolutions 1701
(2006) and 2231 (2015), which I categorically reject. I
also reject references made by the British Ambassador
to human rights, as they are outside the agenda of this
meeting and the purview of the Security Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Mr. Sautter (Germany): At the outset, let me
congratulate you, Sir, on a momentous Security
Council presidency. I would like to thank Olaf Skoog
for reminding us of the important role of the European
Union High Representative as Coordinator of the Joint
Commission, and for the strong support for the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), not only from
21-17267

30/06/2021

Non-proliferation

the External Action Service but from the European Union
(EU) and its member States as a whole. I would also
like to thank Geraldine Byrne Nason for having taken
on the important role of Security Council Facilitator
for the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), and
Rosemary DiCarlo for the continuing and ongoing
support of the Secretariat for the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015).
We also welcome the support expressed by the
Secretary-General for the Vienna talks and for our
efforts to restore and fully revive the JCPOA. We have
now had six rounds of talks, during which we have
made important progress.
The point I am now making is perhaps the most
important one in my intervention — there is no
reasonable alternative to the JCPOA. We believe that
it is entirely feasible to bring the nuclear deal fully
back to life. We all know we are not yet there. In order
to get there, all parties need to show flexibility and a
willingness to take tough decisions. In the end, every
party needs to be convinced that a return to full JCPOA
implementation is in its best interests, and it is therefore
willing to give. That is how negotiations work; they
cannot succeed without compromise.
With regard to the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2021/582) under discussion today, I would like to
stress that we fully share the Secretary-General’s
concerns about the nuclear steps that Iran has taken.
Those worrisome steps include, first of all, the
development and use of advanced centrifuges, far
beyond JCPOA limits; secondly, uranium enrichment of
up to 60 per cent and, thirdly, the ongoing research and
development activities on uranium metal production.
Unfortunately, we do not share the assessment expressed
by some colleagues today that those measures are fully
reversible. They result in technological knowledge
gains and undermine the non-proliferation benefits of
the JCPOA. They are not conducive to building trust
and confidence in the exclusively peaceful nature of the
Iranian nuclear programme.
Another point that concerns us is transparency. The
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) plays a
vital role in monitoring and verifying Iran’s nuclearrelated commitments, as the Council requested in
resolution 2231 (2015). It is therefore deeply concerning
that the Agency’s work has been affected as a result
of Iran’s decision to reduce the implementation of its
nuclear-related commitments. We strongly support the

S/PV. 8811

continued efforts of the IAEA and urge Iran to restore
IAEA access in full.
Turning now to annex B of the resolution, let me
briefly reiterate that we continue to consider Iran’s
development of ballistic missiles, designed to be capable
of delivering a nuclear weapon, including launches
using such ballistic missile technology, as inconsistent
with paragraph 3 of annex B. We are concerned about
Iran’s development of a number of relevant ballistic
missile types and continued test activities. Clearly, such
ballistic missile activity is not conducive to fostering
stability and security in the region. Moreover, we
reaffirm the need to ensure compliance by all States, in
particular by Iran, with the prohibition on the transfer
of Missile Technology Control Regime-listed items
to and from Iran. The delivery of missile technology
to non-State actors in the region is destabilizing and
must cease.
Lastly, while the European Union embargo on
conventional arms remains in place vis-à-vis Iran, we
acknowledge and recognize that the conventional arms
provisions laid out in annex B expired last October.
Iran is called upon to behave in a responsible manner
and refrain from destabilizing actions in that regard.
Let me conclude by noting the following. We have
heard different nuances in today’s discussion but, at
the same time, it appears that all of us around the table
have again stressed the importance of the JCPOA as a
key contribution to the non-proliferation and security
architecture in the region and beyond. That is why
we — Germany — worked very hard here in New
York last summer in order to defend and protect the
JCPOA. We will now do everything in our power to see
the JCPOA talks in Vienna succeed. We count on all
parties to return with a mandate that is suitable so as to
put this important agreement fully back in place.
The President: Before adjourning today’s meeting,
as it is the last scheduled open meeting of the Security
Council for the month of June, I would like to express
the sincere appreciation of the delegation of Estonia to
the members of the Council for their cooperation and
support. Let me also thank Ms. Hasmik Egian and the
secretariat of the Council for all the assistance and
support given to us.
I thank all members for their congratulations to
us on either assuming or concluding the presidency.
Receiving congratulatory remarks at the end of the
presidency is perhaps of more substance and importance

21-1726723/24

S/PV.8811

Non-proliferation

than on the first day, because congratulations on the
first day are an advance payment. But now the job
is done.
Indeed, it has been a busy month — one in which
we rallied to consensus on several important issues
within our purview. We have been able to return to the
Council Chamber for almost all Council meetings. We
could not have done any of that alone or without the
hard work, support and positive contributions of every

24/24

30/06/2021

delegation and the representatives of the Secretariat,
including the technical support team, conference
services officers, interpreters, translators, verbatim
reporters and security staff. I thank them all.
As we end our presidency, I know I speak on behalf
of the Council in wishing the delegation of France good
luck in the month of July.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

21-17267
