38

General A111embly-Twenty-foarth Se11ion

4. Further calls upon those Govemments, in their
consideration of the improvement of the adjustment
process of balance-<;>f-payments disequil!bria, to ~ive
due weight to the mterests of developmg countnes,
including the need to ensure that measures adopted
do not have any adverse influence on the export
prospects or terms of trade of these countries.
1832nd plenary meeting,
13 December 1969.
2566 (XXIV). Promoting effective measures for
the prevention and control of marine
pollution

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2414 (XXIII) of 17 December 1968, in which it requested the SecretaryGeneral to report to the General Assembly at its
twenty-fifth session, inter alia, on the progress achieved
by Member States and organizations concemed in promoting the adoption of effective intemational agreements on the prevention and control of marine pollution as might be necessary,
Recalling also its resolution 2467 B (XXIII) of
21 December 1968 on the prevention of marine pollution which might result from exploration and exploitation of the resources of the sea-bed and ocean floor,
Noting that a joint group of experts on the scientific
aspects of marine pollution has been established by the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization, the World Meteorological
Organization and the Inter-Governmental Maritime
Consultative Organization to give advice to those agencies on that subject,
Taking into account the "Comprehensive outline of
the scope of the long-term and expanded programme
of oceanic exploration and research", 27 providing for
a sedes of scientific studies which would review the
state of the ocean and its resources as regards pollution and forecast long-term trends to assist Govemments individually and collectively to take the steps
required to counteract its effects,
Bearing in mind arrangements made by the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
for a technical conference on marine pollution and its
effects on living resources and fishing, to be held in
Rome in December 1970,
Recalling its resolution 2398 (XXIII) of 3 December 1968 on the convening in 1972 of a United
N ations Conference on the Human Environment and
the report of the Secretary-General on problems of the
human environment28 which, inter alia, stresses the
problems relating to marine pollution,
Noting resolution A.176 (VI) on marine pollution,
adopted by the Assembly of the lnter-Governmental
Maritime Consultative Organization on 21 October
1969, calling for an intemational conference in 1973
for the purpose of preparing a suitable international ·
agreement for placing restraints on the contamination of
the sea, land and air by ships and other vessels or
equipment operating in the marine environment,
Considering that, in spite of the sustained efforts
being made at present, many aspects of marine pollu17 A/7750, annex.

28E/4667.

tion have not yet been dealt with or are not being
fully covered, and that additional agreements on this
subject may be required,
1. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the specialized agencies and intergovernmental
organizations concemed, to complement reports and
studies under preparation, with special reference to
the forthcoming United Nations Conference on the
Human Environment, by:
(a) A review of harmful chemical substances, radioactive materials and other noxious agents and waste
which may dangerously affect man's health and bis
economic and cultural activities in the marine environment and coastal areas;
(b) A review of national activities and activities of
specialized agencies and intergovernmental organizations dealing with prevention and control of marine
pollution, including suggestions for more comprehensive action and improved co-ordination in this field;
(e) Seeking the views of Member States on the
desirability and feasibility of an international treaty
or treaties on the subject;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Economic and Social Council and to the Preparatory
Committee for the United Nations Conference on the
Human Environment, as appropriate in the framework
of the preparations for the Conference.
1832nd plenary meeting,
13 December 1969.
2567 (XXIV). Mobilization of puhlic opinion

The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1357 (XLV) of 2 August 1968 on the mobilization of
public opinion in developed and developing countries
regarding the Second United Nations Development
Decade,
Bearing in mind that the mobilization of public opinion in both developed and developing countries in
support of the objectives and policies of the Second
United Nations Development Decade is an essential
component of the international development strategy,
Recognizing that the more advanced countries need
to continue and intensify their endeavour to deepen
public understanding of the interdependent nature of
the development efforts during the Second United
Nations Development Decade and of the necessity to
assist the developing countries in accelerating their
economic and social progress, and that the developing
countries need to make people at all levels aware of
the benefits and sacrifices involved and to enlist their
full participation in achieving the objectives of the
Decade,
Convinced that activities designed to mobilize public
opinion in both developed and developing countries
should be increased, improved and further co-ordinated,
and that measures towards this end should be initiated
immediately since public and parliamentary support is
necessary for all global development efforts, including
the promotion of the policy measures to be undertaken
as part of the international development strategy,
1. Endorses in particular the following concepts
suggested in the report dated 14 August 1969 of the

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Seeond Committcc

Centre for Economic and Social lnformation of the
Office of Public Information:~n
(a) Successful information programmes in support
of development may require the use of modern techniques, mass media and specialized personnel, in many
cases will have to be unprecedented in approach, scope,
diversity and initiative, and must encourage full understanding of the relevance, complexity and urgency, as
well as the long-term nature, of the problems and processes of development;
(b) The mobilization of public opinion has to be
the responsibility mainly of national bodies;
(e) Toe formulation of concrete aims by the competent authorities can make a significant contribution
to the mobilization of public opinion;
(d) The role of the organizations of the United
Nations systcm will be to assist the national information media and meet their varying needs, in particular
by supplying adequate and appropriate basic information from which those media may draw both substancc
and inspiration for their work;
(e) lnformation from international sourccs will have
to be aimed primarily at strengthening the sense of
interdependence and partnership implicit in the concept
of the Second United Nations Development Decade;
2. Further endorses in general the activities now
being undertaken in support of the aims of the Second
United Nations Development Decade, and notes with
interest the proposals for future action outlined in the
report of the Centre for Economic and Social Information of the Office of Public lnformation;
3. Recommends to the Secretary-General, in order
to further the aims of Economic and Social Council
resolution 1357 (XLV), that appropriate consultations
at the technical level be pursued as soon as possible
with representatives of the specialized agencies and
other organizations dealing with the preparation and
dissemination of information material, in order to explore the best means of co-ordinating and focusing the
activities in support of the aims of the Second United
Nations Development Decade;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to consult with
appropriate non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council, in
categories I and II and on the Raster, as to how those
organizations could support the economic and social
goals of the Second United Nations Development
Decade, particularly through the mobilization of public
opinion;
5. Urges Governments to give consideration, in the
light of their individual circumstances, to the establishment of new national bodies designed to mobilize
public opinion, or to the strengthening of existing ones,
and, as a long-term measure, to give increasing development orientation to educational curricula.
1832nd plenary meeting,
13 December 1969.

2568 (XXIV). Proposed amendment to the rules
of procedure of the General Assemhly
The General Assembly
Def ers sine die consideration of the proposed amendment to the rules of procedure of the General Assembly
29 A/ AC.141/L.1 l.

recommended by the Economic and Social Council in
resolution 1374 (XLV) of 2 August 1%8.
1832nd ple11ary 11/('Ctini.
13 Decemhn / 969.

2569 (XXIV). S¡wei:11 mea;.;11rc•s in fmour of thc
laruJ-loeked dev-..loping <·oun!i·it·-.

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2086 (XX) of 20 Dcccmhcr

1965 on the transit tradc of land-lockcd count riL'S,
Recalling f urther rcsolution 1 1 ( 11) of 23 March
1968, adopted by thc United Nations Confercncc on
Trade and Development at its sccnnd scssion, concerning the spccial problcms of thc land-lncknl cnuntries, 30
Taking note of rcsolution 50 (Vlll) of 4 Fchruary
1969, adopted by the Tradc and Dcvelopment Board
at its eighth session,~ 1 hy which thc Sccrctary-Gcneral
of the Unitcd Nations Confcrencc on Tradc a11d Devclopment was invited to convenc a group or cxpcrts to
carry out a comprehensive examination of thc spccial
problems involved in the promotion of thc trade and
cconomic devclopment of thc land-locked dcvcloping
countries,
l. Welcomes the agrcement rcached in thc Tradc
and Development Board whcreby spccific measurcs in
favour of land-locked devcloping countrics will he
elaborated in the context of the contrihution of thc
United Nations Conferencc on Trade and Dc-vc-lopmcnt
to the international dcvelopment strategy;
2. Requests the Board to consider. on thc basis,
inter afia, of the report to be suhmittcd by thc group
of experts, the adoption of practica! measurcs for the
implementation of ali the provisions of rcsolution 11
(II) of the United Nations Confcrcnce on Trade and
Development;
3. Urges ali States Members of the Unitcd Nations.
particularly the developed countries. to makc an active
contribution to the elaboration of thosc spccific mcasures;
4. Further urges ali Member States which wrre
invited to become parties to the 1965 Convcntion on
Transit Trade of Land-locked Statcs~~ that have not
yet done so to investigate thc possibilities of ratifying
or acceding to that Convention and to makc it clTective
at the earliest possible date.
JR32nd plenary 1111','ting.
13 Dece111her 1969
2570 (XXIV).

United

Nation~

(~onff'rPnf'P

ou

Trade ami Developmn1t
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2402 (XXIII) of 13 December 1968, in which it drew the attcntio11 of the
States members of the United Nations Confcrcncc on
Trade and Development to the tasks which rem;iined
ao Proceedings uf the United Nati1111s Co11fern1ce on
Trade and Dcl'clopment, Second Session, voL í and Corr.1
and 3 and Add.l and 2, Repurt ancl Anu.1,·s (U:1it<-d Nations
publication, Sales No.: E.68.ILD.14), p. ,O
31 Official Records of the General
Assemb/1', Twrnty.
fourtlz Session, Supp/ement No. 16 (A/7616), p_ 7~.
32 United Nations, Trcaty 'Series, , , ,,. V) 1 1. l ºf• , , ; _ 86; L
0
