S/PV.8714

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8714th meeting

Thursday, 6 February 2020, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Belgium)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Yao Shaojun
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Jürgenson
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Aougi
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. DeShong
Mr. Van Shalkwyk
Mr. Ladeb
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Barkin
Mr. Dang

Agenda
Briefing by the Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-03029 (E)
*2003029*

S/PV.8714

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefing by the Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Edi Rama,
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and Prime Minister and
Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs of the Republic
of Albania, to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Rama, and I request the Protocol Officer to escort
him to his seat at the Council table.
Mr. Edi Rama, Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe and Prime Minister and Minister for Europe
and Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Albania, was
escorted to a seat at the Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to Mr. Rama.
Mr. Rama: I am very honoured to address the
Council in my capacity as Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE). This opportunity for an exchange of views
on contemporary security challenges has become a
valuable tradition and is an expression of the excellent
cooperation between our organizations.
The United Nations and the OSCE are natural
partners. As the world’s largest regional security
organization under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations, the OSCE is an important pillar of
the international rules-based order. Our work directly
supports the implementation of the global United
Nations mandate and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. Since 1993, a structured framework has
guided our cooperation, reinforced by a joint statement
issued in December last year. During 2020, it is my
resolve as OSCE Chairperson to maximize our practical
cooperation. Together, we can address key challenges
to international peace and security and promote respect
2/19

06/02/2020

for human rights, fundamental freedoms and the rule
of law.
For Albania, assuming the chairmanship of the
OSCE is a momentous event, marking a step up in
our international leadership. While at the helm of
the OSCE, Albania’s strategic goal will be to defend
multilateralism at a time where we feel that it is under
attack. This is the key reason that prompted us to chair
the OSCE and that inspires our bid to sit, in the future,
in the Security Council.
Let me now describe what we intend to do. The
action of the Albanian chairmanship will revolve
around three main priorities.
The first is making a difference on the ground.
The OSCE has proven time and again that it can deploy
in challenging conflict and post-conflict settings. We
will promote the work of our Organization where it is
closest to our people. Thus, conflict resolution efforts
are at the top of our agenda.
The crisis in and around Ukraine remains the most
pressing security challenge in Europe, so the unique
contribution made by the OSCE Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine (SMM) to reducing tensions and
fostering peace, is essential. Two weeks ago I made
my first visit in this new capacity to Ukraine. I met
with President Zelenskyy and the entire Ukrainian
leadership. I assured my counterparts of our
determination and dedication to do our part to advance
peace efforts, urging respect for OSCE principles
and commitments and the full implementation of the
Minsk agreements. We will also support efforts in the
Trilateral Contact Group and the Normandy format. The
resumption of dialogue in that format and outcomes of
the Normandy summit are steps in the right direction.
Still, there continue to be civilian casualties and loss
of life, and we need primarily to ensure a full and
sustainable ceasefire.
What I heard in my meetings in Ukraine was
a request for further OSCE monitoring in eastern
Ukraine, in the framework of the mandate of the SMM.
We will support the SMM in fully implementing its
mandate. While travelling to the line of contact, I
had an opportunity to observe the practical impact
of our flagship operation on the ground. Operating
in a challenging and volatile environment, the OSCE
SMM offers an essential contribution towards peace.
For that to continue happening, however, there is a
need to ensure safe and secure access for its staff on
20-03029

06/02/2020

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

the ground. That requires political will by the sides. I
will not stop calling for it. Political will is indeed key
to peace, and I could see with my own eyes how the
repaired and reopened bridge at Stanytsia Luhanska is
relieving the hardship of those living across the line of
contact, and how the security and humanitarian aspects
of the conflict go hand in hand. Such positive steps
need to be replicated and multiplied.
Yet the OSCE’s conflict-resolution efforts are
broader. During our chairmanship we are also supporting
the efforts of the co-Chairs of the OSCE Minsk Group,
where talks last week in Geneva saw the exploration
of possible next steps to prepare populations for peace,
as well as discussion of the principles and elements
that could form the basis of a future settlement in the
Nagorno Karabakh conflict.
Looking to Georgia, together with the United
Nations and the European Union, the OSCE is also
a co-Chair of the Geneva international discussions,
where we keep de-escalation and dialogue at the top of
the agenda. While almost 12 years have passed since
the conflict, people on the ground are still affected
by security and humanitarian challenges, including
restrictions on the freedom of movement.
The chairmanship also supports the Transnistrian
settlement process and stands by the results-oriented
approach to the 5+2 talks to promote progress.
Confidence-building measures in the economic, social,
education and health fields bring populations on
both banks closer together and ease their daily lives.
Eventually, they will contribute to a comprehensive
settlement based on the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Republic of Moldova within its
internationally recognized borders, with a special
status for Transnistria.
Across the OSCE region, our organization also
plays a key role in early warning and along all phases
of the conflict cycle, in particular thanks to the
network of field operations. Their action is crucial
to preventing a re-emergence of conflicts and to
strengthening institutions.
Women continue to be disproportionally affected
by conflicts in the OSCE area and, of course, across
the world. They are also unjustly excluded from peace
efforts. Inspired by the twentieth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), Albania will inject
new momentum into promoting the role of women
in peace processes. I know at first-hand, in my own

S/PV. 8714

Government, how effective the contribution of women
leaders is. I hope that this dossier will be one of
enhanced cooperation between the United Nations and
the OSCE.
Other opportunities for reinforced mutual efforts
will include countering violent extremism and terrorism,
building on the excellent cooperation with the United
Nations Office of Counter Terrorism, and addressing
transnational organized crime, in cooperation with the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.
Albania’s second priority is implementing our
commitments. The instruments and institutions of the
OSCE are essential safeguards for human rights and
fundamental freedoms. Their impact reaches beyond
our region and benefits the broader international
community. Promoting the freedom of expression and
the freedom of the media, safeguarding the rights of
national minorities and combating violence against
women are our immediate, urgent priorities.
Advancing good governance is another challenge of
our time. Corruption erodes the very foundations of our
society and is a major threat to stability and prosperity.
Therefore, Albania will promote the OSCE’s efforts
in combating this phenomenon and host a high-level
conference on anti-corruption in Tirana.
Combating trafficking in human beings is another
area where the OSCE is becoming a global player. As
co-Chairs of the Inter-Agency Coordination Group
against Trafficking in Persons, we will maximize our
action in partnership with the United Nations, marking
20 years since the adoption of the Palermo Protocols.
Since its creation, the OSCE has developed
remarkable expertise on arms control. In 2020 we
intend to prioritize countering the spread of small arms
and light weapons and destroying surplus stockpiles
of ammunition.
Our organization also excels in responding
to emerging challenges, such as cybersecurity. In
that connection, we have developed an important
new set of confidence-building measures to reduce
the risks of conflicts resulting from the use of
information technology.
Our third priority is dialogue, which some might
say is the OSCE’s ultimate purpose. The divisions in
our region show how badly we need it. This year is the
thirtieth anniversary of the Charter of Paris for a New
Europe. To promote its legacy, I will make it my personal

20-030293/19

S/PV.8714

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

commitment to advance dialogue among OSCE States
and among and within our societies — about 57 countries
and more than 1 billion people, from Vancouver
to Vladivostok. Key issues such as risk reduction,
incident prevention and environmental protection will
feature in debates among OSCE States, international
organizations and civil society. We will promote the
full implementation of OSCE confidence- and securitybuilding measures to ensure military transparency and
rebuild trust.
Yet we see a major obstacle to dialogue in the rise
of intolerance, hate crimes and hate speech. To reverse
that negative trend and work towards full respect for
human dignity and human rights, we will redouble
efforts to promote tolerance and non-discrimination.
Just before departing for New York, I opened the
Tirana Conference on Combating Anti-Semitism.
Together we remembered the seventy-fifth anniversary
of the liberation of the Nazi concentration camps. We
also proudly shared Albania’s experience of providing
sanctuary to Jewish people, as we were a rare example
of a European country that had more Jewish people
after the war than before it. Albania is really proud of its
history of interreligious and cultural tolerance, which
we see as essential to world peace and security. In our
work as honest brokers and as Chairperson-in-Office
of the OSCE, we will be inspired by our tradition of
tolerance, openness and respect.
To face today’s broad range of complex challenges,
global action must draw on, and coordinate the work
of, regional organizations. The OSCE is an effective
partner of the United Nations and a venue for promoting
the idea that great Power competition must give way
to great Power cooperation. I believe that the basic
principles of the Helsinki Final Act — respect for
sovereignty, territorial integrity and defence of human
rights — are still today, as they were back then, a
simple and effective recipe for security, prosperity and
a future of peace. Our task for the year ahead will be
to safeguard those principles. Together, now more than
ever, the United Nations and the OSCE can be decisive
for peace.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Rama
for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
4/19

06/02/2020

Mr. Heusgen (Germany): It is an honour to have
here the Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). I think it
is very rare that the Security Council meets a person
who is at the same time a basketball player, an artist, a
Prime Minister and the OSCE Chairperson-in-Office. I
welcome him to the Council.
I followed very carefully what he said about the
OSCE. He concluded by underlining the principles of
the OSCE, which remain as valid today as when the
organization was founded. Germany is a founding
member of the OSCE and has been very supportive
of what it believes to be a key organization. We also
subscribe to what the Chairperson-in-Office said
about the OSCE and the United Nations being natural
partners. Germany therefore very much promotes the
partnership between the two organizations, which, after
all, share fundamental principles and — as the OSCE
Chairperson-in-Office stated — defend multilateralism,
which is under threat. Germany engages financially
and provides personnel to the OSCE, which we chaired
in 2016.
Germany also fully supports the programmes and
thematic issues highlighted by the Chairperson-inOffice, including defending fundamental human
rights, preventing violence against women, promoting
good governance, as well combating anti-Semitism,
organized crime, counter-terrorism and the spread
of small arms. I would highlight all of those points
and, in particular, one issue that is very close to our
heart — that is, both the role of women in promoting the
participation of women in Government and peace talks
and protecting them, especially from sexual violence.
I would like to focus on the first part of the
presentation of the Chairperson-in-Office. The work
of the OSCE is making a difference on the ground.
We very much appreciate the fact that he focused on
the protracted crises in the territory of the OSCE. He
mentioned the Caucasus and reminded us of Moldova and
Transnistria, where Russian troops remain, in violation
of the 1999 Istanbul OSCE summit commitments. We
can only promote and support the OSCE’s efforts.
Over the past six years, the OSCE has invested more
in Ukraine than in any other country. Germany truly
appreciates the fact that the Chairperson-in-Office’s
first visit, very early on, was to Ukraine, where he
visited Stanytsia Luhanska, whose bridge has on many
occasions been the subject of discussions here. I recall
20-03029

06/02/2020

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

our appeals to both sides to reconstruct the bridge to
alleviate the plight of the people. It is wonderful that
this is happening, and I thank the Chairperson-inOffice for the message he sent by going there.
Germany remains committed to the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Ukraine. It is now six years
since Russia invaded and annexed parts of Ukraine, the
Crimea, and it still occupies part of Ukraine, in flagrant
breach of international law. Together with France,
Germany continues in the Normandy Format to ensure
that the situation improves, and some progress was
made at the Normandy Four summit on 9 December in
Paris. We appeal to all sides to continue to implement
the results of the summit. In that connection, I would
like to congratulate President Zelenskyy on what he has
done since assuming office with regard to the bridge
and the implementation of the Steinmeier formula, as
well as other gestures he has made. I also appeal to
Russia to adhere to the Minsk agreements.
As the OSCE Chairperson-in-Office mentioned
earlier, the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to
Ukraine (SMM) is the OSCE’s flagship operation.
I would like to take this opportunity to once again
congratulate the observers, who are working under
difficult circumstances. They are continuously
harassed and intimidated and their work is obstructed.
We condemn the continued threats and restrictions
of movement against the SMM. Those actions occur
predominantly in the areas not controlled by the
Government, that is, the areas invaded by Russia. We
call on both sides to ensure unhindered access for the
SMM, which continues to deserve our full support in
carrying out its important mandate.
I recall the briefing (see S/PV.8516) in April 2019
by the outgoing Chief Monitor of the OSCE SMM,
Ambassador Apakan, who also confirmed the difficult
circumstances under which they are operating and the
fact that they were harassed primarily in the occupied
territories. In that context, I deplore the difficult
situation that OSCE finds itself in and note that SMM
instruments were also attacked. An SMM unmanned
aerial vehicle — a drone — was observing Russian
convoys crossing the border and was shot down.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): First, I would like to thank
the Belgian presidency for holding this very important
meeting. I extend my warmest welcome to His
Excellency Mr. Edi Rama, Prime Minister and Minister

S/PV. 8714

for Europe and Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Albania, and thank him for his very insightful briefing.
We are pleased to note that the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) has
played an important role in addressing a wide range of
security-related concerns, which has helped improve
security and humanitarian situations and has facilitated
dialogue to reach solutions in various parts of Europe.
We welcome and encourage the continued
cooperation between the Security Council and
regional arrangements, in accordance with Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. Last week
a representative of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations briefed the Council (see S/PV.8711); today it is
the OSCE, and later this month there will be a briefing
on the European Union. This is a very timely series of
briefings from regional organizations. We once again
thank the Belgian presidency for a very well-designed
programme this month. I would like to make three
points on today’s subject.
First of all, regional organizations are in a very
good position to help maintain international peace and
security with ways and means and solutions suitable
to the context in the region under consideration. They
can play a crucial role in confliction prevention, good
offices, mediation, conciliation and other peaceful
means of dispute settlement. During the open debate last
week (see S/PV.8711) we all heard strong commitments
from Member States to that effect.
Secondly, with regard to promoting cooperation
between the Security Council and the OSCE, we
strongly support the women and peace and security
agenda as the top priority. This year marks the twentieth
anniversary of the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda. Even though extraordinary
work has been done in transforming the perception of
the role of women in peace processes, women are still
underrepresented and remain vulnerable during and
after conflicts. Women can play important and effective
roles in other OSCE priority areas, such as combating
the spread of hate speech, discrimination and human
trafficking. Best practices and lessons learned on the
role of women in all stages of peace processes, especially
post-conflict peacebuilding, should be widely shared
among regions, States and partners. Monitoring and
measuring the progress of the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda can benefit

20-030295/19

S/PV.8714

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

from a comprehensive set of indicators, which can be
universal as well as regional.
Last but not least, we support the positive role of the
OSCE in monitoring the implementation of the Minsk
agreements, thereby contributing to the implementation
of resolution 2202 (2015). We call on all parties to make
every effort to that end, with a view to finding a peaceful
solution for the peace, stability and development of
the region. We would like to reiterate that all disputes
must be settled by peaceful means, in accordance with
international law and the United Nations Charter.
Ms. DeShong (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines thanks His
Excellency Prime Minister Edi Rama for his briefing.
We congratulate him on assuming the chairmanship of
the dynamic and proactive Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), and we wish him a
very successful tenure.
The work of the OSCE is undoubtedly commendable.
As the world’s largest regional security arrangement,
it serves as a platform for preventive diplomacy and
multilateral cooperation across the peace, security and
development nexus. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
welcomes that multidimensional approach to preventing
conflict and ensuring lasting peace. Indeed, existing
threats to international peace and security require
comprehensive political strategies that address the root
causes of conflict. The OSCE’s mandate exemplifies
the very nexus approach that is so crucial for mitigating
existing and emerging transnational risks.
As a small island developing State on the front
lines of the fight against climate change, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines considers it its solemn duty to
raise the issue of climate-driven insecurity. Complex
challenges such as climate change, with its attendant
hazards, require multifaceted solutions. We welcome
the multi-agency Environment and Security Initiative,
within which the OSCE and other partners work to
promote transboundary cooperation for environmental
management and climate change adaptation.
Women’s involvement is critical to political,
peace and security processes. Their full and equal
participation in all forms of political life is instrumental
to well-functioning societies. In observance of the
20-year milestone since the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), our delegation welcomes the efforts to further
implement the women, peace and security agenda in the
OSCE region under Albania’s stewardship.
6/19

06/02/2020

On the crisis in the Ukraine, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines reiterates that principles should guide
all efforts towards a lasting settlement of the dispute.
We welcome the recent efforts made with regard to
confidence-building measures, including prisoner
exchanges and new areas of disengagement. We
emphasize that only through constructive dialogue
and the consistent adherence to the principles of
international law can a lasting solution to this crisis
be crafted and implemented. We hope that in 2020 all
parties can work towards the full implementation of the
Minsk agreements under the auspices of the Normandy
format and the Trilateral Contact Group.
Regarding other border conflicts, including the
situations in Nagorno Karabakh and Transnistria, we
reiterate that the guiding principles of the Charter of the
United Nations with regard to territorial integrity and
self-determination for displaced populations remain
sacrosanct. We welcome the OSCE’s mediation efforts
for the comprehensive settlement of those disputes.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is a small
island developing State, as I said earlier, with an open
economy and no standing army to insulate us against
many of today’s complex security challenges. We owe
our continued peaceful existence to the rules-based
multilateral system, where all regional and subregional
organizations and their member States work together to
advance our common interests of peace and prosperity
for all. We recognize that the OSCE, as a key partner
to the United Nations, has an important place in our
global governance architecture. We extend our fullest
support to the OSCE as it continues to promote peace,
security and development.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Belgium for organizing
this important briefing. My country’s delegation
welcomes Mr. Edi Rama, Chairperson-in-Office of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) and Prime Minister of the Republic of
Albania, and thanks him for his valuable briefing on
the programmes planned in the context of the Albanian
chairmanship of the OSCE. I would also take this
opportunity to once again congratulate the Republic of
Albania on assuming the chairmanship of the OSCE for
the year 2020, and I wish it every success in its efforts
to promote international peace and security.
Pursuant to Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations, the OSCE is the largest regional
20-03029

06/02/2020

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

security organization. Its Mediterranean, European and
Asian dimensions have made it a distinguished partner
of the United Nations as it continues to play an active
role in strengthening regional and international peace
and security.
In view of the OSCE priorities for 2020 that
Mr. Rama highlighted today, which are in line with
the priorities of the United Nations, particularly those
of the Security Council, my delegation supports such
priorities and stresses the importance of a stronger
coordination and partnership between the OSCE and
the United Nations, since they have common values
and goals, with a view to strengthening preventive
diplomacy mechanisms in line with respecting the
principles of sovereignty, territorial integrity and
non-interference in the internal affairs of other States.
Based on Tunisia’s firm belief in the importance of
multilateral efforts as the best mechanism to achieve the
peaceful settlement of conflicts and conflict prevention,
my delegation believes that this noble mission cannot
be achieved without strengthening the capacity of
regional and subregional organizations, given their
knowledge of ongoing situations and the particularities
of the regions, as well as their ability to establish direct
communication channels between parties to a conflict.
In that context and in view of the important role
played by the OSCE in resolving the crisis in eastern
Ukraine, my delegation stresses its support for the
tireless efforts of the OSCE to reach a comprehensive
and balanced solution based on the Minsk agreements
of 2015, particularly in line with the framework of the
Normandy format and the Trilateral Contact Group. In
that regard, Tunisia welcomes the Normandy format
summit held in Paris in December 2019 and the
agreements reached on a number of confidence-building
measures. My delegation also expresses its hope that
efforts will be stepped up and a new dialogue opened in
order to achieve comprehensive solutions to some of the
protracted conflicts in the Euro-Mediterranean region.
Given the connections between the political,
security, economic and humanitarian aspects of
realizing the concept of comprehensive security and
because Tunisia belongs to the Mediterranean region,
my delegation stresses the need to confront joint
security challenges, whether traditional or emerging, in
the Mediterranean, especially in the areas of combating
terrorism and violent extremism and achieving
environmental security and cybersecurity. We call for

S/PV. 8714

promoting strategic cooperation between the OSCE
and various partners to ensure security and stability in
the region.
In order to ensure effective multilateral action
towards achieving peace and security and preventing
conflicts and given the challenges facing the African
continent and the effect on peace and security in
Europe and the Mediterranean, my delegation hopes
to further cooperation between the OSCE and regional
organizations on the African continent.
We also support the efforts of the OSCE to
promote good governance, a culture of tolerance
and non-discrimination as part of the international
approach to enhancing human rights and fundamental
freedoms. In that context, my delegation welcomes
the OSCE’s focus on strengthening the role of young
people and women as part of building international
peace and security.
In conclusion, I reiterate the importance of the
collective efforts made by the OSCE and the United
Nations, especially in the context of partnership with
the Security Council, to achieve international peace
and security and to achieve prosperity for humankind.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
warmly thank Mr. Rama for his briefing. Albania can
count on the full support of France in implementing
the ambitious work programme that it has set out for
its chairmanship of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). There are three matters
that merit our particular attention.
Almost six years after the hostilities began, finding
a solution to the conflict in eastern Ukraine must
remain a top priority. The conflict constitutes one of
the gravest and bloodiest violations of the Helsinki
principles, upon which the OSCE was founded. I
commend the decisive role that the OSCE has played
ever since the crisis broke out and, in that regard, I
welcome the fact that Mr. Edi Rama, Prime Minister
of Albania, made his first official visit to Ukraine as
Chairperson-in-Office of the OSCE.
The OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine
continues to observe, on a daily basis, developments
in the security situation in all regions of Ukraine
and throughout the conflict zone. It also supports the
parties in the implementation of the Minsk agreements.
In that regard, we welcome the efforts made by the
Special Monitoring Mission to observe disengagement

20-030297/19

S/PV.8714

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

in the three pilot areas of Stanytsia Luhanska, Petrivske
and Zolote. We commend the bravery demonstrated by
the men and women engaged in the field and resolutely
condemn any actions aimed at jeopardizing their
security or hindering their mission. The mandate of the
Special Monitoring Mission must be fully implemented
throughout the entire territory of Ukraine, including
near the Russian-Ukrainian border.
The OSCE also plays an essential role in facilitating
dialogue between the parties within the framework of
the Trilateral Contact Group. That process is advancing
in conjunction with political discussions in the
Normandy Format, which are now benefiting from an
increased momentum since the 9 December summit in
Paris — the first held at the Heads of State level since
2016, which France and Germany worked actively to
convene. We now await new operational progress within
the framework of the Trilateral Contact Group so that
the next Normandy Format summit can be organized
in spring.
We cannot mention the Russia-Ukraine crisis
without returning to Russia’s illegal annexation of
Crimea. That violation of Ukraine’s internationally
recognized borders must continue to be vehemently
condemned. In that connection, we deplore the
increasing militarization of the peninsula, as well as
the human rights violations against persons belonging
to minorities, in particular Crimean Tatars.
Secondly, with regard to our line of action, France
welcomes the OSCE’s contribution to the resolution of
the protracted conflicts that continue to threaten peace
and stability in Europe and weigh heavily on the daily
lives of civilian populations.
The recent visit by the OSCE Special Representative
for the Transniestrian Settlement Process to Moldova
should be welcomed. France hopes that it will help to
give new impetus to the negotiations.

06/02/2020

commitment to the territorial integrity of Georgia
within its internationally recognized borders.
In the case of all of those conflicts, it must be
underscored that the political will of the parties is
critical in order to reach a long-term settlement and
strengthen security on the European continent.
Thirdly, and finally, our common objective must
be to strengthen the efficiency of the OSCE. France
welcomes Albania’s decision to make gender equality
and the women and peace and security agenda a key
part of its chairmanship. We also wish to reiterate
our commitment to the multidimensional approach
to security that prevails within the OSCE and to the
human dimension commitments. With regard to the
human dimension, allow me to acknowledge the work
done by the Office for Democratic Institutions and
Human Rights and by Mr. Harlem Désir as OSCE
Representative on Freedom of the Media. We must also
commend Albania for making space on its agenda for
the question of environmental issues and their impact
on security.
Forty-five years after the conclusion of the Helsinki
Final Act and 30 years after the signing of the Charter
of Paris for a New Europe, the OSCE remains the model
of an effective grassroots form of multilateralism that
emerged on the basis of common values at
​​ a time
where political antagonisms were particularly striking.
The implementation and strengthening of the OSCE’s
achievements are among the priorities we share with the
Albanian chairmanship, including close cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
like the OSCE. Such cooperation, under Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations, will enable us to
invent a renewed and revitalized multilateralism that
is capable of responding to the major challenges of
our time.

On Nagorno Karabakh, France is continuing its
mediation efforts as co-Chair of the Minsk Group,
alongside the United States and Russia. The recent
meeting of the two Foreign Ministers is encouraging
and attests to the desire for dialogue between the
two parties.

Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for scheduling this important debate
today. I also wish to thank Mr. Edi Rama, Prime Minister
of the Republic of Albania, for taking the time to come
here, as I think it is very important for the Security
Council to hear from the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). We congratulate
him on assuming the role of Chairperson-in-Office and
wish to assure him of the United Kingdom’s support.

Turning to Abkhazia and South Ossetia, France
reiterates the need for the international discussions
in Geneva to produce tangible results, as well as its

The OSCE is a key pillar of the rules-based
international system, just like the United Nations itself.
It is a crucial institution for European and Euro-Atlantic

8/19

20-03029

06/02/2020

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

security. As Prime Minister Rama highlighted, it is
important that, in discharging that responsibility, the
OSCE be able to make a real difference on the ground.
As other speakers have noted, the people of
Ukraine feel that need particularly acutely. We
welcome Mr. Rama’s recent visit to Ukraine, where he
had an opportunity to witness at first-hand the reality
for people living near the line of contact. We believe
that he is correct to prioritize the OSCE’s response to
the conflict in eastern Ukraine. The United Kingdom
supports the push for full, safe and unimpeded access
for the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine,
as well as adequate resources to ensure that it is able to
fulfil its mandate.
As other speakers have mentioned, we, too, are
deeply concerned by the deterioration of human rights
in Crimea since the illegal annexation, including
arrests, ill-treatment, torture and intimidation against
political opponents and minorities and the denial of
basic human rights and religious freedoms to those
who do not accept the forced imposition of Russian
legislation and citizenship on the peninsula. Therefore,
the United Kingdom urgently calls on Russia to
immediately release the 89 or more political prisoners
currently detained in Russia and in Crimea. We
welcome President Zelenskyy’s commitment to finding
a diplomatic solution to the conflict in eastern Ukraine.
Ukraine’s recent delivery of confidence-building
measures led to the December Normandy Format
summit in Paris and a further prisoner exchange.
We look to Russia to abide by the Minsk agreements
commitments it signed up to and to use its influence
to ensure the separatists do the same. We also call on
Russia to play its part to enable further disengagement
and full access by the International Committee of the
Red Cross to non-Government-controlled areas.
Russia needs to fully respect Ukraine’s independence
and territorial integrity, withdraw its forces from all
of Ukraine and end its illegal annexation of Crimea
and Sevastopol. Crimea and Donbas are part of
Ukraine — what Russia has done and continues to do
there breaches its obligations under international law
and presents a serious challenge to the international
rules-based order.
We
welcome
the
OSCE
chairmanship’s
prioritization of conflict resolution, including the work
of the Special Monitoring Mission and the Trilateral
Contact Group on Ukraine, as well as the resolution of

S/PV. 8714

the other protracted conflicts in the OSCE area. Like
others, we attach great importance to the work of OSCE
field presences across the region. The United Kingdom
has the honour to support Prime Minister Rama’s
chairmanship by chairing Security Committee of the
OSCE. We are very grateful for his determination to
tackle organized crime and underline the importance
of ensuring that action is taken in compliance with
international human rights standards.
The OSCE’s cooperation with the United Nations
on countering terrorism and violent extremism is
particularly strong. We welcome the OSCE’s partnership
with the Security Council’s counter-terrorism bodies
and look forward to the OSCE joint forthcoming
conference with the Office of Counter-Terrorism in
Switzerland on foreign terrorist fighters.
The unique value of the OSCE lies in the consensus
approach to principles and verifiable commitments
allowing for mutual benefits and the prevention of
miscalculation or escalation. In particular, the United
Kingdom would like to see the preservation and
enhanced delivery of existing confidence- and securitybuilding mechanisms in 2020, including the Open Skies
Treaty and the Vienna Document.
We commend the focus of Prime Minister Rama
on the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000)
and the promotion of the role of women in peace and
security. Preventing sexual violence in conflict also
remains a top priority for my Government. We are very
proud to give Prime Minister Rama our full support for
his chairmanship of the OSCE.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): First, I thank the
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), Prime Minister
Edi Rama, for his comprehensive briefing on the
priorities of the Albanian chairmanship and for his
clear focus on the need to comply with the OSCE’s
norms, principles and responsibilities. That is the basis
for security and stability in the entire OSCE area, as
well as for conflict resolution. To achieve that, global
and regional organizations need to work hand in hand.
We need strong cooperation between the OSCE and the
United Nations.
Estonia stands strongly for the free and
independent work of all OSCE mechanisms and
institutions and recognizes that more political support
is needed for that. The Special Monitoring Mission to
Ukraine (SMM) remains the most reliable source of

20-030299/19

S/PV.8714

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

information on the situation on the ground in Ukraine.
It is therefore regrettable that the restrictions posed
on the SMM’s freedom of movement have persisted in
non-Government-controlled areas in eastern Ukraine,
thereby hindering the Mission from fully implementing
its mandate. More so, attempts to threaten, intimidate
and harass SMM personnel, as well as those targeting
and damaging SMM assets, including unmanned aerial
vehicles, are deplorable. They are grave violations of
international law and of OSCE obligations.
We condemn the illegal annexation of Crimea and
the city of Sevastopol and the military aggression in
eastern Ukraine. International human rights monitoring
missions and human rights non-governmental
organizations must have access to Crimea, in line with
relevant United Nations resolutions.
We are deeply concerned about the fact that the
security situation in Donbas has become more volatile.
A 400-kilometre uncontrolled section of the UkrainianRussian State border remains free to flows of weaponry
and personnel, which makes the conflict even more
tense and fragile. We call on Russia, as a party to
the conflict, to fully implement the commitments of
the Minsk agreements, including those undertaken at
the Normandy Four Summit in Paris on 9 December
2019. That includes the establishment of a full and
comprehensive ceasefire for a situation that has recently
worsened and has led to more civilian casualties. More
than 13,000 people have been killed. More than 3,000
of them are civilians and in excess of 30,000 have been
wounded since the beginning of the conflict. Military
and financial support for the armed formations
responsible for that has to stop. The de-occupation
and effective return of Ukraine’s territories are part
and parcel of the most efficient way to restore regional
security. I would like to ask Prime Minister Rama the
following question. How, in practice, might the OSCE
and the Security Council assist in pushing for the steps
needed to resolve the conflict?
Estonia also reiterates its deep concern about
the Russian military build-up in Georgia’s occupied
regions, which is in violation of Georgia’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity. We call on Russia to fulfil
the ceasefire agreement of 12 August 2008 and its
subsequent implementing measures of 8 September
2008 and withdraw its military forces from Georgia’s
Abkhazia and Tskhinvali/South Ossetia regions
without delay.
10/19

06/02/2020

In addition, we are deeply worried about Russian
military exercises, infrastructure reinforcements and
borderization activities in the Georgian regions of
Abkhazia and South Ossetia. The restrictions imposed
on the freedom of movement on conflict-affected
populations is an example of such actions. They further
divide Georgian communities and create hardship,
frustration and fear among local populations. We urge
Russia to cease such destabilizing actions in Georgia.
The European Union Monitoring Mission (EUMM)
remains the only international presence on the ground,
and we deplore any action to prevent its work.
Furthermore, we recall that the EUMM’s mandate
covers the whole territory of Georgia, including its
regions of Abkhazia and South-Ossetia.
We strongly support the OSCE Chairperson’s
efforts on conflict resolution and underline the urgent
need for a meaningful cross-dimensional OSCE
presence throughout Georgia’s full territory, which
would considerably help the OSCE in the Geneva
international discussions, the incident prevention
and response mechanisms and the implementation
of confidence-building measures. We regret that the
Geneva international discussions, on its core topics of
security and stability and humanitarian issues, remain
challenging. We stress that more political will is needed
to enhance those substantial discussions in order to
achieve tangible results.
Estonia supports the efforts of the OSCE
Chairperson, his Special Representative and the Mission
to resolve the Transnistrian conflict in Moldova. A
peaceful, comprehensive and lasting settlement must
be reached, while ensuring the stability, territorial
integrity and sovereignty of the Republic of Moldova,
within its internationally recognized borders. We call
on the Mission to continue to monitor the situation in
the security zone and to report regularly on the incidents
taking place there.
Finally, we support the OSCE Minsk Group’s
work in spearheading the efforts towards resolving the
Nagorno Karabakh conflict. We call on all parties to
fully cooperate with the Minsk Group mediators and to
refrain from destabilizing activities and rhetoric.
Mr. Aougi (Niger) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank the Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), Prime
Minister of Albania and Minister for Europe and
Foreign Affairs, His Excellency Mr. Edi Rama, for
20-03029

06/02/2020

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

his briefing. The OSCE cooperation model, which is
an expression of the shared vision of its members to
be responsible for their own collective security, must
be commended.
Today’s briefing enabled us to understand
the main focus of Albania’s work at the helm of
the organization — that of combating corruption,
trafficking in persons and the spread of hate speech,
and resolving the conflict in eastern Ukraine and
other conflicts in the organization’s area of operations.
The spread of hate speech, which fosters the violent
extremism that leads to terrorism, is a strategic
challenge that must be met with further action by
the international community. Such action should
be demonstrated by concerted efforts in the areas of
sustainable development, institution-building, the rule
of law and good governance.
The Niger welcomes the signing of a memorandum
of understanding between the OSCE and the Office
of Counter-Terrorism and the excellent cooperation
between them. We encourage the two organizations
to intensify their cooperation efforts in areas related
to the women and peace and security agenda and urge
them to identify opportunities for cooperation in the
implementation of resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419
(2018), on youth and peace and security.
With regard to the crucial role of regional and
subregional organizations in the management and
prevention of conflicts, and in line with the principle
of subsidiarity, the Niger welcomes the outcome of
the meeting of 9 December 2019 on Ukraine, in the
Normandy Format, among France, Germany, Russia
and Ukraine. It paved the way for the adoption of
various confidence-building measures, including
the exchange of prisoners, the establishment of new
disengagement zones and the opening of new crossing
points along the line of contact. We therefore encourage
the Albanian chairmanship to work towards restoring
peace and stability in Ukraine by bringing together the
parties involved to overcome their differences in order
to implement the Minsk agreements, in accordance
with resolution 2202 (2015), of 17 February 2015.
The fight against terrorism, threats to peace
and security, climate change and the management
of migration flows are areas of further enhanced
cooperation between ОSCE and other regional and
subregional organizations, particularly those from
Africa. Indeed, it is well known that security dynamics

S/PV. 8714

in sub-Saharan Africa impact peace and security in
Europe. That is why the Niger calls for the expansion
and strengthening of cooperation between the OSCE
and those organizations. Such an approach could be
considered together with the Group of Five for the Sahel,
with a view to seeking solutions, in a spirit of solidarity
and concerted action, to the current challenges facing
the Sahel region in terms of peace, security and the
fight against poverty.
Mr. Barkin (United States of America): It is an
honour to have Prime Minister Rama with us today
in the Chamber, and we thank him for his briefing.
Human rights, democracy, peace and the maintenance
of regional stability are vitally important to all of us, but
they cannot be preserved without deliberate effort. That
makes the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) a crucial partner in promoting those
values, as it also complements the Security Council’s
efforts to address global security concerns.
We face a range of challenges today that
threaten democratic institutions. Cyberwarfare and
disinformation campaigns, including meddling in
the elections of other States, tear at the fabric of free
and open societies. Authoritarian States and leaders
who disregard the human rights and dignity of their
own people, including the freedoms of expression,
association, religion and belief and peaceful assembly,
also disregard the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of neighbouring States. We appreciate
the OSCE commitment to combat those attacks on
freedom and related challenges during the Prime
Minister’s chairmanship.
As a member and the largest provider of financial
support and personnel to the OSCE, the United States
is advancing all dimensions of the OSCE’s work. We
encourage progress towards a comprehensive update of
the Vienna Document to enhance military transparency
and rebuild confidence among the 57 OSCE
participating States. We also welcome greater OSCE
focus on corruption and accountable governance. Some
OSCE States have not kept their commitments, or have
selectively implemented arms control arrangements.
To address those failures, creative and courageous
leadership is needed for structured dialogue and
security issues.
Nowhere is the OSCE’s presence more important
than in Ukraine. Russia’s ongoing aggression has led
to the deaths of more than 13,000 people, displaced

20-0302911/19

S/PV.8714

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

1.4 million people and left 3.4 million in need of
humanitarian assistance. That poses the greatest
threat to European security since the Cold War. We
are encouraged by recent progress, including the
recent detainee exchanges between Ukraine and
Russia and work to improve humanitarian conditions.
That progress has been achieved thanks to President
Zelenskyy’s extraordinary commitment to achieving a
peaceful resolution.
However, we need to see much more from Russia,
which still ignores calls for a comprehensive ceasefire.
Russia instigated that conflict and continues to arm,
train, lead, fund and fight alongside its proxies in
eastern Ukraine. It must immediately follow through
on its Minsk commitments, withdraw its forces, support
further disengagement, expand crossing points and
respect Ukraine’s sovereignty, both in eastern Ukraine
and Crimea. Under such difficult circumstances, we are
proud of the work that the OSCE has done in Ukraine,
including the Special Monitoring Mission’s essential
assessments of the situation on the ground. We call on
Russia and its proxies to stop interfering with the work
of the Mission’s monitors and assets and give them full
access and freedom to fulfil the OSCE’s mandate.
The United States fully supports Ukraine’s
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
within its internationally recognized borders, including
its territorial waters. We do not, or will we ever,
recognize Russia’s purported annexation of Crimea.
We join our European and other partners in affirming
that our Ukraine-related sanctions against Russia will
remain in place until Russia fully implements its Minsk
commitments. Our Crimea-focused sanctions will also
remain in place until Russia returns full control of the
peninsula to Ukraine.
The United States also opposes Russia’s continued
occupation of Abkhazia and South Ossetia, which
are part of Georgia. Russia’s actions contravene its
international commitments and violate Georgia’s
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
within its internationally recognized borders. Although
Russia participates in the OSCE’s 5+2 Transnistrian
settlement negotiations, it has failed to honour its 1999
Istanbul OSCE summit commitments to withdraw
its forces from Moldova. Instead, Russia has used
protracted conflicts to obstruct the development of a
rules-based order and slow the region’s gravitation
towards European and transatlantic institutions.
12/19

06/02/2020

We look forward to working with the OSCE
to resolve those conflicts, including the Geneva
international discussions and the 5+2 talks. We thank
the OSCE Chairperson and participating States for their
support of the Minsk Group process, in which the United
States, Russia and France are working productively as
co-Chairs to help the sides find a peaceful negotiated
settlement to the Nagorno Karabakh conflict.
As I noted at the beginning of my remarks, the
preservation of human rights, democracy, the rule of
law, peace and stability requires deliberate effort.
The United States is committed to that effort, and we
will continue to work closely with both the United
Nations and the OSCE to strengthen the principles that
undergird free nations, both within the OSCE region
and around the globe.
Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China listened attentively to the briefing delivered by
His Excellency Mr. Edi Rama, Chairperson-in-Office
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
European (OSCE) and Prime Minister and Minister for
Europe and Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Albania.
At present, the international situation is undergoing
more rapid and profound changes, with increasing factors
causing instability and uncertainty. Unilateralism
and protectionism are on the rise, which jeopardize
international order and the rule of law. As Mr. Rama
mentioned, multilateralism is under attack. No country
is immune to the risks and challenges involved.
While the United Nations is at the centre of the
international collective security mechanism, regional
and subregional organizations have unique advantages
in resolving regional hotspot issues. China supports
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations in advancing their cooperation, in line
with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations,
with a view to jointly maintaining international
peace and security, firmly upholding the purposes
and principles of the Charter, vigorously advancing
dialogue and consultation to resolve regional hotspot
issues and actively conducting preventive diplomacy to
diffuse disputes and conflicts peacefully.
The regional and subregional organizations should
safeguard multilateralism. Their actions should comply
with international law and basic norms governing
international relations, in particular respect for national
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.
20-03029

06/02/2020

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): Let me begin by thanking
Belgium for convening this very important meeting.
I would also like to welcome His Excellency Mr. Edi
Rama, Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and
Prime Minister and Minister for Europe and Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Albania, to the Security
Council and thank him for his comprehensive and very
insightful briefing.
Indonesia welcomes the positive role of regional
and subregional organizations, including the OSCE,
in dealing with issues of peace and security in their
respective regions. Indonesia also welcomes the
three key objectives of the Albanian 2020 OSCE
Chairmanship: making a difference on the ground,
implementing OSCE commitments and building
stability through dialogue.
In that regard, allow me to highlight three points.
First, with regard to adherence and respect
for international law and norms of international
relations, Indonesia views that the activities of
regional and subregional organizations must be in line
with international law and respect the principles of
non-interference, national sovereignty and territorial
integrity. Everyone must also abide by the principle of
the non-use of force in the resolution of conflicts, as
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.
Secondly, dialogue is key to sustaining peace.
Preventive diplomacy, with inclusive dialogue, must be
prioritized with the full backing of all relevant actors.
Every effort must be made to build confidence and
resolve conflicts peacefully. We sincerely believe in
the value of dialogue and the need to settle disputes
amicably. Political will may not always be present
among the parties at beginning, but, with sustained
dialogue, mutual respect and credible peacemaking, it
can be nurtured.
My third point concerns the promotion of regional
arrangements. Over the span of two weeks, we have
had two Council briefings related to the role of regional
organizations. Indeed, the importance of regional
arrangements is stipulated in Chapter VIII of the
Charter. Political processes to find amicable and durable
solutions to conflicts and tensions should be conducted
on an ongoing basis both within and among regions.
Presidential statements on the role of regional
and subregional organizations, including presidential

S/PV. 8714

statement S/PRST/2007/42, which was introduced and
adopted during Indonesia’s presidency in November
2007, have recognized that regional and subregional
organizations are well positioned to understand the root
causes of many conflicts and other security challenges
close to home and to influence their prevention
or resolution.
We appreciate the commitment of the OSCE to
adhering to the spirit of Chapter VIII of the United
Nations Charter to support the United Nations global
mandate at the regional level. The OSCE has great
potential to help reduce tensions, rebuild trust and
foster cooperation on shared security concerns.
In South-East Asia, where Indonesia and Viet Nam
are located, we have the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN). One of ASEAN’s main purposes is
to promote peace and stability through abiding respect
for justice and the rule of law in relations among
countries of the region and beyond. The dividends are
concrete. Since ASEAN’s inception in 1967, no major
conflicts have occurred in Southeast Asia. With a total
population of more than 650 million people, South-East
Asia has some of the fastest-growing economies and is
the engine of global growth.
Let me conclude by wishing Mr. Rama every
success, during his term as Chairperson-in-Office of
the OSCE, in implementing the three key objectives
highlighted in his briefing.
Mr. Van Shalkwyk (South Africa): South Africa
would like to thank Prime Minister Rama for his
briefing in his capacity as Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE). We wish to commend the good work that he
continues to do in his region to support the maintenance
of international peace and security.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in the area of
peace and security remains a priority for my delegation,
and we welcome all efforts made to strengthen the
relationship between the OSCE and the United Nations.
This year marks the seventy-fifth anniversary of
the United Nations — the Organization that we value
as the embodiment of multilateralism and cooperation,
particularly in upholding human rights and maintaining
international peace and security, as well as promoting
economic development. The three pillars of the United
Nations are all bolstered through engagements with

20-0302913/19

S/PV.8714

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

regional organizations that have insight into the
local contexts in which they operate. South Africa’s
support for that relationship is rooted in our belief
that multilateralism is strengthened through enhanced
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations.
Article 54 of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations, under which the OSCE is briefing the
Council today, envisages strong cooperation between
the Security Council and regional organizations in the
maintenance of international peace and security. Every
regional organization faces a unique set of peace and
security challenges that are determined by the regions
in which they operate and the manner in which such
threats are addressed.
Therefore, increased cooperation with the Security
Council remains critical. My delegation does not believe
that the efforts of regional organizations in maintaining
international peace and security absolve the Council of
its Charter-mandated responsibilities as the custodian
of international peace and security. Their efforts
complement each other, and it is for that reason that
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations remains so important.
New and emerging security threats continue to
undermine the ways in which we prevent and address
challenges, which may be faced by more than one region.
In that regard, it may be useful for regional bodies to
also cooperate and share experiences, as well as best
practices. Deeper cooperation between the African
Union — and more specifically its Peace and Security
Council — and the OSCE, for example, could contribute
to achieving regional and cross-regional peace and
security objectives and addressing challenges.
Turning to one of the key areas of the OSCE’s
work, South Africa welcomes the meeting of the
Foreign Ministers of the four Normandy format
countries — Ukraine, Germany, France and
Russia — held in Paris in December 2019. My
delegation also wishes to commend the OSCE on its
efforts in Ukraine, as it diligently executes its mandate
in monitoring the implementation of the 2015 Minsk
agreements endorsed by resolution 2202 (2015) on
resolving the conflict in eastern Ukraine. In that regard,
it remains necessary for all parties to implement their
respective commitments under the Minsk agreements.
It is important for the OSCE Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine to have unhindered access to monitor
14/19

06/02/2020

and verify compliance with the Minsk agreements in
terms of its mandate. In that regard, we also encourage
all the parties to strengthen all diplomatic efforts to
produce a sustainable and peaceful solution.
Let me conclude by joining other Council members
in commending Mr. Rama’s efforts to prioritize the
women and peace and security agenda, as that is also a
priority for South Africa, and the full implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): First of all, we are grateful for
the presence of Mr. Edi Rama, Prime Minister and
Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs of Albania and
Chairman-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), among us today.
We are confident that his experience and leadership will
contribute significantly to achieving the Organization’s
goals. We take this opportunity to congratulate Foreign
Minister Lajčák and the Slovak chairmanship on the
successes achieved during his term.
We recognize that the OSCE’s priorities are
consistent with the work being done in the United Nations
and the Security Council, namely, inter alia, ensuring
the continuity of political commitments, preventing
escalation, improving security and strengthening
dialogue. We note that its vision and challenges are
also in line with multilateralism, regional security and
hopes for achieving peace through political dialogue.
We commend the Normandy format meeting held
in Paris on 9 December 2019 with the support of the
Trilateral Contact Group. The meeting resulted in the
exchange of 200 prisoners between Russia and Ukraine
on 29 December 2019 under the supervision and
facilitation of the OSCE. That sends a positive message
that we are moving in a new direction, and we hope that
other confidence-building measures opening up new
avenues, including the holding of another Normandy
format summit in the near future, will become a reality.
Mr. Rama’s recent visit to Ukraine has given
an important impulse to the efforts of the Special
Monitoring Mission in that country. We hope that
resolving that conflict will remain a priority objective
for the Mission, in line with the Council’s concern and
willingness to contribute to a peaceful settlement of the
conflict through the effective implementation of the
Minsk agreements.
20-03029

06/02/2020

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

The Dominican Republic welcomes the fact that
combating violence against women, which is a matter
of great importance to the United Nations, is among the
urgent issues on the OSCE agenda. In addition, we note
with interest the willingness to promote dialogue with
a view to reversing the increase in hate crimes and hate
speech and fostering tolerance and non-discrimination,
as well as exchanges on environmental protection. The
OSCE is an important regional hub for such issues,
covering more than a billion people, and aligns with the
highest interests of the United Nations.
In conclusion, we reiterate our support for the OSCE
and the efforts of the co-Chairs of the Minsk Group
with regard to the Nagorno Karabakh conflict and the
Transnistrian settlement process. We wish the Albanian
chairpersonship every success with its agenda for the
new session and call for its comprehensive work plan
to be taken up with energy and determination, with the
support of the Council, in the interest of strengthening
multilateralism and its contribution to the maintenance
of international peace and security.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), Prime Minister and Minister for Europe and
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Albania, Mr. Edi
Rama, for his briefing on the work of the Organization
and the issues on its agenda.

S/PV. 8714

guidelines on international cooperation developed
by the Security Council. We believe that in order to
promote non-consensus initiatives, such as the concept
of countering violent extremism, which some members
of the OSCE are trying to do, is to move in the wrong
direction. We support the plan of the United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism and the OSCE to organize
a conference on the issue of the return of foreign
terrorist fighters, on 11 and 12 February in Vienna, and
look forward to its success.
The time has come to significantly enhance
the OSCE’s work on combating the drug threat. We
welcome the plans of the Chairperson-in-Office to
organize an anti-drug conference. Over the past year,
the OSCE’s work on security in the context of the
use of information and communication technologies
has gained new momentum. We hope it will maintain
a constructive attitude when considering that issue.
Priority should be given to ensuring that negotiations
on international information security continue, under
the auspices of the United Nations, with a view to
developing universal agreements on rules of responsible
conduct in cyberspace. Such rules should enshrine
equal status for all States in their participation in and
governance of the Internet.

The Russian Federation has consistently advocated
strengthening cooperation between the United Nations
and the OSCE on the basis of Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations and the 2006 declaration
of the OSCE Permanent Council. We believe that this
regional organization should complement global efforts
on the European continent. We hope that the current
Albanian Chairperson-in-Office of the OSCE will
clearly follow his organization’s mandate, play the role
of honest broker in achieving consensus and promoting
the collective interests and priorities of OSCE member
States, and maintain a neutral approach.

In an era of an ongoing global trend of deteriorating
mutual trust, regional organizations, including the
OSCE, have a special mission to restore an atmosphere
of mutual understanding in order to resolve crisis
situations in their regions. The main criterion for
effectiveness in that regard is, of course, contributing
to conflict resolution. For our part, we are striving to
provide every possible assistance to efforts within the
framework of the OSCE. As co-Chair of the Minsk
Group, we are actively supporting the resolution of the
Nagorno Karabakh conflict and working to bring the
sides closer together in the Transnistrian settlement
process. We welcome the cooperation between the
United Nations and the OSCE in the Balkans, as well
as the fact that the two bodies will co-chair the Geneva
discussions on stability in the Caucasus.

Cooperation between the two organizations is, in
practice, fairly broad in scope, although there remains
room for its further strengthening. For example,
the OSCE still has considerable potential to combat
transnational threats, in particular those posed by
foreign terrorist fighters, the financing of terrorism
and the spread of extremist ideology. On counterterrorism, it is important to adhere strictly to the

Naturally, when speaking about country situations
on the OSCE agenda, it is impossible not to mention the
internal crisis in Ukraine. The OSCE has been playing
a very positive role in its settlement and the package of
measures under the Minsk agreement is the only path
to that end. That fundamental document, endorsed by
the Security Council in resolution 2202 (2015), calls
for direct dialogue among Kyiv, Donetsk and Lugansk,

20-0302915/19

S/PV.8714

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

for which the Trilateral Contact Group was formed.
The Special Monitoring Mission (SMM), whose work
we support, plays a key role in OSCE assistance.
The Mission should report as fully and objectively as
possible on the situation, including on civilian casualties
and the destruction of civilian infrastructure, and have
direct contact with local authorities in Donbas. We call
on the OSCE Chairperson-in-Office to ensure that the
SMM publishes thematic reports on civilian victims of
the conflict in Donbas and the destruction of civilian
infrastructure over the entire course of the conflict.
Unfortunately, despite significant diplomatic
efforts, the crisis in Ukraine is still far from being
resolved. In that context, we call for an impartial
response to the regular statements from Kyiv about
its desire to revise the Minsk agreements. By the way,
12 February will mark five years since the agreements
were signed. The Security Council expressed its full
support for the agreements in resolution 2202 (2015)
and confirmed that support in presidential statement
S/PRST/2018/12 of 6 June 2018.
There are many examples of Kyiv’s revisionist
approach. One need only quote the representative
of Kyiv at the Trilateral Contact Group, Mr. Oleksii
Reznikov, who, in an interview on 23 January, said
that the position of President Zelenskyy remained
unchanged and could be summarized by the fact that
the Minsk agreements should be at least partially
revised. It would be interesting to hear the views of our
French and German colleagues on how such a statement
aligns with their vision of the future of the Ukrainian
peace process.

06/02/2020

present Russia as a party to the conflict — which defies
all facts and common sense — thereby contributing to
the efforts of the Kyiv authorities to shirk responsibility.
They are basically giving Kyiv carte blanche for any
discriminatory action that it may take against its
own Russian-speaking citizens. By the way, from the
statements of some of our colleagues here, who make
up fantasies about human rights violations in Crimea,
some people might get the impression that the region,
which has rejoined Russia, is somehow closed off to
foreign visitors and that no one is allowed to go in. That
is obviously just a fantasy. Crimea is completely open
for any kind of visits that are conducted in accordance
with Russian law. That can be confirmed by tourists,
of whom there were some 7 million last year. I would
therefore ask Ms. Pierce to stop inventing things. I invite
her to come and visit Crimea to see how people live.
Despite the contradictory signals from the
Zelenskyy team, we would like to believe that, with
the arrival of the new administration in Kyiv, they will
finally understand what is obvious — any resolution of
the situation in the east of the country will be impossible
without the direct participation of the people of those
regions. Here in the United Nations, that is known as
inclusivity. Guided by that principle, we call on the
opposing sides of conflicts everywhere to engage in
direct communication — from Afghanistan to Syria
and Yemen, from Cyprus to Colombia and Venezuela.
Only the population of Donbas is being denied that
obvious right.

When will they stop denying the obvious? Over
the past five years, Kyiv has not fulfilled a single
political commitment, has used every possible excuse
to refrain from holding a dialogue with its own citizens
and has continued to claim a non-existent Russian
aggression without offering any evidence thereof.
Unfortunately, we can deduce from the words of our
colleagues, including the Permanent Representative of
Germany, that they remain prepared to support such
claims, despite the fact that they have been refuted by
the former Chief Monitor of the Special Monitoring
Mission, Mr. Ertuğrul Apakan, in this very Chamber.

We would like to believe that the OSCE understands
the absurdity of the situation and that it is a non-starter.
We hope that the new Ukrainian leadership will realize
how damaging it is to promote confrontational initiatives
that only divide society and restrict the linguistic,
educational, religious and cultural rights of the Russianspeaking population and other national minorities. The
Kyiv authorities must do the very opposite and try
once again to win the trust of people whose interests
and vital beliefs were desecrated by the authors of the
anti-constitutional Maidan coup d’état. The goal of the
OSCE is to assist way that process in every possible,
which is critical to the future of Ukraine, rather than
abet the short-sighted and noxious nationalistic relapses
still prevalent in Ukrainian society.

Overall, as we have heard from the statements of
our Western colleagues, none of them has ever read the
Minsk agreements or even intends to read them. It would
seem more advantageous to continue to stubbornly

We believe that the OSCE can and should play a
significant role in the establishment of multilateralism
as a systematic basis for international relations based
on international law, contributing in every way to the

16/19

20-03029

06/02/2020

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

construction of a system of equal, comprehensive system
and indivisible security. That is why we are interested
in strengthening the role and authority of the OSCE and
in expanding its cooperation with the United Nations,
as that relationship has tremendous potential. We look
forward to seeing the Albanian chairmanship-in-office
contribute to that endeavour.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Belgium.
I wish to begin by congratulating Prime
Minister Edi Rama and his country on assuming the
chairmanship-in-office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCЕ).
As the largest regional security organization, the
OSCE plays a key role in promoting dialogue, building
confidence and preventing conflict from the western
Balkans to Central Asia. We welcome the goals set
and presented by the OSCE Chairperson-in-Office. He
can count on Belgium’s support in reaching them. I am
convinced that they will contribute to the promotion of
peace and security, for which the Security Council is a
guarantor. I would like to make three points.
First, we welcome the priority Mr. Rama intends
to give to the Ukrainian crisis, as demonstrated by
his recent visit to that country. The crisis is one of the
gravest violations of the founding principles of the OSCE
and, I recall, of the Charter of the United Nations. We
underline the OSCE’s constructive role on this issue,
particularly through its Special Monitoring Mission to
Ukraine. The Mission’s mandate must be respected,
which requires secure, unconditional and unhindered
access to all of Ukrainian territory, including in Crimea
and along the border with Russia.
We call on all parties to work for a lasting solution
to the conflict, which must be based on respect for
the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of Ukraine within its internationally
recognized borders. Dialogue is crucial in that regard,
both in the Normandy format and within the framework
of the Trilateral Contact Group, which can be fully
effective only if the ceasefire is scrupulously applied
on the ground.
Secondly, I highlight Mr. Rama’s desire to combat
violence against women and girls and to promote their
role in matters of peace and security. Twenty years after
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), the integration

S/PV. 8714

of the gender dimension in all our activities must
remain a priority. We welcome the commitments made
in this area by the OSCE in April 2019. This twentieth
anniversary must be used as an opportunity to make
an honest assessment of our progress and to chart a
path forward.
Respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms are core elements of the OSCE comprehensive
security concept. Unfortunately, we note a disturbing
deterioration in the human rights situation in many
regions where the OSCE is active. In that regard,
we share Mr. Rama’s desire to promote tolerance
and non-discrimination with a view to combating
hate speech.
Thirdly, the OSCE plays a key role in preventing
and combating transnational threats, such as terrorism,
organized crime and trafficking in human beings. This
last point is a priority for our country, as evidenced
by the organization by Belgium of an Arria Formula
meeting on 25 October 2019. We welcome the good
cooperation between the OSСЕ and the United Nations
in that regard, particularly in the context of the
Inter-Agency Coordination Group against Trafficking
in Persons, chaired by UN-Women and the OSCЕ. This
unique and innovative model is an example of effective
multilateralism, and we would do well to replicate it
throughout the United Nations system.
In conclusion, Belgium supports the strengthening
and deepening of synergies between the United
Nations and the OSCE. The various dimensions of
the OSCE reflect an integrated approach to security,
which is necessary for the establishment of lasting
peace — objectives that the Council must support.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The representative of Germany has asked for the
floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I am still a bit speechless
after having listened to the fairy tale of our Russian
colleague. I am under the impression that, if we
continue our discussions about Ukraine, one day our
Russian colleague will say that Ukraine invaded Russia
and not the other way around.
I hope that next time our colleague mentions the
implementation of the Minsk agreements, he will finally
react to what actually happened after the signing of the
Minsk agreements, the most important provision of

20-0302917/19

S/PV.8714

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

which was an immediate ceasefire, which was not upheld
by Russia. Instead, Russia continued the fight against
the city of Debaltseve. That was at the beginning of the
implementation of the Minsk agreements and made it
very difficult subsequently to convince the Ukrainians
to believe in those agreements and implement them. As
I said before, we congratulate our Ukrainian friends on
implementing the Minsk agreements.
With regard to the statement of our Russian
colleague, I missed a mentioning in it of the downing of
Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17, where Russian rockets
brought down a plane, killing 298 people. We all
remember the Russian rebels celebrating the successful
downing of the plane. To date, there has been no
compensation paid by Russia regarding the victims of
that incident.
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of the Russian Federation has asked for the floor to
make a further statement.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are always impressed by the institutional
memory of Mr. Heusgen, who took part in the negotiations
on drafting the Minsk agreements, although his memory
has recently started to significantly fail him.
Regarding the aggression against Ukraine, in recent
history there is only one example of such aggression,
namely, on 22 June 1941. We will not mention the
country that carried out that aggression, particularly
since the nationalistic forces in Ukraine are trying to
forget about it and, in fact, echo Mr. Heusgen’s words
about the supposed Russian aggression.
I will not return to the issue of Flight MH-17. Our
position is well known. There is no convincing evidence.
Russia has not been involved in the investigation. I do
not think that this is a topic for our discussion today.
I would just urge Mr. Heusgen to act responsibly.
He is promoting some very good initiatives, which
we support — children in armed conflict and women,
peace and security. Each statement in which he abets the
Ukrainians’ unwillingness to engage in dialogue with
their own people does not theoretically promote those
initiatives that he supports but has a concrete impact on
the women and children in Donbas who are dying due
to the bullets of Ukrainian soldiers. He should think
about that next time he makes a statement.
18/19

06/02/2020

The President (spoke in French): I now give
the floor to Mr. Rama to respond to the questions
and comments.
Mr. Rama: In his opening remarks, Ambassador
Heusgen very kindly mentioned that I play a sport that
is all about jumping higher than the others. But I want to
make sure that everyone knows that I see the Albanian
chairmanship of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) as a mission to remain
on the ground. I am well aware that what we, Albania,
can contribute to doing in 2020 is not to compete with
any of the giants that are involved in formulas, contact
groups, forums or formats because it is up to them to
push for an ultimate solution.
What we can do and how we can add value is not
to forget that, while there are discussions at the highest
levels and exchanges such as the one we witnessed,
there are people dying. I want representatives to know
that more than 4 million people on both sides of the
contact line, who have benefited from the OSCE Special
Monitoring Mission to Ukraine facilitating ceasefires,
are part of that tragic daily life. Let me recount that
since December 2019, there have been 20,000 incidents,
including 7,000 explosions, and 69 people killed after
the ceasefire was declared and accepted by the sides.
That is not an insignificant number although, in general,
the number of casualties has dramatically decreased.
I would join those who praised President Zelenskyy
because I think that he is contributing, through not easy
steps, to opening up a more intense and more fruitful
dialogue. The exchange of a large group of detainees
on 29 December was particularly important. But I also
wish to underline that there is something factual. I
do not want to take the difficult path of taking sides
but I wish to say something factual, namely, that
there is a widespread sentiment based on facts that
the Ukrainian side is talking with proxies. That is the
problem. Something much more substantial is therefore
needed on the Russian side by way of contribution
and influence because we all know that it can have an
important influence on the sides on the ground.
I visited the area and, as I shared with you,
Mr. President, one cannot believe the situation, even
being there. It is like a post-apocalyptic film, with
10,000 people on average walking to cross a tiny river
through a bridge whose width is that of an ambulance,
not larger. Incidentally, an ambulance can still not get
to its destination because there is not yet an agreement
20-03029

06/02/2020

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

to allow even terminal patients to reach hospital. They
have to get out of the ambulance and walk. There are
patients who die while walking in extreme cold — I can
say that I had never experienced anything like that — and
wind. Ninety per cent of those 10,000 people are elderly
people. They have to cross to the other side to get their
pensions and for pharmaceuticals.
I do not think that it is difficult for both sides to
reach a common understanding regarding those people,
who belong to God, while they are asking if they are
Russians or Ukrainians and eligible for this or that. It
would be appropriate to give them the opportunity to
bring their dying family members to hospital without
having to stop in the middle of the way. So that is what
I think we can, and will, try to do during this year.
In answer to the question of the Estonian
Ambassador about how the OSCE and the United
Nations can do more, we must cooperate more because,
after the United Nations, the OSCE is the second largest
organization, with 57 member States, 1 billion people
and very many issues.
Frankly, we have to do more to make sure that what
was agreed in 1975 remains valid. Territorial integrity,
stability and sovereignty should be respected. In 1975, I
was a pioneer with a red scarf in a country that was the
North Korea of Europe — the only country that not only
refused to join the OSCE but bashed the Helsinki Final
Act as a new law for the degeneration of both the West
and the East. Coming from such a place and looking at
the world today, I can say that the Helsinki principles
are still valid. However, while following current
developments, it often seems that those principles are
being used to fight each other rather than as a basis for
coming together to resolve our issues.

S/PV. 8714

My final point is that I think the possibility of a
United Nations peacekeeping operation in the area under
discussion should not be excluded. That is because there
is something very disturbing about the situation there.
The Special Monitoring Mission has brought about a
lot of a lot of change and has, as my Russian colleague
said, made an important contribution. However, that
is only during the day. Once night falls, it is back to
bases and there are explosions and shooting. We have
been able to make good progress thanks to the use of
technology, because while the Special Monitoring
Mission personnel cannot monitor the entire border
24 hours a day, video surveillance can.
A United Nations peacekeeping operation should
therefore be considered by all, particularly as a tool
to give the process substance in the minds of all those
who must guarantee the ceasefire, given that ongoing
work to implement agreements, formulas and formats
may take a long time. I was very impressed that one
of the Council members today brought up the need to
implement something that was already decided in 2008.
From 2008 to 2020 — a dozen years — people have
died, people have suffered and risking their lives while
the conflict is still unresolved and may remain so.
That is all I have to say here. The OSCE and the
United Nations can do what the parties to the conflict,
and perhaps the facilitators, too, are not able to
provide — a better life for the normal people who are
going through hell while the back and forth continues.
The situation is not particularly promising as it could
continue for ages.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

20-0302919/19
