S/PV.8731

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8731st meeting

Monday, 24 February 2020, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Belgium)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Yao Shaojun
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Auväärt
Mr. Michon
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Aougi
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. DeShong
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Ladeb
Mr. Allen
Mr. Hunter
Mr. Dinh

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia (S/2020/121)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-04891 (E)
*2004891*

S/PV.8731

The situation in Somalia

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Somalia (S/2020/121)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Somalia to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. James Swan,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia; Mr. Francisco Caetano José Madeira, Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission for Somalia and Head of the African Union
Mission in Somalia; and Mr. Dan Smith, Director of the
Stockholm International Peace Research Institute
Mr. Madeira is joining this meeting via videoteleconference from Addis Ababa.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2020/121, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia.
I now give the floor to Mr. Swan.
Mr. Swan: The year 2020 has the potential to be
a transformative year for Somalia. A number of key
national priorities are due to conclude and will impact
Somalia’s trajectory for years to come. Last October,
at the Somalia Partnership Forum, Somalia and its
international partners agreed on the main priorities
on which Somalia must not fail in 2020. Those include
achieving debt relief, holding one-person-one-vote
elections, finalizing the federal constitution, advancing
the fight against Al-Shabaab and consolidating the
federal State.
Already, there has been good progress on Somalia’s
economic priorities. The Executive Boards of the
International Monetary Fund and the World Bank
have confirmed Somalia’s eligibility for debt relief
2/21

24/02/2020

under the enhanced Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
Initiative. That milestone demonstrates that, with
unity and common purpose, the federal Government
and federal member states can achieve even highly
ambitious goals. There has been progress, too, in the
passage of key legislation to strengthen Somalia’s fiscal
framework, such as the Companies Act and the Public
Financial Management Act. The 2020 budget, approved
by Parliament and signed by President Mohamed
Abdullahi Mohamed Farmajo, reflects steadily
increasing revenue generation.
In the area of human rights, Somalia has submitted
its first-ever treaty report on the Convention Against
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, signed the African Union
Convention for the Protection and Assistance of
Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) in Africa and
approved its national policy on refugees, returnees
and IDPs.
As I reported to the Council in November (see
S/PV.8671), for Somalia to navigate the remaining
challenges and achieve its ambitious priorities, all
Somalia’s stakeholders must work together in the
national interest. That responsibility begins with
Somalia’s leaders. It is for them to engage in dialogue in
a spirit of national unity and set aside narrow political
interests to strengthen Somalia’s State, security
and prosperity.
In my last remarks to the Council, I welcomed the
meeting in November between the President and some
political party leaders. Regrettably, those consultations
have not continued. Meanwhile, the Federal President
and federal member state leaders have not met together
as a group since May 2019. The protracted absence of
a broad political consensus on the way forward in 2020
remains a threat to further progress.
In December, I led representatives of the African
Union, the European Union and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development in a series of consultations
with political leaders and civil society groups in the
federal member states, as well as with the federal
executive and legislative branches and other key
stakeholders. We briefed President Farmajo on our
findings and emphasized the urgent need to resume
dialogue. We and international partners stand ready to
support that, as required.
While technical advances across political, security,
economic and humanitarian agendas have continued,
20-04891

24/02/2020

The situation in Somalia

I must underscore that those gains will quickly reach
their limits without the necessary political agreements.
I call on Somalia’s leaders as a matter of urgency to meet
and engage in dialogue on Somalia’s national priorities.
In 2020, Somalia will face a critical test of its
State-building progress through the holding of historic
one-person-one-vote elections. In recent years, Somalia
has established a track record of regular, peaceful
transfers of power. That commendable achievement
must now be preserved in 2020. In addition, a move to
one-person-one vote elections will mean a shift from
the elders-based selection of recent political cycles to
direct voting by the people of Somalia.
The new electoral code has now been approved
by the House of the People and the Upper House and
signed into law by the President. While an important
step, the new law, regrettably, does not address many
outstanding questions necessary to implement the code.
Those questions relate to the locations of constituencies,
how to guarantee 30 per cent of seats for women and the
modalities to enable Somalis from across the country
to participate. I call on the Federal Parliament, in
collaboration with the National Independent Electoral
Commission (NIEC) and in consultation with the
Federal Government, the federal member states and
other stakeholders, to resolve those issues urgently so
that technical preparations can get under way. That
must include the federal member States ensuring that
the NIEC can maintain offices across the country to
organize elections.
Elections must also be held in Somaliland, where
parliamentary elections were last held in 2005. I urge
the authorities and all political actors to find a way
through the current impasse for both parliamentary and
local elections to take place in Somaliland before the
end of 2020.
Political space and debate will be an essential
component in the year ahead in Somalia to enable
candidates, journalists, civil society and international
partners to engage frankly in the political discourse.
We especially look forward to hearing the voices of
women, young people and minorities in an open debate
on Somalia’s future.
Continued efforts towards reconciliation will also
be necessary to forge unity on Somalia’s future. We
call on political actors in Galmudug and Jubaland in
particular to engage in dialogue, refrain from violence
and avoid divisions that will be exploited by Al-Shabaab.

S/PV. 8731

We note that recent security deployments in Jubaland’s
Gedo region have led instead to increased tension.
Turning to the security situation, let me first pay
tribute to the courage of the Somali National Army
(SNA) and the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) in confronting Al-Shabaab. There has been
steady, commendable progress in rebuilding Somalia’s
security institutions, including implementation
of biometric registration, electronic payment of
salaries for the security forces and personnel records.
Unfortunately, military operations have slowed since
mid-2019 and force generation has, to date, not been
sufficient for the tasks required in 2020, including
priority operations against Al-Shabaab and reopening
main supply routes. Despite the efforts of the SNA,
AMISOM and international partners, regrettably,
Al-Shabaab retains the ability to conduct large-scale
attacks in Mogadishu, including against the United
Nations and the international community. In the
recently recovered areas in Lower Shabelle, it is also
able to generate significant revenue through extortion,
as well as conduct operations beyond Somalia’s borders.
It is essential that the Somali Government clarify
its operational priorities and generate the forces
necessary to enable operations to degrade Al-Shabaab,
defend recently recovered areas and reopen main
supply routes. Those operations must be conducted
with respect for human rights and sequenced with the
return of legitimate local governance, the rule of law
and stabilization activities in order to be sustainable.
AMISOM has committed to implementing the
reduction of 1,000 soldiers by 28 February, as decided
by the Security Council in resolution 2472 (2019). Prior
to the drawdown, the Somali Government, AMISOM
and the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
prepared a joint threat assessment, as requested by the
Council and by the African Union Peace and Security
Council. AMISOM remains essential to maintaining
security under current circumstances, but it is also time
to begin inclusive discussions on the strategic outlook
and requirements to enable AMISOM to progressively
hand over security ownership to the Somali authorities
in a manner that preserves hard-won gains while
achieving greater strategic effect against Al-Shabaab.
Vulnerable Somalis continue to face extreme
humanitarian challenges. Back-to-back droughts,
flooding, conflict and insecurity have left 5.2 million
people in Somalia in need of assistance — that was before

20-048913/21

S/PV.8731

The situation in Somalia

the worst locust outbreak Somalia has experienced in
25 years. The Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations is supporting the Government in
mitigating the potentially catastrophic impact on food
security. I call on donors to urgently provide funding
and support for the 2020 humanitarian response plan.
In the longer term, we must align behind the Somali
Government’s national development plan to advance
humanitarian, development and peacebuilding goals.
Regional cooperation is essential to addressing the
many challenges in the Horn of Africa. I welcome the
efforts of the President and regional leaders to resolve
differences and strengthen ties. In that regard, we note
that the Ethiopian Prime Minister, Mr. Abiy Ahmed,
arranged a meeting earlier this month between President
Farmajo and the Somaliland President, Mr. Muse Bihi
Abdi. We look forward to their further engagement
with a view to constructive dialogue.
There is much to do in the year ahead. Only by
working together — as Somalis, as partners, and
in a spirit of unity and compromise — will progress
be made. Further impetus and consensus-building
are needed to ensure that key 2020 benchmarks for
elections, security and relations between the Federal
Government and federal member states do not fall
further behind schedule. I look forward to Somalia’s
leaders taking the bold steps necessary to enable such
progress in this critical year. I also look forward to
the United Nations continuing to play its role through
the full implementation of the mandate authorized by
the Council.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Swan
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Madeira.
Mr. Madeira: This is a crucial year for Somalia,
in which the country is expected to deliver on pressing
national priorities. Inclusive politics, elections and debt
relief under the advancement of the transition plan are
just some of the most immediate of those priorities. So
far, the signs are positive, despite the many challenges.
On 25 August, with the support of the international
community and partner organizations and after due
consultations with the Federal Government of Somalia
and the Galmudug authorities, the African Union
Mission to Somalia (AMISOM) deployed forces in
Dhuusamarreeb, with the purpose of helping to create a
reassuring atmosphere for the reconciliation conference
4/21

24/02/2020

to take place and support the establishment of security
conditions for the ensuing electoral process to evolve in
a peaceful and violence-free environment.
The successful holding of the Federal Government’s
promoted Galmudug reconciliation conference resulted
in the stakeholders agreeing on the modalities for the
election. The state formation effort was given a boost
with the successful conclusion of the negotiations
regarding the quota of parliamentary seats to be
reserved for Ahl Al-Sunna Wal-Jama’a, which opened
the way for the state electoral process to begin and the
election of the 89-member state Assembly and other
organs of the state to take place.
We made it clear then and we make it clear now
that the election was but one step in the right direction
among the many that are required. The reality on
the ground in Galmudug, under the paralysis of state
institutions, demands that the primacy of politics
remain at the forefront of all efforts under way to once
again make Galmudug a functioning and viable federal
member state that is capable of achieving sustainable
peace and providing for its people. In that context, the
inclusive politics momentum that was garnered with
the successful holding of the Galmudug reconciliation
conference should be harnessed and enhanced, not lost.
A lot remains to be done to make Galmudug a strong,
vibrant and reconciled society.
We therefore urge the leadership of Galmudug to
continue to work in earnest to ensure that no genuine
Galmudug stakeholder is alienated and that all 11 clans
that constitute the state of Galmudug have a guaranteed
place around the table where their future is being shaped
and their destiny sealed. It is therefore important that
we, the international partners engaged with helping
Somalia overcome its present challenges, continue
to work in earnest to encourage the Somali people
to embrace and emulate the spirit and letter of the
Dhuusamarreeb reconciliation conference and ensure
that genuine dialogue and harmonious interaction
are established between the leadership of the federal
member states and their communities and between the
Federal Government of Somalia and the governments
of the federal member states.
It is AMISOM’s strong belief that this multifaceted
interaction, if supported, harnessed and sustained,
will unlock the immense reconciliation capacity of the
Somali people, the most assured pathway to sustainable
peace in Somalia.
20-04891

24/02/2020

The situation in Somalia

We applaud the Federal Government’s continued
commitment to fostering dialogue among the Somali
people, as demonstrated by the recent meeting between
President Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed Farmajo and
Mr. Muse Bihi Abdi of Somaliland, in the margins of
the thirty-third African Union Assembly, earlier this
month. This is a very encouraging development and a
source of great hope for the future of Somalia.
As I noted earlier, Somalia is embarking on an
important year, and one of the most important priorities
this year is the organization of peaceful and credible
national suffrage for the election of members of the
Federal Parliament and that of the Federal President.
The fact that Somalia’s federal electoral law has been
approved by the House of the People and signed into law
by President Farmajo a few days ago is an important and
very positive development. We at AMISOM recognize
that there are still a number of important issues to be
ironed out in order to ensure the unhindered and smooth
implementation of the electoral law, but we remain
optimistic and confident that the momentum gained
in the last two months will continue and that whatever
obstacles may stand in the way of the elections in the
last quarter of this year will be successfully overcome.
For this, a lot of responsibility has been placed
in the hands of the National Independent Electoral
Commission and Ms. Halima Ismail Ibrahim, its
Chair. It is our duty to support her in this endeavour
by providing the Commission with the commensurate
material and financial resources it will need; the
security and mobility that will be indispensable for the
effective holding of the election; and the expertise that
it will require, in terms of both regular electoral staff
and specialized personnel. We at the African Union
reaffirm our continued readiness to support the peace
process, both technically and in terms of security.
We are galvanized by the tenacity, steadfastness
and resilience with which the Federal Government of
Somalia has been implementing its commitment to
the terms agreed with the Bretton Woods Institutions.
This capacity to stay the course against all odds is now
paying off. Somalia has met the required benchmarks
under the fourth staff-monitored programme with
regard to domestic revenue, mobilization, public
financial management, financial-sector stability, and
compliance with anti-money-laundering and combating
the financing of terrorism. As a result, early this month
the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank
agreed that Somalia is now eligible for assistance

S/PV. 8731

under the enhanced Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
initiative. We congratulate the Federal Government of
Somalia on that great achievement.
The recently concluded threat assessment indicates
that Al-Shabaab remains resilient and retains the
capacity to carry out attacks against the Somali
security forces, AMISOM and innocent civilians,
mostly using improvised explosive devices, mortars
and targeted assassinations.
In a concerted effort to degrade and contain the
enemy, AMISOM and its partners continue to support
the Somali security forces with ground and air operations
focusing on Al-Shabaab’s presence and activities in
Middle Shabelle, Lower Shabelle, Middle Juba and
Mogadishu. The implementation of the transition
plan remains the rallying point of our mandated
tasks towards 2021. Our operations in this regard are
confronted with challenges related to the slow pace in
the generation and equipping of the Somali security
forces; the lack of sustained intelligence, surveillance,
and reconnaissance capability service; and inadequate
logistics support for the Somali National Army.
As mandated by the Council under resolution
2472 (2019), AMISOM is required to draw down
another 1,000 of its troops, the third batch since 2018.
This is a task that is ongoing and will be completed
by 28 February. The drawdown will be on a pro rata
basis. There will be, however, consideration for a threat
assessment when reconfiguring the remaining forces
within our sectors.
The current politics of drawdown are a complete
mismatch with the reality obtaining in the theatre of
operations. The process of generating adequate, welltrained, well-equipped and logistically well-supported
Somali forces to take over security responsibilities for
AMISOM is not in tandem with the targets and timelines
we have set for ourselves in the transition plan. The
process is slow, underfunded, profoundly dependent on
the goodwill of individual partners, with no shared and
coordinated training plans and no evident correlation
with the need to generate, in a timely manner, forces
capable of taking full security responsibility from
AMISOM and allow the completion of the current
transition by 2021. As a result, the AMISOM forces
that, per the transition plan and concept of operations,
are supposed to be reconfigured into more flexible and
more mobile forces capable of sustainably going out and
taking on and degrading the enemy are the same forces

20-048915/21

S/PV.8731

The situation in Somalia

that are currently still holding the bulk of the population
centres they have liberated from Al-Shabaab.
In that context, the operations they can undertake
against the enemy cannot go beyond a limited distance
from the population centres they are holding. These
negatively impact the task of securing the main supply
routes, the pursuit of the enemy through its strongholds
and the capturing and holding of new territory from
Al-Shabaab.
The Security Council may wish to look more
closely into the reality that is confronting our forces and
those of the Federal Republic of Somalia in the theatre
of operations and consider the additional measures that
need to be taken to allow pressure to be exerted on
Al-Shabaab in a sustainable, consistent and relentless
manner so that the enemy can be effectively degraded
and the Lower Shabelle successful joint operations
extended to much wider Somali territorial expanses.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Madeira for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Smith.
Mr. Smith: I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for
the opportunity to speak to the Council today about the
effect of climate-related impacts on peace operations in
Somalia. This is a glimpse into the world of tomorrow,
in which peace operations will be undertaken in
security environments that are increasingly influenced
by climate and vulnerable to its vagaries.
The mandate renewals in 2018 and 2019 for
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
(UNSOM) referred to the impact of climate change.
Against that background, my institute, the Stockholm
International Peace Research Institute, has explored the
evidence of climate impact, assessed the risks it poses
and identified responses. We released our report in late
2019, and my briefing today summarizes its findings.
In a nutshell, floods and droughts in Somalia
exacerbate conflict and displacement, thereby
increasing the risk that the efforts of UNSOM and the
work of the Federal Government of Somalia to build
peace will be undermined. The pressure of weather
events is part of what challenges the current powersharing agreement, providing, inter alia, recruitment
opportunities for the Al-Shabaab terrorist organization.
Turning that around, so that the response to climate
variability creates opportunities for peacebuilding, is
6/21

24/02/2020

perhaps the essence of the challenge facing the Federal
Government of Somalia and UNSOM. Addressing the
negative impact of environmental change on peace
operations could offer an opportunity to build a
positive relationship between environmental resilience
and sustainable peace.
I do not need to explain to the Council the
contours of conflict in Somalia. Conflicts persist
among competing clans and ideological and political
groups. There are both national and local conflicts,
and both types feed each other. The local conflicts are
often closely linked with access to natural resources,
especially land, fisheries and water. The ownership
of resources is closely linked to livelihoods and ways
of life and therefore to markers of communal identity,
which makes conflict particularly hard to resolve or
even manage and embeds the influence of climate deep
within the factors that shape the prospects of security
and insecurity — peace or conflict — in Somalia.
Let us therefore turn to the country’s climate. Our
report does not argue that climate defines everything
in Somalia or elsewhere. But the evidence is that if
our analysis leaves out nature, including climate, then
the analysis is incomplete. Somalia experiences some
of the world’s highest mean annual temperatures and
has long been prone to extreme weather conditions.
In the six decades since 1960, the country has
experienced a gradual and continuous increase in mean
annual temperature. While the conflicts have made
data collection and tracking difficult, in 2007, the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)
projected a temperature increase of between 3.2°C
and 4.3°C by the end of the twenty-first century — far
exceeding tolerable levels. Meanwhile, rainfall is erratic
and varies widely between the seasons and from year to
year. In 2014, the IPCC projected more rain for Somalia
in the coming decades, with the rain falling more
intensely, thus generating a high and growing risk of
flooding and soil erosion.
Consequently, seasons and weather are hard
to predict. This uncertainty has a direct impact on
everyday life for a people who are highly dependent
on agriculture for their livelihoods. It intensifies
competition for natural resources and generates
conflicts because, as herders shift away from traditional
grazing routes due to unexpectedly changed conditions,
so farmers find themselves having to defend their land
and crops against extra pressure.
20-04891

24/02/2020

The situation in Somalia

Herders are more inclined to sell livestock in times
of extreme weather, which depresses local prices,
weakening an already weak market, which closes
options for a dignified livelihood for young men. It
therefore indirectly encourages criminality and creates
opportunities for recruitment by armed factions. In
short, local climate realities feed Al-Shabaab with a
pool of potential recruits. Of course, the influx of small
arms into the region offers armed factions additional
opportunities for building their strength.
Further, local conflicts can quickly escalate to
become conflicts at the national level. Disagreements
on natural resources are absorbed into Somalia’s
larger political dynamics and have led to some of
its deadliest violence. And worryingly, at the same
time as resource-based conflicts have both deepened
and escalated, migration to the cities and internal
displacement have had the effect of weakening
traditional means of managing and resolving conflicts.
The evidence is clear that climate-related shocks
and stresses can destabilize Somalia’s prospects for
peace. Extreme weather events create water and food
insecurity that give Al-Shabaab the opportunity to act
as service providers, which allows the group’s political
narrative to gain support and decreases trust in the
peacebuilding efforts of the Federal Government of
Somalia and the United Nations.
UNSOM and the United Nations country team have
responded to the increasing pressure and recurrence
of extreme weather events and their knock-on effects.
Based on the lessons learned from the 2011 drought
and its catastrophic consequences, initiatives were
developed that curbed the potentially severe famine
in 2016 and 2017. The key was timely information
and effective interagency cooperation across Somalia.
This is the basis for forming the Disaster Operations
Coordination Centre, working with the comprehensive
recovery and resilience framework for Somalia. It
is also important that the role of an environmental
security adviser was created, so as to address the need
for coordination. UNSOM is therefore taking steps to
address climate-related risks. Together with the United
Nations country team, what more can it do?
First, the Mission can focus on improving
coordination between the Government and humanitarian
and security actors, both Somali and international. To be
sure, care must be taken not to undermine humanitarian
neutrality, but assistance in a humanitarian emergency

S/PV. 8731

can be accepted from different quarters. Preparation for
this will reduce the impact of future shocks and can be
done without compromising humanitarian principles.
Secondly, it can remain alert to the need to adapt
its response structures to evolving conditions. Part
of its long-term strategy and part of the recovery and
resilience framework for Somalia should be to build the
capacity to receive, process, disseminate and act upon
information that reflects the changing on-the-ground
realities in the dual context of a changing climate and
protracted conflicts.
Thirdly, climate and climate change cross national
boundaries and so does the impact. Broader regional
responses are required. Through the African Union
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
appropriate inter-State frameworks exist, with which
UNSOM can cooperate.
If I may, our report also contains relevant input for
similar United Nations missions in vulnerable areas.
Accordingly, and fourthly, the case of UNSOM in
Somalia exemplifies what we have also identified in
other operations in the Sahel, in the Middle East and
in Asia — the imperative of preparing now for climate
impacts. The first step is to increase capacity to assess
climate-related security risks. A good starting point
is to step up the dialogue on this issue among United
Nations agencies working in-country. It is or should
be a central plank of the sustaining peace and conflict
prevention agenda.
Fifthly, by increasing information exchange
between missions, knowledge about what works and
what does not will be brought together and can be more
widely shared.
And sixthly, dare we say it, we should dare to find
new responses. Some tried and tested measures are still
relevant, but, all other things being equal, a changing
world requires some new responses. Knowing what
does not work means it is time to find something new,
even experimentally.
Finally, there are implications for the wider United
Nations system. To synthesize climate-risk-assessment
capacity, risk-assessment information should be made
available to those that need it via the United Nations
system and the climate security mechanism; we must
ensure that the training of peacebuilding personnel
includes a specific focus on climate sensitivity; and
lastly, we must carry out the systems adjustments

20-048917/21

S/PV.8731

The situation in Somalia

needed so that funding streams can support integrated
responses to climate-related security risks and prioritize
programmes that promote climate resilience.
In sum, the case of Somalia shows us the future
of peacebuilding. There are practical steps decision
makers can take to address the negative impact of
today’s environmental crises to improve tomorrow’s
prospects for peace and security. UNSOM and the
Federal Government of Somalia have both made
important steps in this direction, and there is room
for more.
I thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity
to address the Security Council, whose attention is
greatly appreciated.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Smith
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank our briefers. I thought Dan Smith’s briefing was
particularly interesting. It is a helpful reminder that it
is rarely the case in States like Somalia that all of a
country’s problems can be fixed through a top-down
political process in smoke-filled rooms in the capital
city and that actually a bottom-up community-based
wider contextual understanding is important. I thought
Mr. Smith’s point around the need for the Security
Council to think about conflict prevention is something
that we struggle with sometimes. Thinking climate risk
is part of that. The data input is also a very important
aspect; I hope we can take that forward collectively.
Let me start with one of the most positive elements
to arise recently and congratulate the Government
of Somalia on reaching the major milestone of
eligibility for debt relief under the Heavily Indebted
Poor Countries Initiative, and let me commend the
cooperation between the Federal Government and the
federal member states on the financial reforms that have
enabled them to reach this milestone. It is vital now
that this cooperation between the Federal Government
and the federal member states deepens and extends to
political and security reform, which will allow Somalia
to fulfil the criteria necessary for debt relief.
Let me also welcome the recent enactment of the
electoral law, which President Farmajo has noted was
“a chance to execute democratic rights for one-person
one-vote in the forthcoming 2021 elections”. But
8/21

24/02/2020

that is only the first step. There are essential aspects
of the elections that are still unresolved, and we are
concerned about spoilers trying to push the process off
track. It is therefore vital that the Somali Parliament
take urgent steps to make progress on the passage of
the amendments to the Political Parties Law, which
will allow parties to register for the elections and to
address other unresolved questions in the electoral
law, including the definition of constituencies, the
allocation of seats to constituencies, how the 30 per
cent quota of seats for women — to which Somalia has
committed — will be implemented and the management
of seats in Banaadir and Somaliland. These questions
need to be answered in order to make the electoral law
technically implementable and fundable if we are to
deliver peaceful, inclusive, credible and transparent
one-person one-vote elections, in line with the
provisional Constitution of Somalia.
We regret that the National Independent Electoral
Commission (NIEC) is unable to operate freely in all
federal member states. The NIEC is an independent
and impartial technical body empowered by the
Constitution, and we call on Somali authorities at all
levels to cooperate fully with the NIEC, to admit the
registration of political parties and to take steps to
ensure media freedoms.
That is an example of one of the problems currently
facing us in Somalia. We believe that it is primarily
through dialogue and cooperation between the Federal
Government of Somalia and the federal member
states that a resolution can be reached. That is simply
essential to achieving a peaceful and agreed process
for the transition of power. Elections are a crucial step
towards a political settlement in Somalia and a broader
constitutional review. We therefore call on the Federal
Government and the federal member states to engage
constructively and urgently in consensus building
in order to agree on how the electoral model will
be implemented.
In order to ensure broader stability in Somalia,
we urge all stakeholders in Galmudug state to engage
in dialogue on local reconciliation so as to preserve
the significant efforts and progress of the last seven
months. We are concerned that a divided Galmudug
with multiple claims to leadership will be harder to
govern, and compromise must be made to avoid the
risk of instability and conflict. We also urge all parties
in Jubaland to ease tensions and address differences
through dialogue and compromise.
20-04891

24/02/2020

The situation in Somalia

Let me turn to security and security reform. We are
at a critical juncture in discussions on the long-term
future of international support to Somali security and
how we can support Somalia in taking the lead. The
Council mandated an independent review of Somali
security after 2021, and we urge regional partners
to engage in consultations with Somalia, the United
Nations and the African Union to help deliver a joint
and unified solution for a post-2021 security model in
Somalia. Rapid progress on security reforms is vital,
including commitment to the delivery of a Somali-led
transition plan and the implementation of a national
security architecture. It is crucial that the drawdown
of troops of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) happen in line with the threat assessments
on the ground. This approach was not taken last time
and it had a negative impact, so better consultation
is important.
We remain concerned about the ongoing climateand conflict-induced humanitarian crisis. The current
desert locust crisis in Somalia and the wider region
is extremely worrying and the United Kingdom is
coordinating closely with partners to limit the locust
infestation and mitigate the impact of crop losses
through surveillance and spraying operations. We call
on the international community to provide more funding
for the humanitarian response and to step up efforts
to build resilience and long-term climate-mitigation
initiatives in Somalia. I note that in the past 12 months,
the United Kingdom has given over $400 million
to the various humanitarian, political and security
requirements in Somalia.
Finally, let me pay tribute to the United Nations for
its continued support under the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Somalia. We pay tribute to
the ongoing commitment and sacrifices of AMISOM
troop-contributing countries and, of course, the
Somali national security forces in their fight against
Al-Shabaab. They are brave and tenacious men and
women who are fighting for the security not only of
Somalia but of the region and us all.
Somalia and its international supporters face a
huge task in the coming years in delivering inclusive
national elections and a transition to Somali-led
security. The United Kingdom will continue to stand
firmly alongside Somalia, the United Nations and the
African Union in those efforts. But without substantial
progress, both on elections and on consensus-building
between the different levels of Government, there is a

S/PV. 8731

risk that our next discussion on Somalia will be a much
more difficult discussion. So, let us do everything we
can to prevent that from happening.
Mr. Hunter (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Swan for his briefing today.
The United States deeply appreciates his commitment
to advancing security, stability and development in
Somalia. I also thank the other two briefers for their
presentations today.
This year is a critical year as Somalia seeks the
economic growth and development promised by
debt relief, inclusive peaceful and credible national
elections and progress towards the transfer of security
responsibilities from the forces of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) to those of Somalia.
While those developments each hold tremendous
promise for the Somali people, realizing them will
require the full commitment of the Government and the
people of Somalia.
We congratulate Somalia on its commitment to
implementing fiscal reforms towards debt relief. The
recent announcement by the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund that Somalia is eligible
for debt forgiveness is a significant step towards
faster economic growth, more grants and investments,
increased Government revenue and expanded services
for its citizens. In order to ensure progress on debt
relief, we urge the Federal Government of Somalia
and the federal member states to agree on financial
accountability and revenue-sharing principles.
Looking to elections planned for this year, we
recognize that Somalia is in a difficult phase in its
journey towards democracy, with previous elections
marked by limited participation, clan quotas, corruption
and threats of violence. Recent elections in Jubaland,
South-West state and Galmudug had their flaws, but we
are encouraged that many candidates refrained from
violence and demonstrated commitment to a peaceful,
negotiated reconciliation process. We are troubled that
some electoral models under consideration for 2020 and
2021 are not practical, could exclude key communities
or might provide a pretext for delaying the elections.
We urge the Federal Government and federal member
states to work together to keep elections on track this
year and agree on a practical model for peaceful, timely,
inclusive and credible elections.
Al-Shabaab remains a deadly and destabilizing
force within Somalia and across the region. We extend

20-048919/21

S/PV.8731

The situation in Somalia

our deepest condolences for those killed and injured in
recent attacks in Mogadishu and Kenya, and we reaffirm
our commitment to working with our partners to use all
means to defeat those terrorists and extremists.
Since the Council met on this issue in November
(see S/PV.8671), Somalia’s armed forces and police
have taken positive steps towards ownership of national
security. We welcome the progress Somali security
forces and AMISOM have made against Al-Shabaab
in Lower Shabelle, but the operation has stalled. The
Government must find a solution to generate capable
forces and not allow reversals of recent security
gains. We should acknowledge that the transition of
security responsibilities to the Government of Somalia,
which must remain a top priority, is behind schedule.
AMISOM will not remain in Somalia forever.
We support the ongoing efforts of AMISOM’s
leadership and look to the Somali security forces and
institutions to undertake the reforms and development
that will enable them to assume responsibility from
AMISOM, following the benchmarks and timeline
of the Somali transition plan. At the end of February,
AMISOM will draw down 1,000 peacekeeping troops,
which is a critical step in this process.
Efforts to build capacity within Somalia’s security
forces, which give them the ability to hold areas
freed from Al-Shabaab are tremendously valuable,
and we extend our appreciation to Somalia’s partners
on the Council that are working to build those skills.
Limited resources, institutional challenges and
resistance to reforms continue to undermine Somalia’s
ability to generate new forces and take on additional
responsibility for security. It is imperative that the
Federal Government work to address those challenges
as soon as possible.
We commend the President for appointing a
new generation of Somali National Army (SNA)
leadership focused on reforms, and we urge their
full implementation. We also commend the work of
the United Nations Support Office in Somalia and its
support of AMISOM. We call for further accountability,
efficiency and transparency in its operations.
The key to progress on all those fronts is improved
cooperation and coordination between the Federal
Government and its member states. The United States
is deeply concerned that dissension between them has
increased in recent months, and we have continued
our outreach efforts to the Federal Government and
10/21

24/02/2020

presidents of the member states. Greater rapprochement,
dialogue and compromise will be necessary on all sides
to ensure Somalia’s security, stability and prosperity.
We commend the President for his outreach
to leaders of member states, including recently to
Somaliland President Abdi, and hope that it will lead
to a broader reconciliation process. The deployment
of SNA troops to a politically motivated offensive
in the Gedo region of Jubaland is unacceptable and
diverts resources from the agreed road map for security
operations. It is imperative that the Federal Government
and federal member state security services focus on
combating Al-Shabaab rather than engaging in armed
conflict with each other to resolve political disputes.
We call on President Farmajo to end the Somali National
Army offensive in Gedo and for both President Farmajo
and Jubaland President Madobe to commit to dialogue
and reconciliation.
Finally, we remain concerned by the continuing
humanitarian emergency in Somalia, compounded by
the severe locust outbreak affecting the region. With
more than $1 billion required for relief aid in 2020,
we underscore the need for timely, reliable and more
equitable humanitarian assistance and encourage
other Governments to join us as we pledge ongoing
humanitarian aid for Somalia.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank the briefers
for the information they provided today.
We welcome the progress made in the preparations
for the 2020 and 2021 elections as well as the adoption
of legislation outlined in the Mutual Accountability
Framework. We note with concern the ongoing political
impasse between the Federal Government and the
leaders of the federal member states. We understand
that overcoming that impasse must be a priority so as
to support the reconciliation process and ensure a fair
electoral process in Somalia. We call on the leaders
to redouble their efforts to reach an agreement that
addresses issues such as security, the constitutional
review and the elections, among other national
priorities. We welcome the positive developments in
the subregion, resulting in the agreement signed by
President Farmajo and President Kenyatta on restoring
bilateral relations and the joint plan of action for 2020
and beyond between Eritrea, Ethiopia and Somalia.
We welcome the adoption of the amended electoral
law. We call for ensuring the 30 per cent quota of women
20-04891

24/02/2020

The situation in Somalia

S/PV. 8731

and a broad participation of the public, particularly
young people, in the electoral process. In that context,
we believe the adoption of the amended federal
constitution to be essential and we urge the parties
to continue working towards holding a constructive,
inclusive and transparent dialogue.

We are confident that the process of preparing for
and holding future elections will be a gateway to a
new stage of dialogue in Somalia that will promote
the development of a participatory democracy and
lasting solutions to the many challenges facing the
Somali people.

The effects of climate change continue to pose
a challenge to Somalia. The seasonal rains and
rapid shifts to severe droughts, combined with the
vulnerabilities and lack of resilience of communities,
have resulted in a worrying increase in humanitarian
needs in the country, where humanitarian assistance is
needed to survive.

Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We are grateful to Mr. James Swan,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and
Mr. Francisco Madeira, Head of the African Union
Mission in Somalia, for their comprehensive briefings.
We would also like to thank Mr. Dan Smith, Director of
the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute,
for his briefing.

In that regard, we particularly appreciate the
briefing by Mr. Dan Smith, who informed us about the
effects of climate change on the security situation in
Somalia and the great effort being made by the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) to
respond to the increasing impact of climate change on
that country.
Somalia’s vulnerability to climate change is reflected
by the repercussions it has on the population, who are
forced to flee their homes in search of basic services. In
addition, those who have already been displaced due to
conflict and violence are disproportionately impacted.
That has increased the humanitarian needs of the
population, including food insecurity.
It is therefore essential to continue to provide both
the relevant authorities and those called on to support
their efforts with the necessary tools for preparation,
analysis and response regarding the negative impacts
of climate change. As we are already seeing in Somalia,
that would make it possible to comprehensively address
the root causes of the current climate and humanitarian
crises in the country and to provide sustainable
solutions to them.
As on previous occasions, we would like to express
our concern about the security situation in Somalia
and the attacks perpetrated by the terrorist group
Al-Shabaab, which continues to be the main source
of violence in Somalia. We particularly condemn the
attack on 28 December 2019 in Mogadishu, which
killed 90 people, and we express our condolences.
In conclusion, we recognize the role that the United
Nations Support Office in Somalia, the African Union
Mission in Somalia and UNSOM have been playing in
achieving lasting peace and stability in the country.

Russia fully supports the efforts of the Federal
Government of Somalia to achieve domestic political
and economic stability and to implement democratic
changes. We continue to closely follow the situation
in the country and the steps taken by its authorities to
prepare for this year’s key event — the general elections.
We are pleased to note that the Somalis have managed
to achieve progress in that regard. The most significant
achievement was clearly last week’s adoption of the
very important electoral law.
We also welcome the consultations launched in
Mogadishu earlier this month to revise the federal
constitution. Furthermore, we would like to welcome the
contribution of the Federal Government to normalizing
the situation in the Horn of Africa as a whole. The
reaffirmation at the end of January by President
Mohamed Farmajo and the leaders of Ethiopia and
Eritrea of their commitment to earlier agreements as
well as the plan of action that they adopted are a good
illustration of that. At the same time, much remains
to be done. We trust that the Somalis will continue to
honour their commitments.
We agree with the assessment in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2020/121) that the lack of a
constructive dialogue between Mogadishu and the
federal member states remains a significant factor that
hinders political progress and national reconciliation
efforts in Somalia. Indeed, without the resumption
of that dialogue, the numerous problems facing the
country risk remaining unresolved. We call on the
Somali authorities to step up their efforts to establish
links with the authorities of Jubaland and Puntland and
to resolve political differences in Galmudug. We believe
that a significant contribution to resolving those issues

20-0489111/21

S/PV.8731

The situation in Somalia

could be made by setting up a permanent mechanism
for communication with the federal member states,
including Somaliland.
Al-Shabaab continues to pose a major threat to
the country’s security. We are seriously concerned
about the significant increase in terrorist activity by
its fighters and their use of ever more sophisticated
improvised explosive devices. In that regard, we
would like to recall that in August 2019 our delegation
asked the United Kingdom, as penholder on Somalia,
to organize a briefing to the Council by the Director
of United Nations Mine Action Service on the threat
posed by those devices in Somalia; we could have heard
from him today. However, unfortunately, our request
fell on deaf ears.
We still believe that the issue of improvised explosive
devices warrants just as much attention as other aspects
of the situation that we have considered today. We are
convinced that, in order to tackle the terrorist threat
in Somalia, there is a need for effective joint efforts to
build a unified national security architecture. Progress
in this area should be decisive with a view to handing
over responsibility for the security of the country to the
Somalis themselves. The process should also take into
account developments in the situation on the ground.
At the moment, we agree that the African Union
Mission to Somalia is an extremely important player
in fighting Al-Shabaab. The international community
should continue to take steps to increase the operational
readiness of the African peacekeeping units and the
Somali National Army. Considering the complex
humanitarian situation in Somalia, Russia continues to
provide assistance to the country and to Somali refugees
in neighbouring countries. We do so through targeted
contributions to the relevant funds of the World Food
Programme. We also intend to continue to train Somali
civilian personnel.
In conclusion, I would like to assure the Council
of our country’s firm commitment to continue working
intensively in the Security Council to resolve the crisis
in Somalia, while respecting the country’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): First of all, let me
thank our three briefers for their insightful remarks
and comments.
Germany wholeheartedly supports the efforts by
the Somali Government to ensure peace, stability and
12/21

24/02/2020

development in Somalia. In that context, we underscore
that credible, free and fair elections in 2020 and 2021
are key to democratic State-building in Somalia.
Following the elections in 2016 and 2017, a wide range
of Somali leaders pledged to hold direct one-person
one-vote elections in 2020 and 2021. Most recently, that
was also reflected in the commitments of the Somali
Government and stakeholders under the 2020 Mutual
Accountability Framework.
We take note of the federal electoral bill signed into
law by the Federal President last week. However, we
also see that some paragraphs of the law are arguably
not implementable, despite repeated and concrete advice
on those issues provided to Parliament by the National
Independent Electoral Commission and United Nations
electoral experts. In addition, the electoral code leaves
many important questions unresolved. Those questions
need to be answered on the basis of broad political
consensus and in full cooperation between the Federal
Government of Somalia and the federal member states
in accordance with commitments made under the
Mutual Accountability Framework.
Like others, we are highly concerned with regard
to the current political situation in Galmudug and
Jubaland. We call for the political settlement of tensions,
which requires dialogue and compromise. Constructive
political cooperation between the Federal Government
and all federal member states must be given the
highest priority. Unfortunately, we have not seen much
progress over recent months, but coordination meetings
should resume promptly and take place regularly in
order to resolve outstanding issues. In the light of the
2020 elections, the political process, obviously, must
noticeably catch up. On the issue of Somaliland, we also
encourage both sides — Mogadishu and Hargeisa — to
pursue the now-resumed dialogue.
On security, first of all, let me commend the
progress made in the security sector. We pay tribute
to the work and the sacrifices of the African Union
Mission to Somalia and the Somali National Army. It
is crucial to continue on that path in a coherent and
coordinated manner. We need security sector reform
and the implementation of the national security
architecture and a security transition. The security of
elections is equally important. But it also important to
pursue constructive discussions with all stakeholders
on the future of international support to the Somali
security sector over the months ahead, including
with the perspective of the upcoming independent
20-04891

24/02/2020

The situation in Somalia

assessment requested by the Security Council for early
2021. We need a credible and sustainable post-2021
security model for Somalia.
On the humanitarian situation and developments,
Germany remains extremely concerned about the
current humanitarian situation and about the additional
challenges caused by the plague of locusts. We reacted
swiftly by making available €3 billion to the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations to
safeguard livelihoods, and will continue to monitor the
situation very carefully.
To say a few words on the human rights situation,
we noted that Amnesty International stated in its latest
report that there had been a surge in violent attacks,
threats, harassment and intimidation of media workers
in Somalia. We are obviously concerned about that
assessment and urge all stakeholders to respect the
freedom of the press and to protect media workers.
We were very impressed by the report of Mr. Dan
Smith and see very clearly the nexus he talked about.
The aggravating consequences of climate change for
Somalia’s humanitarian situation and fragile statehood
clearly demonstrate the challenges posed by climate
change for regional stability and security.
However, climate-related risks are not the only
drivers of conflict — I think we would all agree on that.
But, at the same time, it is a reality that they represent
one driver, and often a very significant one, of conflict,
which we cannot ignore and, we feel, the Security
Council should not ignore. Floods and droughts
exacerbate conflicts. The analysis of the situation
in Somalia would be incomplete without taking into
account climate-related risks. Food insecurity and
other insecurities give Al-Shabaab an opportunity to
present themselves as alternative providers of security.
There is therefore obviously a clear nexus between
climate-related risks and insecurity. For us, all of this
shows that there is substantial cause for concern about
the effects of climate change on the security situation
in Somalia.
At the same time, as we heard in today’s briefings,
climate change poses challenges to the implementation
of the mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia. We are therefore convinced it is
high time for the Security Council to duly take into
account climate change as a factor relevant to peace
and security. Germany is investing in strengthening
capacity on climate and security in the field, inter alia

S/PV. 8731

by financing the cost of an environment and security
adviser who will support the United Nations in-country
presence and provide information on climate-security
risks in Somalia.
Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks the briefers, Mr. James Swan, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia,
Мr. Francisco Caetano José Madeira, Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission for Somalia and Head of the African Union
Mission to Somalia, and Mr. Dan Smith, Director of the
Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, for
their briefings.
Over the past three months, we have seen positive
progress in Somalia’s national reconstruction and the
preparations for the late 2020 or early 2021 elections.
The new electoral code was passed and signed into law,
the ninth national development plan was unveiled and
the tripartite summit with Eritrea and Ethiopia was
held during, which the joint plan of action for 2020 and
beyond was adopted.
China commends Somalia’s efforts to promote
international peace, stability and development and
welcomes improved relations and cooperation among
the countries of the Horn of Africa. In parallel to
those developments, Somalia faces some persistent
challenges in areas such as the political process,
election preparations and socioeconomic development.
Terrorism remains a threat to security, while natural
phenomena, including floods and the plague of locusts,
imperil the country’s humanitarian situation. The
international community should continue to closely
follow the evolving situation in Somalia and provide
constructive assistance on the basis of respect for Somali
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.
First, we need to help Somalia improve its national
governance capacity. The Security Council and the
international community at large should uphold the
principled position that the country’s political process
should be Somali-led and -owned, and, based on
respect for the Somali Government’s leadership, help
the country move its political process forward, improve
the development of the federal institutions, improve
the relationship between the Federal Government and
federal member state Governments and create enabling
conditions for smooth and peaceful elections in late
2020 or early 2021.

20-0489113/21

S/PV.8731

The situation in Somalia

24/02/2020

Secondly, we need to strengthen Somalia’s security
capacity-building. The international community should
continue to support the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia so that it can function better, as
mandated, and provide it with stable, predictable and
sustainable funding, help Somalia strengthen its security
capacity-building and enable the Somali security forces
to take over the responsibility for maintaining national
security in phases.

than 18 months and is a major obstacle to the completion
of crucial projects for Somalia. Dialogue must resume
immediately, particularly between the Somali federal
authorities and the authorities of Jubaland and Puntland.
In that connection, we welcome the mediation efforts
undertaken in December by the United Nations, the
African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development and the European Union, but regret that
the Somali authorities did not follow up on them.

Thirdly, we need to deepen cooperation among
the United Nations, the African Union and countries
of the region on the Somali issue. The international
community should support African countries in
resolving African issues the African way, and support
regional and subregional organizations, such as the
African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, in playing a leading role in the political
settlement of the Somali issue.

Secondly, with regard to the 2020 and 2021 elections,
France takes note of the enactment of the electoral
law. While that is a positive step in furtherance of the
commitments made at the latest Somalia Partnership
Forum, uncertainties remain regarding key issues, in
particular with regard to the definition of electoral
constituencies, the representation of federal member
states and the implementation of the 30 per cent quota
for women, whose full and effective participation is
essential. Those uncertainties must be quickly clarified
so that the 2020 and 2021 elections can be held on
schedule, in a peaceful, inclusive and transparent
manner, and based on the principle of one-person,
one-vote. We also call on the Somali authorities to
broaden the democratic space so as to enable the
participation of all political parties and civil society,
and to lift all restrictions on the freedoms of expression
and assembly.

Fourthly, we need to focus efforts on tackling
the root causes of conflict. Somalia has been ravaged
by a protracted war, with devastating effects on its
socioeconomic development. That is compounded by
its significant lack of capacity to cope with climate
change and natural disasters. It is necessary to take a
sustainable development approach if we are to overcome
food and security issues, as well as the humanitarian
crisis in the context of climate change. The international
community should step up its assistance in such areas
as education, health, food security and infrastructure
development to help Somalia achieve self-reliant
sustainable development as soon as possible.
China has long been actively engaged in Somalia’s
peace process and has provided humanitarian assistance
and socioeconomic development support to Somalia. In
order to help Somalia respond to flooding, China recently
provided tents, mosquito nets, emergency medical
supplies and other in-kind assistance to Somalia. Along
with the rest of the international community, China
is ready to continue its constructive role in helping
Somalia achieve peace, stability and development.
Mr. Michon (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank our three speakers for
their briefings and to reiterate France’s full support
for the Special Representative. I would like to stress
four points.
First, France is concerned about the stalemate in
relations between the Somali Federal Government and
certain federal member states, which has lasted more
14/21

Thirdly, with regard to the security situation,
France remains concerned about the frequency of
attacks by Al-Shabaab, particularly in Mogadishu. In
that context, we note that it is critical to continue to
implement the security transition plan from the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) to the Somali
security forces. The Somali federal authorities must
therefore step up their efforts if they hope to control the
entire territory, including through the implementation
of a credible force-generation plan and the integration
of regional forces into the Somali National Army. With
regard to AMISOM in particular, France is of the view
that the European Union must of course continue to
provide the Mission with financial support, but that, in
return, the Somali federal authorities must speed up the
implementation of security reforms and resume their
cooperation with the federal member States. In that
connection, we stand ready to participate actively in
the discussions on future international engagement in
Somalia after 2021. Those discussions must include all
actors involved in Somalia.
20-04891

24/02/2020

The situation in Somalia

S/PV. 8731

Fourthly, with regard to climate change, France
welcomes the briefing delivered by the Director of
the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute
(SIPRI). It is evident that climate change is a major
factor in the conflict in Somalia. As explained by the
SIPRI representative, episodes of drought followed
by floods and, more recently, the invasion of locusts,
both caused by climate disruption, significant affect
Somalia’s humanitarian and security situation. As
in many other places affected by climate change, the
increase in the number of internally displaced persons
and forced population displacements, combined with
the scarcity of natural resources and food insecurity,
are exacerbating tensions between displaced people
and host communities and stoke the flames of
intercommunal rivalries.

in the Mutual Accountability Framework, require
strong cooperation between the Federal Government
and the federal member states. The two must engage
in constructive dialogue to peacefully resolve all
outstanding differences. Ending the political deadlock is
essential to accelerating political progress, consensusbuilding, and reconciliation. We commend the efforts
of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, the African Union, the European Union and
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development to
facilitate dialogue on how to achieve national priorities.
We concur with the Secretary-General’s view that the
organization of elections in a timely and peaceful
manner remains a priority for 2020. We therefore
welcome the adoption of the electoral law and hope the
2020 electoral timeline can be met.

Unfortunately, this situation will likely recur in
other regions of the world. That is why we believe that
conflict prevention must fully integrate an analysis
of the security impacts of climate change. In that
context, we call on the United Nations to conduct
a periodic analysis of the security risks of climate
change throughout the world — not only areas of
conflict — based on information provided by United
Nations agencies and on their capacity for conflict
analysis. As SIPRI did in the case of Somalia, such
analyses must include recommendations for preventive
measures to be implemented, first and foremost by the
national authorities but also by development partners,
regional organizations and United Nations agencies.

Secondly, we remain deeply concerned about the
ongoing threat posed by Al-Shabaab. We condemn all its
recent attacks, including those employing improvised
explosive devices in Afgooye and Mogadishu, and
would like to express our deepest condolences to the
families of the victims. We welcome the completion
of a joint threat assessment of security conditions on
the ground. It is necessary to continue assessing the
implications of the planned drawdown of an additional
1,000 personnel of the African Union Mission in
Somalia later this month in order to ensure that the
security gains achieved thus far will not be reversed.
We are encouraged by the Government’s commitment to
the implementation of the transition plan, including the
continued military operations, force-generation efforts
and institutional capacity-building. We would like to
reiterate the importance of accelerated and coordinated
international assistance to support force-generation
and capacity-building. That is crucial to producing a
well-trained and -equipped Somali security force that
is eventually able to take over security responsibilities.

Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): Let me begin by
thanking Mr. Swan, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Somalia, Mr. Madeira, Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission for Somalia, and Mr. Smith, Director of
the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute,
for their comprehensive briefings.
The year 2020 is crucial for Somalia, as it embarks
upon multisectoral reform, including the holding of
universal suffrage elections, strengthening its security
sector and promoting economic and social development.
The Mutual Accountability Framework, agreed in
October 2019, is important and ambitious. We hope
for its continued implementation. In that connection,
I would like to highlight three issues regarding the
political, security, and humanitarian situations.
First, it is necessary to resolve the political impasse
between the Federal Government and the federal
member states. The key national priorities, as set out

Thirdly, it is important to alleviate the humanitarian
situation in Somalia. Recent flooding has compounded
the dire humanitarian situation, with an increasing
number of people being displaced and in need of
assistance. In this regard, we call on all international
partners to provide the much-needed humanitarian
relief and assistance so as to ensure the long-term
recovery and resilience of the Somali people.
Lastly, I commend the Federal Government
for demonstrating leadership and determination
in implementing its reform agenda while tackling
multidimensional challenges. I wish to reaffirm

20-0489115/21

S/PV.8731

The situation in Somalia

Indonesia’s respect for Somalia’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity and to pay the utmost tribute to
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia, the
United Nations Support Office in Somalia, the African
Union Mission in Somalia and all actors working to
ensure lasting peace and stability in Somalia.

24/02/2020

and meaningful participation in peacebuilding and
State-building processes.

We would like to thank Mr. James Swan, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Francisco
Caetano José Madeira, Special Representative of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission for
Somalia and Head of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), and Mr. Dan Smith, Director of
the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute.

On the security situation, we appreciate the close
cooperation of United Nations Assistance Mission
in Somalia and AMISOM in support of the national
security architecture agreement and transition plan
with a view towards devising an inclusive securitysector approach that responds to the needs of the
Somali people. However, we remain deeply concerned
by the persistent terrorist threat that Al-Shabaab still
poses, and we reiterate our strong condemnation
of the attacks and all acts of terrorism and violent
extremism perpetrated by that terrorist group. We are
steadfast in our support for the Somali National Army,
and we appreciate the support of AMISOM and other
partners to continue working to reduce the capacities
of Al-Shabaab and other terrorist groups operating
in Somalia.

As Somalia embarks on a crucial year, the Niger,
South Africa, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and
Tunisia commend the Federal Government of Somalia
for its ongoing efforts and the progress it has made
in stabilizing the country, including strengthening
State institutions, improving the security situation
and creating an enabling environment for pushing the
political process forward. We hope that the Federal
Government and the leaders of the federal member
states will continue to engage so as to reach the
necessary political agreement and build consensus and
unity on key national priorities.

We welcome the threat assessment of security
conditions on the ground undertaken jointly by the
United Nations, the African Union and the Federal
Government and call on the international community to
continue to provide the necessary security assistance to
Somali authorities at both the federal and state levels,
including in force-generation and capacity-building.
In this respect, we reiterate our position that any
reconfiguration or drawdown of AMISOM should be
conditions-based and not lead to a security vacuum that
will be exploited by terrorist groups and undermine the
gains made in Somalia so far.

A constructive and inclusive dialogue would
certainly enable the Somalis to adequately address
the political, security, humanitarian and development
challenges the country is facing. We therefore echo the
call by the Secretary-General for the Somali leaders
to consider instituting a mechanism for dialogue and
consensus-building in order to advance the aspirations
of the Somali people. We hope that such a dialogue will
also help pave the way for the preparation and timely
organization of peaceful national elections in 2020.
We believe that the timely organization of peaceful
national elections in 2020 as identified in the Mutual
Accountability Framework is of the utmost importance
for progress to continue to be achieved towards
stabilization and the building of a functional federal
State in Somalia.

We commend the gains made during the military
operations undertaken jointly by the Somali National
Army and AMISOM in Lower Shabelle, resulting in
several strategic areas recovered from Al-Shabaab.
We urge the Federal Government to continue building
the structures and capabilities of the Somali National
Army to be effective and well-resourced in accordance
with the transition plan in order to take over their
responsibilities from AMISOM. We are convinced
that these achievements will help create conditions
favourable to Somalia being able to effectively assume
the security responsibilities by 2021 and facilitate the
holding of democratic elections in the country by the
end of the year 2020. We appeal to the international
community and partners to mobilize resources and
replenish the Trust Fund for AMISOM, and we call on
the Trust Fund to support the Somali security forces.

Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the African States members
of the Security Council — the Niger, South Africa and
Tunisia — and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines.

We underscore the importance of engaging women
and young people in the country’s political life. Building
a democratic and inclusive State will require their full
16/21

We express our concern about the humanitarian
situation affecting millions of Somalis as a result of
20-04891

24/02/2020

The situation in Somalia

adverse climatic conditions and terrorist threats. The
climate has created propitious conditions for the locust
invasion that is having a devastating impact on the
agriculture sector of Somalia, leading to the declaration
of a state of emergency this month. In this regard, it
is imperative to take into consideration the impact of
climate change. Urgent assistance is needed to develop
adaptation and resilience measures in the country, and
we call on the international community of donors to
support Somalia to this end.
Finally, we commend the sustained efforts by
the Federal Government over the years to ensure that
Somalia becomes eligible for debt relief from the
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative of the World
Bank and the International Monetary Fund. This is a
significant achievement that we hope will pave the way
for further economic development in Somalia.
Mr. Auväärt (Estonia): I thank the briefers for
their insightful overview of the latest developments
in Somalia.
It is important that 2020 is used not only to
consolidate the progress made thus far but to further it.
Dialogue between the Federal Government of Somalia
and federal member states is a crucial priority to achieve
progress on national priorities. Estonia joins the call to
the country’s leaders to take immediate steps to restore
ties and consider instituting a mechanism for dialogue
and consensus-building in the interest of the nation.
This is crucial not only for the upcoming elections but
also for the broader political, security, humanitarian
and development challenges the country is facing,
which cannot be solved unless there is constructive
dialogue and strong unity of purpose between the
Federal Government and the federal member states.
As identified in Mutual Accountability Framework,
organization of timely, credible and peaceful national
elections must remain the first priority for 2020. We
recognize the profound progress already made towards
direct elections and welcome the enactment of the
electoral law. However, there are some concerns about
the frameworks governing the elections. Gaps in the
electoral law need to be addressed to ensure that it
is implementable.
Among other important questions, such as the
definition of the constituencies and the management of
seats for Banaadir and Somaliland, Estonia emphasizes
that female representation should be safeguarded in
the elections, and the 30 per cent female representation

S/PV. 8731

should be enshrined in legislation. Women must be
equal partners in peace efforts.
Al-Shabaab’s ability to conduct attacks in Somalia,
including in Mogadishu, remains extremely concerning.
Ensuring security for the Somali people is at the heart
of our responsibilities, and therefore it is crucial that
the drawdown of African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) troops happen in line with the threat
assessments on the ground. We condemn all grave
violations committed against civilians, in particular
against children, and the continued high numbers of
child recruitment. We must also tackle conflict-related
sexual violence, which remains pervasive across much
of Somalia. In order to strengthen the legal frameworks,
we call for the sexual offences bill to be passed by
the Parliament.
Estonia is deeply concerned about the current
humanitarian situation, including the recent locust
invasion and the threat it poses to the fragile foodsecurity situation. As we heard from the Director of
the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute,
climatic shocks continue to severely impact Somalia
and require comprehensive solutions that offer
prevention and threat mitigation. Estonia encourages
further efforts in this line of work that will proactively
address these threats.
Finally, I would like to express Estonia’s support
for the work of the United Nations in Somalia and to
pay tribute to AMISOM and the Somali security forces
for their efforts to make long-term peace and stability
in Somalia a reality.
Mr. Dinh (Viet Nam): At the outset, I would
like to thank this afternoon’s three briefers for their
informative and important statements.
In the period under consideration, there were
positive developments in Somalia that have given rise
to hope for greater security and stability. Viet Nam
welcomes this and believes that with sustained efforts
from the Government and regional and international
partners, this progress will contribute to better
promoting security and the livelihoods of the people.
Cautious optimism is required, however, and more
efforts are needed. Traditional and non-traditional
threats to stability and development remain a
significant concern, mainly due to the unrelenting
terrorist attacks by Al-Shabaab. Better synchronization
between the Federal Government of Somalia and the
federal member states is also needed in the interests of

20-0489117/21

The situation in Somalia

S/PV.8731

24/02/2020

the implementation of the ambitious national priorities
and, as Mr. Smith just noted, the country continues
to be vulnerable to the adverse impact of climate
change and various shortages. National food security
and livelihoods are at risk amid the recent surge in
desert locusts.

cannot emphasize enough the need to address the deeprooted economic issues facing Somalia, especially in
agricultural development. Only by doing so can we help
the Government and the people of Somalia overcome
long-term challenges and maintain sustained stability
and security.

In this regard, we
following observations.

Last but not least, we reiterate the importance of
assistance from and coordination with regional and
international partners in these important undertakings
by the Somali Government. We commend the work of
and reiterate our support for the African Union Mission
in Somalia, the European Union Training Mission
for Somalia, the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Somalia and the United Nations country team and
Special Representative to continue their support for
Somalia in maintaining peace and stability and ensuring
further development.

wish

to

make

the

First, we support the efforts by the Government
and other political leaders of Somalia for national
unity and reconciliation. We join the call upon all
parties concerned to make further efforts to engage
in a constructive dialogue, for the sake of security,
sustained stability and development in Somalia. We
therefore commend the recent meetings between
President Farmajo and other political leaders and look
forward to their continued efforts and specific followup actions.
Secondly, we commend the progress made in the
preparations for national elections in 2020, with the
signing of the electoral bill on 21 February by the
President of Somalia. It is significant that the bill allows
all people and political parties, especially the political
representation of women and minorities, to take part
in the electoral process, including at least a 30 per cent
minimum quota for women parliamentarians.
Thirdly, we strongly condemn all forms of violent
extremism and terrorist attacks by Al-Shabaab in
Mogadishu and the region against civilians, Government
officials and international forces. We emphasize the
need to step up efforts to counter the continued threats
from terrorism and tackle the flow of illegal arms to
terrorist groups. In addition, more effective security
measures are needed to protect civilians, especially
women and children. In this regard, we also welcome
the recent engagement between the Government of
Somalia and the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 751 (1992), concerning Somalia, and the
Panel of Experts on Somalia.
Fourthly, the rapid shifts from severe drought to
flooding have negative impacts on populations that are
already vulnerable due to chronic poverty and conflict.
We support the flood-response plan launched by the
United Nations and the Federal Government of Somalia
in December 2019, and we call on international partners
to support the Federal Government in mitigating
current and future risks and alleviating the suffering
caused by weather-related crises. In that connection, we
18/21

The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Belgium.
First, I would like to say a few words on the
political situation. Somalia is currently developing its
federal system, and we understand how complex that
task is. We commend the good technical cooperation
between the federal levels undertaken with a view to
obtaining debt relief. There is a need now to extend that
cooperation to other areas and to add to it constructive
dialogue at the political level.
Somalia is making progress on several crucial
issues, including security-sector reform and preparing
for the elections. However, in the absence of a domestic
political dialogue, any solutions reached can only be
incomplete. Some aspects of the electoral code must
be reviewed, as has been noted. Time is of the essence
in organizing the presidential elections as scheduled.
We would also encourage the Federal Government to
expand the democratic space in order to enable everyone
to participate, including women, young people and
displaced persons.
Finally, a just and reasonable solution must be found
in order to ease those tensions linked to the regional
elections in Galmudug and Jubaland.
Turning now to security matters, the insufficient
dialogue between the Federal Government and
some federal member states has also had a negative
impact on the transition plan and the departure of the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). Better
coordination will enable Somalia to make progress on
20-04891

24/02/2020

The situation in Somalia

implementing its security architecture and the Somali
National Army to increase its staff numbers.
Al-Shabaab remains the main threat to security and
stability in the country. The deployment of the Somali
National Army is crucial to containing this threat and
protecting the population. Thanks to the partial lifting
of the embargo, authorities are now able to obtain the
necessary weapons.
I would also like to recall that the European Union
supports Somalia by financing AMISOM, the European
Union Training Mission for Somalia and the European
Union Capacity-Building Mission in Somalia, as well
as the anti-maritime-piracy Operation Atalanta.
The suffering of the population is of concern to us.
Humanitarian crises and the displacement of persons
as a result of conflicts and climate phenomena such
as drought and floods exacerbate one another. The
study presented by Mr. Smith highlights the interaction
between those phenomena. We believe that if these were
better taken into consideration by the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM), that would
help to improve the effectiveness of the Mission.
In conclusion, I would like to commend the work of
Special Representative Swan and the staff of UNSOM
for their commitment.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Somalia.
Mr. Osman (Somalia): On behalf of President
Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed Farmajo and the Federal
Government of Somalia, I would like to begin by
expressing my gratitude and appreciation for the strong
leadership shown by the Permanent Representative of
Belgium as President of the Security Council for this
month. I would also like to welcome the new members
of the Council — Tunisia, the Niger, Viet Nam, Estonia
and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines — and wish them
every success in fulfilling their mandates.
I would also like to take this opportunity to shine
a light on and honour the 82 young lives that were
cut short on 28 December at the Ex-control Junction
in Mogadishu. Desperate attacks by terrorist groups
do not diminish the resolve of the Government and
people of Somalia as we continue in our quest for peace
and stability. We thank the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) for its sacrifices in that regard as
it continues to fight alongside us.

S/PV. 8731

The Federal Republic of Somalia reiterates its
unwavering commitment to continuing to work closely
with the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
alongside AMISOM to ensure the transfer of primary
security responsibility from AMISOM to Somalia. I
therefore extend my gratitude to Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Ambassador Swan for his
briefing as well as the increased understanding and
close cooperation between my Government and the
Mission. On the same note, I would also like to thank
Ambassador Madeira, Special Representative of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission for
Somalia and Head of AMISOM, for his briefing and
Mr. Dan Smith, Director of the Stockholm International
Peace Research Institute, for his presentation on climate
and the impact of climate change on security.
The current Government, which took office three
years ago, embarked on comprehensive and ambitious
cross-sectoral reforms. Given the challenges that we
inherited as a Government, we overcame considerable
obstacles and achieved progress within an extremely
short period thanks to the strong partnership between
the Federal Government of Somalia, the federal member
states and our international partners. Together, we have
worked to tackle some of the threats to Somalia’s peace
and security.
Our flagship reform agenda has been economic
recovery through wide-ranging reforms with the
ultimate goal of re-engaging with international financial
institutions. Today that goal is very much within
reach. We have achieved great success and undertaken
unimaginable reforms, as we have made serious efforts
to reconstruct and validate our external debt.
To further set the conditions for achieving debt relief,
the Federal Government of Somalia recently adopted
the ninth national development plan, which will act as
our interim poverty reduction strategy — a blueprint
for our economic development over the medium term.
The plan aims to address the root causes of poverty and
provide sustainable measures to improve the impacts
of poverty experienced by Somalis across the country.
In that regard, Somalia welcomes the announcement
by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the
World Bank at their respective 12 and 13 February
Board meetings of our eligibility for debt relief under
the enhanced Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Debt
Initiative. That is a historic step forward and we thank
the members of the international community for their
support towards that achievement.

20-0489119/21

S/PV.8731

The situation in Somalia

The decision point on debt relief is not an end to
our quest for comprehensive economic reforms but, in
fact, the beginning of a long-term process to steer our
country out of poverty and to ensure that our people
attain socioeconomic emancipation. It is not lost on us
that further comprehensive reforms are still required to
move from that decision point to the completion point.
Today I assure the Council that the Somali leadership
is committed to remaining steadfast and to concluding
all necessary reforms to reach that goal. As members
may know, under the new IMF programme, we have
committed ourselves to a more stringent reform package.
We believe that such a path will allow for foreign
direct investment that will not only benefit all Somalis
but also diversify our economy, create jobs and ensure
the ability of the Government to directly fund the
provision of basic services. We have recently focused
on a number of private-sector development reforms,
such as the development of Somalia’s company law and
the establishment of the Somali Bureau of Standards.
This week we hope that Somalia will become the 182nd
member of the Multilateral Investment Guarantee
Agency, which protects and insulates potential
international investors against any political and
security risks. The proceeds of the debt relief will
enhance socioeconomic inclusion, decentralize service
provision and act as the single most unifying factor
across the political strata.
Under extremely difficult circumstances, with
the leadership of Prime Minister Hassan Ali Khayre,
the Somali Government has made irreversible gains
in security sector reforms. We have begun the task
of reforming the Somali security forces, placing a
special focus on their leadership, personnel, funding
and logistics as we aim for able, affordable and
accountable forces.
The greatest success is perhaps the management
of the resources of the Somali national security forces
through a system that is cashless, auditable, trackable
and verifiable. Indeed, that enhanced accountability
framework has seen the partial resumption of direct
support to some of our forces by the United States and
increased technical and physical support to our military
from Turkey.
The Somali national security forces are currently in
the midst of concluding the second phase of its reform
plan, comprising a combination of human resources
reform and investment in leadership. That will enable us
to implement the newly approved pensions and gratuity
20/21

24/02/2020

bill, which is awaiting the signature of the President, as
well the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
solutions that we have begun to pursue.
Providing direct investment to the Somali security
forces is the surest way for us to effectively and
decisively deal with the threats that Al-Shabab poses
to our citizens and allies throughout region, We have
courageous, committed men and women in uniform
who are willing to protect their people against a brutal
enemy. However, we face shortages that, if overcome,
would give our forces the requisite military advantage
over an enemy that is desperately determined to survive.
We have nevertheless continued to make use of the
capabilities at our disposal, together with the support of
our international partners, to step up the fight against
the insurgents. Operation Badbado in Lower Shabelle,
borne out of that collaboration, has had a great impact on
the infiltration of vehicle-borne improvised explosive
devices into the capital as well as on the necessary
extension of governance and stabilization to that
region. Similarly, in Lower Juba, the Somali National
Army, supported by forces of the federal member states
and our allies, has continued to push the terrorists out
of their hideouts in preparation for wider clear-andhold operations.
The Somali National Army has also begun to play
a role in supporting the peacebuilding efforts, the
latest example being with regard to the intercommunal
conflict in Towfiiq and Af Barwaaqo. Thanks to the
dedication and rapid deployment of the Somali national
armed forces, a ceasefire initiated an immediate
peacemaking process that was spearheaded by the
community elders of both communities, supported by
the Federal Government of Somalia. To mitigate such
threats, the Federal Government has been working
together with the federal member states to closely
monitor such disputes and clashes through early
warning prevention mechanisms.
As Somalia enters a critical phase of
democratization, we require concerted efforts, both
domestic and international, to unreservedly support the
ongoing economic, political and security progress in
order to ensure that vested interests do not find ways
to undermine the tangible gains that we have made over
the past few years.
Regarding our social reform agenda, the Federal
Government of Somalia has increased the budgetary
allocation to social sector reform and development by
20-04891

24/02/2020

The situation in Somalia

200 per cent. This Government has demonstrated a track
record in responding to the needs of our citizens. As we
transition from decades of instability and insecurity,
our health service providers are now providing basic
medical care at the point of use.
Cultural identity relies on the memory of
communities and individuals. Reviving our culture
and heritage is a powerful tool for determining what
the Somali people remember. After decades of conflict,
the restoration of our symbolic cultural sites has
instilled hope in the Somali people. We have renovated
and restored many renowned landmarks, including a
number of monuments, sports and cultural sites.
The Federal Government continues to build an
inclusive political process across the country. Our
efforts in Galmudug have borne fruit. Through a
lengthy State-building process that entailed months of
reconciliation, negotiation and setbacks, the people of
Galmudug have finally managed to form an inclusive
regional legislative assembly, which led to the election
of the Speaker and, later, the President of the state
Government. The regional leadership now faces the task
of amicably addressing outstanding issues, bringing
any disgruntled stakeholders on board and uniting the
citizens of Galmudug.
The Government is committed to accommodating
the democratization process and to continue building
consensus around contentious issues requiring political
debate going forward — a major shift from the norm that
was built over the past two and a half decades. Politics
is now becoming ever more issues-based, and future
elections will be guided by programmatic linkages.
In the regional context, Somalia stands ready to
play its part as a member of the global community in
our fast-evolving world. Somalia remains determined
to achieve the region’s common objectives to empower
ourselves for the betterment of our people. We will do
so while recognizing the inherent rights for mutual
respect for sovereignty, territorial integrity, political
independence and unity, including Somalia’s.
Somalia believes the region can best succeed with
more cooperation and less interference. That is why
our President decided to play a leading role in the
Horn of Africa initiative. As many members may be
aware, the Horn of Africa’s swift and crucial diplomatic
turnaround was one of most significant and successful
diplomatic developments in the African continent for

S/PV. 8731

many years. That development will indeed pave the
way for long-term stability in the region and has the
potential to attract investors to the region while at
the same time preventing the destabilizing effects of
regional disputes from spilling over into Somalia. The
Government of Somalia therefore calls on all external
actors, especially those in our neighbourhood who
are Security Council-mandated, to cease interfering
in our domestic affairs and, rather, support the hardwon gains on the political, security and economic
fronts, which would be beneficial to the entire region.
According to the Charter of the United Nations, Article
2, paragraph 4,
“All Members shall refrain in their international
relations from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of
any state, or in any other manner inconsistent with
the Purposes of the United Nations.”
The current electoral discussions are now at fever
pitch. My President signed into law the electoral
model approved by both houses of Parliament, firmly
signalling the type of year we should expect. Debate
has begun in earnest, and we are aware that the path
will require candid engagement with all the different
Somali stakeholders. I would like to assure the Council
today that we are bound by and will respect the principle
that the elections be held on time and the transfer of
power be peaceful and orderly.
For the past three years, the rallying call of this
Administration has been for a narrative change for
Somalia, and for our partners to take greater risk in our
country by believing in the hope and the spirit of the
Somali people, who have endured so much. Since then,
our collaborative relations have shown that real change
happens when we work together to change mindsets,
negate old narratives and make genuine tangible
progress. I therefore urge our partners today to see us
for what we can be. We must not be defined by our past
challenges. The narrative of progression, positivity and
reform that defined my Government over the past three
years must be supported by all.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
further names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 4.55 p.m.

20-0489121/21
