2117th

United Nations

PLENARY MEETING

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

(Opening Meeting)

Tuesday, 18 September 1973
at3p.m.

TWENTY-EIGHTH SESSION

NEW

Official Records
CONTFNTS
Page

Agenda item 1:
Opening of the session by the Vice-Chairman of the
.
delegation of Poland
Agenda item 2:
Minute of silent yrayer or meditation

Address by Mr. Stanislaw Trepczyfzski, Temporary President, Vice-Chairman of the delegation of Poland and
Deputy Minister for Foreign Affnirs ofPoland
3. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (interpretation from
French): Another year has passed since our Assembly

1

Address by Mr. Stanis,law Trepczynski, Temporary President,
Vice-Chairman of the delegation of Poland and Deputy
.
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Poland
Agenda item 3:
Credentials of representatives to the twenty-eighth session
of the General Assembly:
(a) Appointment of the Credentials Committee

3

Agenda item 84:
Scale of assessments for the apportion men t of the expenses
of the United Nations: report of the Committee on
Contributions

3

Agenda item 4:
Election of the President

3

Address by Mr. Leopoldo Benites, President of the twentyeighth session of the General Assembly

4

Agenda item 27:
Admission of new Members to the United Nations

9

Trmporary President:
Mr. Stanistaw TREPCZYNSKI (Poland).
President: Mr. Leopoldo BENITES (Ecuador).

AGENDA ITEM I
Opening of the session by the Vice-Chairman
of the delegation of Poland

I. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (interpretation from
French): I declare open the twenty-eighth regular session of
the General Assembly.

AGENDA ITEM 2
Minute of silent prayer or meditation
2. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (interpretation from
French): I invite representatives to stand and observe one
minute of silent prayer or meditation.

YORK

opened its last session. As far as developments in the world
are concerned, it has been a year out of the ordinary,
bringing forth and paving the way for changes which mark
an historic epoch.
4. Never before have hopes of abiding peace and security
in the world been so real, the prospects so close, or the
chances so great. It behoves the United Nations to do
everything in its power to see to it that these hopes are not
disappointed, that the prospects do not recede and that the
chances are not wasted.
5. Our Organization can only prove equal to these great
challenges if it makes a contribution worthy of it to the
great current of healthy change, if it harnesses its proceedings and the concerted efforts of its Members towards
making this process a permanent and irreversible one.

6. Today, with many momen .0US international meetings
and the conclusion of fateful agreements behjnd us, we can
now speak of a new juncture in the world situation. The
policy of peaceful coexistence is becoming more and more
generally the rule governing relations between States with
different social systems. We have arrived at the threshold of
a new historic era for the community 'of nations. Let me
express my whole-hearted belief that no people which is
truly concerned with its own happiness and that of other
nations, and which sincerely aspires to lasting peace, that
no country, big or small, can be the loser from a policy of
peaceful coexistence, the principle3 of which lie at the very
foundation of the Charter of our Organization. On the
contrary, everyone stands to gain and ought to gain from
the fruits of such a policy.
7. War has always brought in its wake the devastation of
the material and cultural achievements of whole generations, while peace has been the sine qua non of economic
development and progress. In our times, advances in science
and technology have multiplied both the destructive power
of war and the creative force of peace as a dynamo in the

The printed official records of the plenary meetings of the General Assembly are published in fascicle
form, the record of each meeting being issued
separately. A prefatory fascicle is issued for each
session, containing a table of contents and the
agenda.

The representatives stood in silence.
A/PV.2117

2

General Assembly - Twenty- eighth Session - Plenary Meetings

develop ment of all areas of life. It is only in a context of
detente and peace that there can arise an equitab le and
purposively shaped internat ional division of labour, based
on equal rights, that is advantageous to all peoples.
8. In the past year, we have also seen changes which have
furthere d the universalizatioJ'. of our Organization along the
lines that many Member States have for a long time urged
from the rostrum of this Assembly. At the last session of
the General Assembly, 27 years after the end of the Second
World War, observers from both tIte German Democratic
Republic and the Federal Republic of Germany for the first
time took their seats togethe r in thi3 hall. Both these States,
whose eminen t representatives we are happy to welcome in
our midst, are this day to become full-fledged Members of
the United Nations. We are equally pleased to be able to
greet the first observer from the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. We are glad that the membership of this
Organization will be increased by the new State of the
Bahamas. Also before us is the topical questio n of the
admission of Bangladesh to the United Nations.
9. Despite the difficulties, the world is marching forward,
fired by the determi nation and will to action on the part of
nations . Although it is an uphill path, not without setbacks,
and the pace is often a strain on our patience progress is
nevertheless being seen to be made, and increasingly so, on
almost every contine nt.
10. In Asia, the prospects of a lasting peace are looming
larger. The hotbeds of conflict and war are gradually dying
out. The world is not losing hope that the termina tion of
the war in Viet-Nam will bring peace to all the nations of
Indo-China. Encouraging reports of the normali zation of
relations are coming in from the Indian subcont inent. There
is more and more talk in Asia of the need to devise a
regional system of security and co-operation.
11. In Africa, the tenth anniversary of the Organization of
African Unity was a symbol of the changes which are taking
place and the aspirations of the many States on that
contine nt. Undaun ted by obstacles and difficulties, Africa
is steering a valiant course of renewal and doggedly cllsting
off the relics of the colonial past. In this struggle for
freedom , AmiIcar Cabral, who was among us at the
twenty- seventh session, has sacrificed his life.
12. In Latin America, a contine nt on which- thanks to the
cordial hospita lity of a number of Govern ments-I was able
to make an extreme ly useful political tour last spring,
progressive transfor mations are accelerating develop ment,
despite the difficul t struggle against retrograde forces. We
were deeply shocked by the news of the sudden and tragic
death-d uring the recent dramati c events experienced by
the Chilean people -of President Salvador Allende, who was
the guest of our Assembly less than a year ago.
13. In Europe, the realities arising out of the results of the
Second World War have been irrevocably recognized. The
Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe, whose
second phase begins in Geneva today, has in effect spelled
the end of the post-war period on this contine nt and the
opening of a new era in which a repetiti on of the. tragedy of
war should never again be possible. We are support ed in this
conviction by the fact that the Conference on Security and

Co-operation, also attende d by the United States and
Canada, is the first meeting of equal and sovereign partners
in the history of Europe which has gathered not for the
purpose of carving up the contine nt or deciding the fate of
others, but to organize its own structur e of peace, security
and co-operation.
14. We look forward to the immine nt success of the
Conference not only because we feel that it serves the real
interests of Europe , but also because we look at it in the
perspective of the indivisibility of world peace and the
influence that the possibility of organizing a system of
collective security in Europe can have on similar arrangements in other parts of the world.
15. The efforts at disarmament pursued at various levels
give rise to new hopes, especially with regard to the
convening of the World Disarmament Conference.
16. The Fourt-I-]. Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held in Algiers earlier this
month, was a new manifestation of the promin ent role
which these countrie s play in the struggle for the achievement of the principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
We all hope that the decisions of the Conference will also
contrib ute to the successful work of our session.
17. The voice of public opinion will soon make itself
clearly heard at the World Congress of Peace Forces, due to
meet in Moscow in a few weeks. We are pleased to note that
public opinion and the great social movements in many
countries are, with increasing vigour, aligning themselves in
concert with world joint action in favour of peace, detente
and co-operation.
18. Though aware that there still survive relics and
thro'- <Jacks to the old days and that many sources of
tension and conflict continu e to fester in various quarters
of the globe, we are stressing the positive side of the
balance sheet since the pressure of these achievements, the
climate of spreading detente and mountin g internat ional
co-operation wiII make it easier to eradicate the anachronistic legacy of the past. Just as we have managed to stamp
out many of the ills of this world, so we are bound sooner
or later to be rid of the remnan ts of colonialism, of the
spectre of hunger which still haunts millions of people, of
social injustices and racial discrimination. We must grapple
with discriminatory practices in internat ional trade and in
the field of econom ic co-operation and with the danger of
forfeiting the distinctive values of nations and individuals.
19. Above all, we must extinguish the embers of conflict
and war in the Middle East, which are now the greatest
peril. Not only is the situatio n there incompatible with the
decisions of our Organization; it also runs counter to the
logic of developments in the world and for that reason
cannot continu e.
20. Public opinion cannot tolerate the poisoning of the
internat ional atmosp here by the all too numero us vestiges
of power politics at a time when it has founder ed on all its
main frunts. Like peace, ti~tente too must be indivisible so
that all can enjoy its blessings.
21. The responsibility fOl tackling these numero us problems falls on our Organization, which will the better

--

-~

21 17th meeting - 18 September 1973

acquit itself of its tasks the greater the degree of normalization that enters the over-all world situation. Moreover,
there is no doubt that growing mutual understanding in this
hall and in the Assembly's Committees, and constructive
decisions by this body and their consistent implementation,
will contribute to the improvement of the international
atmosphere. The important thing is to ensure that international efforts and contacts, whether bilateral or multilateral, dovetail into successful solutions of the issues that
are stlll outstanding. That purpose is also being served by
the assiduous endp.avours. which we hold in high regard, of
the Secretary-General of our Organization, Mr. Kurt Wald·
heim.
22. The plenitude of contemporary life means that the
United Nations is continually coming up against new
problems. This broad range of matters falling within the
purview of our Organization is evidence of its vitality and
significance, of its opportunities and great responsibilities.
23. Before closing I should like, on behalf of the members
of the Assembly to express our heartfelt condolences to the
Swedish delegation on the death of King Gustav VI Adolf.
24. May I be permitted once again to express my
profound gratitude to all delegations and to the members of
the Secretariat for their invaluable co-operation during the
twenty-seventh session.
25. Let us hope that the present session, under the
enlightened leadership ot the new Presidl'nt whom we are
about to elect, will prove a session of expedations fulfilled.
AGENDA ITEM 3
Credentials of representatives to the twenty-eighth session
of the General Assembly:
(a) Appointment of the Credentials Committee
26. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (interpretation from
French): Rule 28 of the rules of procedure provides that
the General Assembly at the beginning of each session shall
appoint, on the proposal of the President, a Credentials
Committee consisting of nine members. Accordingly, I
propose that, for the twenty-eighth session, the Credentials
Committee should consist of the following Member States:
0_ 1, Greece, Japan, Nicaragua, Senegal, the Union of
Soviet ~ocialist Republics, the United Republic of Tanzania, the United States of America and Uruguay.

27. If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the countries
I have men~ioned are hereby appointed members of the
Creden tial s ComlJ1i ttee.
It \Vas so decided.
AGENDA ITEM 84
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses
of the United Nations: report of the Committee on
Contributions
2~. The

TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (interpretation
from French): I should like to draw tile attention of the

3

General Assembly to a letter which was sent to me by the
Secretary-General in which he informs the Assembly that
four Member States are in arrears in the payment of their
contributions to the regular budget of the United Nations
within the terms of Article 19 of the Charter.
29. This letter will be found in docull:Jent A/9157. The
document will also contain communications from the
Pennanent Representatives of the Member States. concerned, informing the Secretary-General that the amounts
due have been sent to the United Nations and requesting
that their countries should be pennitted to vote. It will
mention the circumstances which have caused the delay in
th,:: payment of these contributions.
30. In this regard, I should like to draw the attention of
the Members of the General Assembly to the second
sentence of Article 19 of the Charter, which reads:
"The General Assembly may, nevertheless, permit such a
Member to vote if it is satisfied that the failure to pay is
due to conditions beyond the control of the Member."
31. In the light of the communications annexed to
document A/9157, which indicate that the arrears in the
payment of contributions are due to circumstances beyond
the control of the Member States concerned, the Assembly
might perhaps pennit these Members to vote, in accordance
with the sentence of Article 19 af the Charter which I
quoted during the brief period which is to elapse until their
contributions actually reach the Secretary-General. The
Secretary-General will report to the General Assembly as
soon as these contributions have been received, and! think
that he might be invited to report in any case in this regard
on 26 September at the latest.
32. If I hear no comment or objection to this proposal, it
will be so decided.

It was so decided.
AGENDA ITEM 4
Election of the President
33. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (interpretation from
French): I now invite the members of the General
A.ssembly to proceed to the election of the President of the
twenty-eighth regular session of the General Assembly. In
accordance with rule '"'4 of the rules of procedure, the
election will be held by secret ballot.

At the invitation of the Temporary President. Mr. GabreSellassie (Ethiopia) and Mr. Smid (Czechoslovakia) acted as
tellers.
A vote was taken by secret ballot.
Number of ballot papers:
Invalid ballots:
Number of valid ballots:
Abstentions:
Number of members voting:
Required majority:

130

o

130

o

130

66

. III

4

General Assembly - Twenty- eighth Session - Plenary Meetings

Number uf I

~~ obtained:

Mr. Benites (Ecuado r)
Mr. Amerasinghe (Sri Lanka)

129
. . . . . . ..

~

Hal'ing obtained the required majorit)', Mr. Leopoldo
Benites (Ecuador) was elected President of the twentyeighth session of the General Assembly.
34. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (interpretation from
French): 1 extend my sincere congratulations to Mr. Benites

and invite him to assume the presidency of the twentyeighth session of the General Assembly.

Mr. Benites (Ecuador) took the Chair.
Address br Mr. Leopoldo Benites, President of the
twenty.~ighth session of the General Assembly
35. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I
trust that you will allow me, first of all, to pay a very well
deserved tribute to the President of the twenty-seventh
session of the General Assembly, Mr. Stanislaw Trepczynski, whose wise directio n of the proceedings and keen
sagacity made him one of the best Presidents of the Gener.al
Assembly that I have known.
36. I~ is also my desire and my duty to recall with
emotion the memory of the distinguished Guatemalan jurist
and diploma t Mr. Emilio Arenales Catalan, the last Latin
American President of the General Assembly, a man who
was taken from us by the chill hand of death at the very
height of his creative powers.
37. Allow me next to state that, contem plating the
magnitude of the tasks which I assume today, I rely
confide ntly on the timely advice and wise co-operation of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Kurt Waldheim, whom, over the
many years that I have had the honour of knowing him, I
have learned to admire as a diploma t and to appreciate as a
friend.
38. Also, I should like in advance to express my confidence in all the members of the Secretariat, especially
those who will be working most closely under the direction
of the Under-Secretary-General for Political and General
Assembly Affairs, Mr. Bradford Morse, in whom intelligence goes hand in hand with kindness, and agility of
thought with prompt ness of action.
39. I feel that I must also express my feelings over t~e
deaths of two Heads of State that have taken place in the
last few days.
40. The first was that of the constitu tional President of
Chile, Mr. Salvador Allende. It does not behove me from
this rostrum to pass a political judgem ent on his ideas or his
political actions, but I must state tllat I have the deeply
rooted personal conviction that he was a man who loved his
people and defende d his ideals with his blood and his life.
41. May I also be allowed to express to the Government
and people of Sweden my sincere condolences on the death
of His Majesty King Gustav VI Adolf. During his noble
existence and long years of reign he possessed the love of

his people and the wi~dom to lead them to a high level of
social well-being and progress based on justice.
42. I address you with great emotion and I thank you for
the honour you have done me in electing me to preside over
this session of the General Assembly of the United Nations,
the supreme organ of the internat ional commu nity and the
highest expression of world public opinion .
43. As a man I speak with the humilit y that flows from
the awareness of my own limitations and the magnitude of
the responsibilities I assume. The only merit that I
acknowledge in my work and the 18 years during which I
have come to Assembly sessions and of the 13 years during
which almost constan tly I have served as Perman ent
Representative of Ecuador is my loyalty to and my faith in
the Organization. However, this merit is not mine alone; it
speaks for and is the reflection of the unchangeable
approach and resolute attitude of my country , Ecuador,
which despite internal difficulties and changes of Government maintained and still maintains today a uniform and
consistent internat ional poli~y, based on respect for the
Charter of the United Nations.
44. The political stance of Ecuador is in turn based on the
ethical and legal principles which form the commo n
cultural heritage of Latin America derived crom a thousan d
years of history.
45. At a time when Europe had not as yet ~Inerged from
the age of epic verse steeped in bloolt and the feudal castle
hedged in with cupidity , our own aboriginal forbears in
Latin America had already written their spiritual history in
the wondro us Mayan-Aztec pyramids; the Incas had created
the wide structur e of their communal social system; they
had built royal roads that today still cause amazement and,
in the stone mystery of Machu Picchu, they had ral,cd a
hymn to their greatness; the Aymanis Indians had erected
the gates of glory of their cities of the sun; and that
enigmatic culture of Easter Island had bequeat hed to all the
ages its questions in stone.
46. Our aboriginal races-w hich largely remain intact as a
potentia l for the future- merged themselves into the most
humane , humanistic and universal culture of the Europe of
the colonizers; Iberia, and especially Spain, discoverer of
worlds and mother of races, that explored from the present
states of' Alabama, Texas, Tennessee, Oklahoma, Kansas,
Arizona, Nebraska, Colorado, New Mexico, California and
t"lorida -where it founded the first European city of the
United States, St. August ine-dow n to Santiago del Nuevo
Extrem o in the Chilean territories and Santa Mafia del
Buen Aire on the banks of the River Plate.
47. Spain, which denied itself the right to conque r and
enslave indigenous peoples, assuming only the right of
tutelage in accordance with the legal philosophy of Francisco de Vitoria and with the Laws of the Indies, formed in
Latin America a culture of mixed origins- Indo-A froHispanic. Spain from the sixteen th century onwards
fOlll1ded universities and craft schools free of any discrimination whir:h, in all the Iberian overseas dominions, resulted
in the creation of an extraor dinary art, a unique literature
and a keen sense of thE law. It is that Latin America, now
made wider and more universal as it combines with our

brethren in the
nomina tion ma
expressing my th
48. Not long a
the peoples of
Panama to discu
Council did hold
that, without an
America more 0
essential points.
49. The first
stone of the Ch
the sovereignty
principle is linke
force in interna t
principle is the .
tories by force
domina tion, enc
jeopardizing the
50. The second
indispensable sa
peoples to ado
system they see
51. The third i
have the right
words, this calls
neo-colonialism
underlies colonia

apartheid.
52. The fourth
full sovereignty
the subsoil of t
resources of th
established sover
face, soil, subsoil
53. And the last
of the link betwe
bearing in mind
Intemat ional Sec
54. The entire
need to maintain
five points that
implicitly or expl

55. The first co
graph of the Prea
Charter an indi
generations from
lifetime has brou

56. The two wa
mobilization of 1
before attaining
missing, in addi
suffered more tha
and women.

57. The "untold
the chlorine gas

.

'2li7th meeting - 18 September 1973

5

brethren in the Caribbean, that honoured me :ith the
nomination making possible this election for which I am
expressing my thanks.

1915 and, together with mustard gas, brought death or
lifelong suffering to 1.3 million human beings.

48. Not long ago-reviving the old dream of Bolivar that
the peoples of the world converged on the Isthmus of
Panama to discuss problems of peace and war-the Security
Council did hold meetings in Panama City. May I point out
that, without any prior agreement, the speakers from Latin
America more or less agreed, one after the other, on five
essential points.

58. In the Second World War the "untold sorrow" was the
fire-bombing with napalm, which sticks to the skin like the
poisoned tunic of Nessus, or white phosphorus, which
penetrates into the body and continues to burn, and the
massive aerial bombardment of open cities with bombs that
started at 3,000 pounds of TNT (dynamite), then increased
to 10,000 and finally reached the equivalent of 20,000 tons
in each of the uranium-235 and plutonium bombs dropped
on Hiroshima and Nagasaki in the tragic August of 1945.

49. The first point, which constitutes the very cornerstone of the Charter of the United Nations, is respect for
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States, and this
principle is linked to that prohibiting the threat or the use of
force in international relations. A logical corollary of this
principle is the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territories by force and of the establishment of any type of
domination, enclave or unlawful occupation jupairing or
jeopardizing the territorial sovereignty of States.
50. The second is the principle of non-intervention, an
indispensable safeguard of freedom and of the right of
peoples to adopt whatever political, social or economic
system they see fit, and by their own decision.
51. The third is that all peoples subject to foreign rule
have the right to obtain full self-government; in other
words, this calls for the total abolition of colonialism and
neo-colonialism and the condemnation of racism, which
underlies colonialism, especially in the opprobrious form of
apartheid.
52. The fourth is the recognition of the right of States to
full sovereignty over the natural resources of the soil and
the subsoil of their territory and the living and mineral
resources of the adjacent sea over which they have
established sovereignty and jurisdiction, including its surface, soil, subsoil and intermediate water column.
53. And the last and fifth point is the effective recognition
of the link between international development and security,
bearing in mind the Declaration on the Strengthening of
International Security in resolution 2734 (XXV).

59. The "untold sorrow" was also, in the Second World
War, the destruction of more than 60 per cent of the
industrial capacity, which led to hunger and disease and to
the problem of displaced persons and refugees.
60. Nevertheless, according to the 1969 Yearbook of the
Stockholm International Peace Research Institution
(SIPRI), since the establishment of the United Nations and
the entry into force of the Charter there have been 101
armed conflicts, including civil wars with or without
~utside support, interventions, border clashes and outright
wars. l I am convinced that in all those conflicts one or
more of the principles I referred to previously were
violated.
61. Despite so-called "limited wars", in some of which the
most cruel weapons of mass destruction, in particular
chemical weapons, including defoliants, were perfected or
tested, it is true that a third world war has been avoided.
62. It would be folly to boast that this has been the result
of enforcement action by the United Nations. Of the basic
agreements on collateral measures of disarmament, hardly
any originated with the Organization, and the Disarmament
Committee, which was established by resolution
1722 (XVI) of 20 December 1961 as a body for negotiation
between the ':wo super-Powers, has remained simply that,
despite the conscientious and intelligent way in which its
members have worked and the fact that it has been enlarged
without any change in its terms of reference.

56. The two wars mentioned in the Preamble involved the
mobilization of 170 millbn men, of whom 36 million died
before attaining the age of 40, 4 million were reported
missing, in addition to which the civilian population
suffered more than 25 million casualties, including children
and women.

63. The growth of nuclear power in the 28 years of
existence of the United Nations is awesome. The unit of
explosive power in 1945 was the kiloton, the eqUivalent of
1,000 tons of TNT, produced by a chain reaction of
neutrons when a critical mass of fissionable isotopes such as
uranium-235 or plutonium is brought together. Today the
unit of explosive power is the megaton, or the eqUivalent of
1 million tons, ever since the explosion in 1952 of the first
thenl10nuclear bomb based on the fusion of light hydrogen
atoms triggered by the thermal power of a fission bomb.
The 2a-kiloton bomb dropped on Hiroshima caused
approximately 250,000 instant deaths and injuff~d 92,000
people, of whom 38 died of radiation effects as recently as
the first six months of this year, according to a report in
The New York Times of 5 August 1973. In the early 1960s
the megaton explosions were terrifying, and the outcry of
world public opinion-which this Assembly represents- had

57. The "untold sorrow" to which the Charter refers was
the chlorine gas which hung over the lines at Ypres in April

1 See SIPRI Yearbook of World Armaments and Disarmament,
1968/69 (New York, Humanities Press. 1970). pp. 366-371.

54. The entire structure of the Charter is based on the
need to maintain inrernational peace and security, and the
five points that I have mentioned are contained in it
implicitly or explicitly.
55. The first commitment we assumed in the first paragraph of the Preamble to the Charter-which forms with the
Charter an indivisible whole-was "to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war, which twice in our
lifetime has brought untold sorrow to mankind".

i

~!

"

·.'i:·. ·',
I.
,:'

I.·•.·
I

65.
for
nucl
ther
mea
the

Hmi
syst
is t
diffi
disar
cedu
66.
of
Orga
vote,
idea
the
Unit
whic
mes
anac
of f
creat
~prea

prop
espe
67.
have
a dy
stanc
subsi

68.
Natio
one i
Seco
the
defm'
Chart
clear
be gi
chan
refere
2 Tr
Outer

6

General Assembly - Twenty-,lghth Session - Plenary Meetings

some moral impact in bringing about the 1963 Moscow
Treaty. 2
64. Nevertheless, nuclear tests are continuing, not only in
the atmosphere, where the danger of contamination affects
many States which have rightly protested, but also underground, where, in addition to the risk of unsettling
geological faults, there is the danger of the increasing power
of nuclear weapons and their means of delivery; for
underground tests not only have been used to perfect
missiles with multiple nuclear warheads and with the ability
to strike at several targets simultaneously but have made it
possible to increase world megatonnage to the point where
the share of terror for each inhabitant of the earth is
usually calculated as being between 3 and 15 tons of TNT.

65. The General Assembly has called and continues to call
for the abolition of all weapons of mass destruction,
nuclear or chemical, without any positive results. However,
there are two important facts which may give grounds for a
measure of optimism: the first is the agreement between
the two super-Powers on partial and temporary nuclear
limitation measures, particularly in respect of delivery
systems, both quantitative and qualitative, and the second
is the agreement reached in this Assembly, after intial
difficulties were [wercome, concerning a future world
disarmament conference, the mandate, agenda and procedures of which are to be carefully studied.

66. In the face of these realities of today, there is no lack
of prophets of doom who proclaim the failure of the
Organization because it has in its ranks, with the right to
vote, a majority of peoples they regard as immature. Their
idea of weighted voting could spell the final overthrow of
the Organization as it was created by the peoples of the
United Nations in 1945. There is also an imperial arrogance
which has barefacedly argued the urgent need for gendarmes necessaires to impose peace through fear, which was an
anachronistic dream of Taine later taken up by the leaders
of fascism. And there is no lack of proposals for the
creation of spheres of influence which would mean the
spread of despotism. Those who advocate these or similar
proposals completely ignore the United Nations, and
especially the General J\ssembly.
67. Considering such solutions, I would reaffirm what I
have maintained fer many years: that the United Nations is
a dynamic entity, capable of adapting to changing circumstances, and this is what makes it exist and will make it
subsist.
68. It should be remembered that the term "United
Nations" had, at the outset, a meaning different from the
one it has now; it meant the nations which, united, won the
Second World War. Originally they wanted to be exclusively
the Organization of the self-styled democratic world. The
defmition of "enemy States" given in Article 53 of the
Charter, a term appearing also in Articles 77 and 107, is
clear proof of this original limitation which was intended to
be given to the Organization, and it is to be hoped that a
change generated by this Assembly would delete those
references forever.
2 Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in
Outer Space and under Water, signed in Moscow on 5 August 1963.

69. Being an instrument drafted by the victorious States,
the Charter could not but reflect the power politics which
underlay the two wars. The States which had borne the
brunt of the last war could not, however, resist the
temptation to exercise broader power in the organ on
which, within the framework of the purposes and principles
of the Charter, the Members, which are the same that
constitute the General Assembly, confer primary, but not
exclu!live, responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security in Article 24 of the Charter. lt is
not my intention to voice negative criticism, but rather to
state the facts which show that very often the use-or more
correctly the abuse-of those powers, not only quantitatively but also qualitatively, has obstructed the performance of essential duties or vitiated consensuses that
had been negotiated.
70. Power politics-the legacy of a past which we hope is
now behind us-were also reflected in the absence of a clear
defmition of universality. The word "universality" and the
concept it expresses are not to be found in the Charter.
71. Yet despite these limitations inherent in the Charterwhich I mention in a non-controversial spirit and with an
humility-the Organization has had to evolve, adapting
itself to the imperative exigencies of life and continually
creating new formulae for coexistence.

72. I noted earlier that the nations, which, united, won
the Second World War took upon themselves the defence of
democracy, the interpretation of which ran the gamut from
the classical conception of the" Manchester school to direct
democracy. Accordingly, one of the essential commitments
in the Preamble to the Charter is "to practice tolerance and
live together in peace with one another as good neighbours".
73. Tolerance-a passive and almost negative virtueevolved out of the progressive evolution which is life, and
has come to mean not just peaceful coexistence, but active
co-operation, and today basic agreements between Powers
with different ideologies are possible, greatly enhancin3 the
prospects for peace.
74. In addition, after a long and hard struggle, the
principle of universality has been incorporated into the life
of the Organization. It is difficult to ignore the fact that the
Charter of the United Nations is, on the one hand, a
. multilateral treaty which imposes upon the States parties
binding obligations, many of them voluntary limitations of
their domestic jurisdiction and, on the other, it is the
constitution of the international community-"We the
peoples of the United Nations", as the Charter puts it.
75. The concept of an international community could be
said to be a reality; it is a fact independent of the will of its
members and that is what differentiates it from international society, whidl is dependent upon the desire for
partnership. That is why the international community
demands universality.
76. Universality embraces the need for all existing States
to be able to become Members, if they so wish and fulfil
the essential conditions of Article 4, as well as the need for
all peoples who are under foreign rule to achieve full

self-governn
States whic
State an in
dence by C
liberation n
pendence C
reprisals an
achieve full
every effor
colonial co
77. The a
of the int
compare th
Members. I
minutes, ac
the discove
the German
of German
stage of th
universality.
78. The t
munity is a
mastery of
immediate
the coming
Mach 2, it
earth in a
by technol
hitherto u
opinion as
SOIl ~ write
indirect but

79. I am t
super-State
trend to su
and to un
should like
deal with
strengthen
of internati
yet indefin
strengthen
ordinator 0

80. There
resolutions
resolutions
Charter, rea
disregard w
legal basis
declarations
since a mul
the resoluti
conferred 0
which they

81. 'nle U
tion 217 A
Interventio
Protection
tion 2131
Independen

,.
2117th meeting - 18 September 1973

self-government and total independence, thus becoming
States which can join the United Nations. As a citizen of a
State an inhabitant of a region which achieved independence by force of arms, I could not condemn the armed
liberation movements which are struggling to attain independence for their peoples, heroically suffering dreadful
reprisals and inhuman atrocities. I believe that, in order to
achieve full universality, the United Nations must make
every effort and apply all necessary measures to assist
colonial countries and peoples.
77. The advance towards universality and full integration
of the international community becomes obvious if we
compare the 5 I founding Members and the present 132
Members. I have no doubt that this Asser..bly will, in a few
minutes, accept the brother State of the Bahamas, where
the discovery that gave the earth its universal shape began,
the German Democratic R,::public and the Federal Republic
of Germany-thus ending, in my opinion, the restrictive
stage of the Organization and beginning the stage of true
universality.
78. The trend towards integration of the world com·
munity is an irreversible historic process. As a result of the
mastery of electronics, an event in any place on earth has
immediate repercussions on the other side of the globe. In
the coming years, when commercial aircraft will exceed
Mach 2, it will be possible to reach the other side of the
earth in a few hours. The interdependence brought about
by technological devekpment has produced a phenomenon
hitherto unknown to history: an international public
opinion as powerful as national public opinion which, for
SOIl ~ writers of treatises on constitutional law, has an
indirect but real governing influence.
79. I am f2r from belieVing that the United Nations is a
super-State or a world government. However, in view of the
trend to subject the world to dominant spheres of influence
and to underrate the powers of the General Assembly, I
should like to reaffirm my personal belief that, in order to
deal with urgent problems in future, it is necessary to
strengthen the action of the General Assembly as an organ
of international public opinion, which is an incipient and as
yet indefinite form of world government, as well as to
strengthen the Economic and Social C0uncH as the coordinator of international economic cO-0peration.
80. There is a tendency to maintain that the only binding
resolutions an. those of the Security Council. Those
resolutions obviously are binding and Article 25 of the
Charter, reaffirms this binding character, which a few States
disregard with arrogant insolence. But I believe that the
legal basis for the binding force of resolutions and
declarations of the General Assembly lies in the fact that,
since a multilateral treaty is binding upon the parties to it,
the resolutions and declarations have the binding force
conferred on them by the provisions of the Charter on
which they are based.
81. HIe Universal Declaration of Human Rights Iresolution 217 A (1Il)/, the Declaration on the !nadmissibility of
Intervention in the Domestic Affairs of States and the'
Protection of their Independence and Sovereignty Iresolu·
tion 2131 (XX)/, the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples Iresolu-

7

tion 1514 (XV)/, the Declaration on the Strengthening of
International Security /resolution 2734 (XXV)/, irirer alia,
would be useless dialectic exercises if they were deemed to
be merely recommendations with no binding force, and the
Assembly would be no more than a sounding-board for the
interests of the great Powers.
82. There are some facts which lead one to believe that
world public opinion, of which the General Assembly is an
outstanding organ, is urging that dynamic development.
Only three African and seven Arab and Asian States were
among the founding Members. The administering Powers
opposed every endeavour by those of us who strove for the
independence of colonial peoples. The decade of the 1950s
witnessed the struggle which enahled former colonial
Territories to join the Organization as sovereign States. On
20 September 1960-a glorious date for decolonization-17
African States were admitted as Members, together with
Cyprus, and they thus were able, on 14 December of that
same year, to vote on resolution J 514 (XV).
83. The growing evolution towards universality has given
rise to a new phenomenon which also indicates the progress
made by the Organization as a result of the action of
international public opinion <is embodied in the Assembly.
Once the former balance of power, based on victory, was
destroyed, the United Nations became the instrument for a
political struggle in favour of the developing countries. But
halfway through the J 960s, the inexorable force of
economic events highlighted the diffference between the
industrialized north and the impoverished south, a differ·
ence defined by latitude which was clearly foreseen by that
devoted and far-sighted servant of peace, U Thant, from his
position as Secretary-General of the United Nations.
84. With few exceptions, the industrialized countries
amassed their wealth as true colonial or neo-colonial
Powers. In one way or another, they relied upon exploiting
the natural resources of the less developed countrieswhether or not they were politically independent-since
they provided cheap raw materials in return for costly
manufactured goods.
85. In the Assembly and other United Nations organs, we
are witnessing the great battle of public opinion to achieve
such essential objectives as fair terms of trade, recognition
of the right of States to exercise full sovereignty over their
natural resources, formulas for the transfer of technology
which do not constitute a disguise for imperialist penetration and a share for all developing countries in the benefits
of super-development, among many other targets.
86. There can be no peace without justice nor intern::!·
tional security with hungry people. Internal political
freedom without economic security is the most irritating
and hypocritical mockery of the so-called democracies. To
internationalize this would be to extend that shocking
mockery to the three quarters of mankind which SllHen
from malnutrition, illiteracy, and disease. Nor is it morally
admissible that, under the ;Jfetext of a ~- -adoxical freedom, powerful States support private companies in their
pillaging of the wealth of developing countries. These
developing countries have the right to adopt internal
measures in exercise of their sovereignty in their own
territory and the adjacent sea over which they have
established sovereignty and jurisdiction.

_1="0- co ~ =' -c'- •
C'

General Assembly - Twenty-eighth Session - Plenary Meetings

.~

:l

~

I[

87. A short while ago, in an interview with the Venezuelan
press, Arnold J. Toynbee pointed out that by the year 2000
a world government would be needed to deal with three
problems: over-population, imbalance between production
and consumption, and environmental deterioration.
88. Let me remind you that in 1914, at the beginning of
the First World War, the population of the world was
roughly 1,800 million. In June of last year it was calculated
at 3,782 million, and it is expected that by the year 2000,
at the current birth and mortality rates, it will be
approximately 7,500 million. Such an increase in population obviously poses the problem of an expanding rate of
consumption and a production rate that lags behind; and
this has already caused a deficit in production which is
likely to increase in the future.
89. The industrial development that is indispensable if the
new needs are to be satisfied also creates a dangerous
amount of environmental contamination. The large-scale
exploitation of forests and the destruction (If phytoplankton are diminishing oxygen in vast quantities. The
biosphere is seriously threatened by the growing pollution
of the atmosphere, soil and water.
90. These and other problems must be met, but they
cannot be solved without strengthening the organs of
co-ordination and co-operation on a world scale. Although
the idea of a world government is not practicable for the
moment, it is necessary to strengthen the United Nations-and I do not mean only the Security Council, which
has to be given all means to enable it effectively to maintain
international peace and security, but more particularly the
General Assembly as the organ of the world community,
and the Economic and Social Council as the agent and
co-ordinator of the economic development and social
welfare of that community.

91. I apolo~e for having taken up so much of your time.
I have, however, confined myself to presentir:g in broad
outline the general problems which you in your wisdom
will be specifically called upon to solve. I have avoided
. dealing with specific items of the agenda of the Assembly
which are exclusively within your competence. Because,
both morally and legally, the President of the General
Assembly is not entitled, directly or indirectly, to intervene
in the debates, and even less in the decisions on matters
that fall within the purview of the Assembly. However,
while the President cannot deal with specific problems, I do
not think that there is anything to prevent him, before he
takes up his duties, from expressing his views on the major
problems of humanity, all of which in one way or another
are under the examination of the General Assembly as the
o.gan of the world community.
92. In the final analysis, as these problems are of concern
to man, tillS fragile, thinking reed, as Pascal believed, or this
most extraordinary wonder of the universe, as Sophocles
defmed him in Antigone: man as a social being or as an
individual whose hopes and fears make up the thread of
history.
93. A modern philosopher has said that there are some
periods in history when man feels in this world as if he were
in a solid mansion, while there are other stormy periods

when he can find no haven in which to pitch his tent. I think
that those tumultuous periods generally correspond to the
transition between historical periods. Such was the case
when the barbarians struck at the gates of Rome with their'
spears and when feudal autarchy and the medieval system
of guilds clashed with the monetary economy of the East
and the classical philosophy that reached them from
Byzantium.

94. But ours is an era of transition. It is a world of birth
and death, of meetings and farewells. With full awareness of
the change that was lacking at othflr moments of transition,
we are witnessing the end of a historical era that began with
the industrial revolution, which was characterized economically by the creation of empires and internally by the
concept of sovereignty as power. Today we are witnessing
the economic integration and convergence of free peoples
in an international community, the increasing advancement
of man as a social being and the change of the concept of
sovereignty as power to that of sovereignty as a function.

95. Certainly we are still living a peace with fear arising
from the balance between the nuclear Powers. We are
indeed aware that the most inhuman weapons have been
tested right up to recent times. It is a fact that the criminal
mentality of the makers of weapons of mass destruction
forebodes for the next century lethal developments such as
the use of lasers, meteorological warfare, the poisoning of
plankton, total destruction by means of short-half-life
isotopes of lethal effect which can be used as tactical
weapons. One might even stretch the imagination and think
of the use of anti-gravitational forces. But in the face of
that world of fear there also rises up our world of hope, to
which our outgoing President, Mr. Trepczynski, referred in
his superb statement this afternoon.
96. The historical period which we are now starting is one
of complete te!:hnical and practical mastery of nature and
control over the major forces of the universe, bent to the
use and benefit of mankind. Control of nuclear fission has
already led to the production of electric energy in modest
amounts which it is hoped to increase to more than 80 per
cent by the beginning of the next o:entury; it has also made
possible the desalination of sea-water, pest control, and
increase in the yield and quality of crops, the destruction of
malignant tissues and the conservation and preservation of
food-stuffs. Optimistic scientists believe that in the first
decade of the next century the most powerful force in the
universe-'that of the fusion of light atoms-may well be
used for peaceful purposes instead of for its current sole
purpose of mass destruction. It is possible that by that time
amazing discoveries will have been made in the chemical
industry, especially petro-chemicals, so that petroieum,
which is now used to drive machines and stimulate
consciences, may well be made a source of food, of clothing
anrl even of building components to house the growing
masses of mankind. The riches of the sea-bed and the ocean
floor, including the enormous food potential of algae, are
already being explored, if not exploited, on a massive scale.
H is no fantasy or pipe dream to speculate that technology
might well transform the world and make it in fact a noble
mansion for a worthy humankind. The fear is that the
c'Ilormous potential of technology might fall and be placed
at the service exclusively of selfish interests. The hope· is
that it may serve to benefit mankind, humanity organized

in an
wlllc

97.
etem
vacill
justi
by v
ahov
man

98.
wor

99.
acco
shou
unde
reeo
A/9
the
the
of t
prev'
the
the
on tl
of tI
this

It

100.
Secu
Gen
Ge
doe

102.

sent
mat

103
pria
offe
elec
mea
felic

104
of

'-~,""".'

... ,

21l7th meeting - 18 September 1973

in an interriational community, increasingly more universal,
which the United Nations represents.
97. Looking at that future of fears and hopes, one cannot
eternally rem<tin in the hesitatnt posture of Hamlet,
vacillating between "to be" and "not to be". The future of
justice and peace must be conquered by work, by patience,
by vigorous enthusiasm, by constant energy, but over and
above all by strengthening the moral fibre and force of
mankind which this Assembly embodies.
98. Ladies and gentlemen, I invite you now to begin our
work.
AGE~DA ITEM 27

Admission of new Members to the United Nations
99. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): In
accordance with the procedure followed in the past, I
should now like to invite the General Assembly to consider,
under item 27 of the provisional agenda, the positive
recommendations by the Security Council in documents
A/9080 and A/9097 for the admission to membership in
the United Nations of the German Democratic Republic,
the Federal Republic of Germany and the Commonwealth
of the Bahamas. Tllis special procedure has been applied
previously in order to give States recently recommended by
the Security Council for membership in our Organization
the opportunity, if the Gen~ral Assembly acts favourably
on their requests, to participate from the outset in the work
of the session. If there is no objection, we shall proceed in
this manner.

It was so decided.
100. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
Security Council has recommended the admission of the
German Democratic Republic, the Federal Republic of
Germany and the Bahamas to the United Nations in
documents A/9080 and A/9097.
101. We shall first of all take up the draft resolution which
appears in document A/L.698/Rev.1. This refers to the
admission to membership in the United Nations of the
Gennan Democratic Republic and the Federal Republic of
Germany.
102. In connexion with this draft resolution, the representative of Israel has asked to speak on a procedural
matter, and I call on him.
103. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): Mr. President, at the appropriate time the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Israel will
offer you the congratulations of my Government on your
election to the presidency of this Assembly. In the
meantime I should like to convey to you my warm personal
felicitations and best wishes.
104. I have asked to be allowed to speak under the rules
of procedure of the General Assembly to state that in
accordance with those rules my delegation has requested a
separate vote on operative paragraph I of the draft resolution in document A/L.698/Rev.!. The reasons for this
request are as follows.

9

105. The consideration of the admission to the United
Nations of the Federal Republic of Germany and of the
German Democratic Republic 28 years after the Second
World War brought about by Nazi aggression is an event of
profound historical significance. The United Nations was
born out of the international struggle in that war against
nazism and the threat is posed to all mankind. For the
Jewish people, subjected by the Nazi regime of the German
Reich to a holocaust of slaugllter and destruction, and for
the State of Israel which has been the home of the surviving
remnant of that tragedy, the question before the General
Assembly is overcast by dark shadows. The grim memories
are indelible. It was only three decades ago that 6 million
human beings were systematically annihilated merely because they were Jews. Two million Jewish children were
mercilessly put to death in gas chambefs and crematoria.
One third of the entire Jewish peopJe was massacred. The
military and civilian losses o(the allies fighting against Nazi
Germany were numbered in many millions. However, the
Jewish people as a whole, men, women and children,
became the objective of a barbaric campaign of total
physical liquidation. When the war ended the nations
counted their dead. The Jewish people counted its survivors. Never has a crime of such dimensions, of such
cruelty and horror, taken place. To the Jewish people it
demonstrated once nore how real are the dangers to its
exist~nce, even in our times. It proved anew that Jewish
survival depends in the final test on the Jewish people's
capacity to defend itself. It was a reminder that truth and
right are not wedded to the side of those who are more
numerous and that the Jewish people's struggle to preserve
its life and to safeguard its heritage, its faith and its moral
values is a just cause however many, and powerful its foes.
106. The wounds have not yet all healed. Man's inhumanity which has inflicted them and the lessons to be
drawn from it cannot be ignored or forgotten. The Jewish
people will not forget. The United Nations must not forget.
By history, by law and by morality Germany as a whole
bears responsibility for the holocaust. The Federal Republic
of Germany has consistently recognized this heavy responsibility. During his recent visit to Israel, the Chancellor of
the Federal Republic of Germany declared:
"As a German, and on behalf of the great majority of
my countrymen, I can say this: ... The three decades
that separate us from the days of horror made us forget
nothing of what must not be forgotten.
"I have already pointed out that nobodY, however
young, can be relieved of the liability of history ...
History, however bitter it may be, is reality which is daily
carried over into the present and into the future. This
reality, too, has to be accepted.
"We cannot undo what has been done. The sum of the
suffering and of the horror cannot be removed from the
consciousness of our peoples. Co-operation between our
two countries remains characterized by the historical and
moral background of our experiences...."
107. Throughout the years the Federal Republic of
Germany has tried to steer a course towards a new epoch in
its international conduct and in its relations with the Jewish
people. It has exerted and is exerting efforts to make

l

i

'

I

I

I

i

I

General Assembly - Twenty-eighth Session - Plenary Meetings

amends, if at all possible, for the terrible atrocities
perpetrated against the Jewish people by the Nazi regime in
the name of the German nation.
108. At the same time, however, Israel notes with regret
and repugnance that the other German State has ignored
and continues to ignore Germany's historical responsibility
for the holocaust and the moral obligations arising from it.
It has compounded the gravity of that attitude by giving
support and practical assistance to the campaign of violence
and murder waged against Israel and the Jewish people by
Arab terror organizations. Thus, the world stands today
before the spectacle of one of the German States being
once again associated with the denial to the Jewish people
of its fundamental rights.
109. The Government of Israel has always favoured the
principle of universality of the United Nations. It has
always welcomed and attached great importance to international detente, espechlly in the relations between the
great Powers and between East and West in general. It
cannot, however, pass in silence over the policy of the
German Democratic Republic, which for more than 20
years has been airrJng to relegate to oblivion the holocaust
wrought upon the Jewish people by Nazi Germany and, in
contravention of the United Nations Charter and in
particular of its Article 4, has been fanning the f1am~s_of
hostility and belligerency against Israel, the Jewish State
which is inseparable from the Jewish people in its struggle
to repel anti-Jewish hatred, to prevent the shedding of
innocent Jewish blood and to preserve the right of the
Jewish nation to live in freedom, peace and security.
110. Accordingly, Israel supports the admission of the
Federal Republi..: of Germany to the United Nations but
desires to place on record its opposition to the admission of
the German Democratic Republic. The Israel delegation
regrets that, due to objections of the sponsors of draft
resolution A/L.698/Rev.l, a separate vote on the admission
of the German Democratic Republic has become impos• sible. In the circumstances, my delegation is not pressing
for such a vote. Had it taken place, Israel would have voted
against the admission of the German Democratic Republic.
Ill. The PRESIDENT (interpretation ,"rom Spanish): I
call on the representative of Guinea, who also wishes to
speak on a procedural matter.
112. Mrs. Jeanne Martin CISSE (interpretation from
French): Mr. President, since I have the privilege of being
among the first speakers at this twenty-eighth session,
permit me, before the arrival of my Foreign Minis~er, to
extend to you my personal congratulations on your
election to the Presidency of this twenty-eighth session of
the General Assembly.
113. The statement which my delegation feels prompted
to make is made not for the sake of being original or
intriguing: it is the confirmation of a consistent attitude
faithful to the important interests of a sovereign people.
114. On 21 June last, at the 42nd meeting of the
Committee on the Admission of New Members, which had
the task of considering the applications of the two
Germanys for admission to membership in the United

Nations, the delegation of the Republic of Guinea, in the
initial stage, defined unambiguously its attitude within the
terms of the mandate of that Committee. Subsequently, at
the meeting of the Security Council held for the purpose of
taking a decision on the conclusions of the Committee on
the Admission of New Members, we had occasion to
present the fundamental reasons for our line of conduct
and we developed the details to a considerable extent at
that time. 3

I 15. Faithful to our ideals and to ourselves, we reaffirm
our full support for the German Democratic Republic, a
peaceful State which has struggled ceaselessly for peace and
co-operation. In its foreign policy that country, moved by
the ideals of social justice, has given a tangible and striking
example of respect for the sovereignty of other States and
for international morality.
116. On all battlefronts, against the calamities of nature,
against hunger, illiteracy, imperialism and neo-colonialism,
we have found that country side by side with us. In the
many offensives against under-development, in a disinterested fashion, the German Democratic Republic has given
its support and effective co-operation to the peoples of
Africa, Asia and Latin America.

w

117. My delegation remains convinced that the admission
of the German Democratic Republic to membership in our
Organization will strengthen the international community
in its noble task of restoring justice where it has been
violated, of ensuring peace where it remains threatened, of
safeguarding the foundations of liberty where they have
been challenged, of rescuing humanity from the fall-out of
hysterical acts of man from 1940 to 1945.
118. While we give our unreserved support to the German
Democratic Republic, we are obliged to stress our firm
reservation with regard to the admission of the Federal
Republic of Germany. Since the sponsors of the draft
resolution were unwilling to have a separate vote, my
delegation is obliged to mention for the record the
reservation of the Republic of Guinea with regard to the
admission of the Federal Republic of Germany.
119. We shall not dwell on the allegations which would
have us believe that, as by a miracle, the wolves have
become lambs, that German pilots who ceaselessly assist in
the bombing of the peaceful citizens of Guinea-Bissau and
Cape Verde, who have been cynically firing on our brothers
an~ our sisters in Mozambique, at the side of the Lisbon
torturers, have suddenly become our friends and brothers.
120. Very soon Portugal, deprived of its support, will be
.beaten by the valiant freedom fighters of Guinea-Bissau,
Cape Verde, Mozambique and Angola. We should like to
express the hope, on behalf of peace and for the love of
peace, that our friends the sponsors of this draft resolution
will not be duped by Bonn, that they will understand the
cost of their generosity-yes, generosity, I call it; this is the
word which, out of respect, we concede from this rostrum.

w

o

re
C
B
ti

m

cr
re
t

121. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I
call now on the representative of Egypt, who also wi&hes to
raise a procedural question.

re
p

3 See Official Records of the Security Council, Twenty-eighth
Year. 1730th meeting.

1
t

~
2117th meeting - 18 September 1973
~e
~e

at
of
m
to
ct
at
m

a
Id
Iy
19
d

.",
1,

122. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID (Egypt) (interpretation from
French): Mr. President, first of all, I wish to congratulate
you on your election to the presidency of the twentyeighth session of the General Assembly.
123. I should like to make it clear that I am speaking at
this time as representative of a Member of this Organization
and as a sponsor of draft resolution A/L.698/Rev.1.
124. The representative of Israel has raised a procedural
point and I fee! constrained to speak at a moment when the
United Nations family is about to increase its membership,
thus taking a further step towards its ultimate goal of
universality.
125. I feel constrained to speak, after hearing with
consternation the words of the representative of Israel in
raising this procedural point in order to object to the
admission of the German Democratic Republic.

ie

rn

If
n

r
y
n

f
e
f

1

126. This time, Israel contends that its attitude is dictated
by the fact that it is entitled to damages and indemnity for
the Nazi crimes committed against the Jews during the last
world war.
127. But I wish to emphasize that we all deplore the
atrocities of the last world war. The guilty parties were
judged by international tribunals and they paid the penalties. But I wonder on whose behalf Israel, in raising this
procedural question, is speaking. In the name of victims,
citizens of a third country at a time when Israel itself did
not exist? And of what right to compensation does Israel
speak? A right that is without legal foundation but which
Israel constantly and wrongly invokes with the sole aim of
evoking false feelings of guilt?
'

1

I

t

I

128. What is strange in Israel's attitude is not only what it
claims in raising its procedural motion today; it is also, and
above all, the unsurpassed audacity revealed in its claims.
Israel contends that a State has no right to join this
Organization because of alleged obligations owed to Israel,
while at the same time Israel itself, a Member of this
Organization, holds the record for violated obligations.
129. How many times has Israel rejected United Nations
resolutions? How many times has Israel violated the
Charter and the various conventions on humanitarian law?
But the last straw is that, while Israel speaks of compensation, Israel itself is the only State that, ever since 1948, has
constantly defied world public opinion, which, in numerous
resolutions of the United Nations, has charged Israel with
the duty of indemnifying the Arab people of Palestine for
their usurped homeland and the violation of their funda·
mental rights.
130. What a contradiction on the part of Israel, what
cruelty, what cynicism! And it is for this reason that, if the
representative of Israel had insisted on putting his motion
to a vote, we should have opposed it.
131. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
representative of Saudi Arabia wishes to speak on a
procedural matter, and I now call upon him.
132. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): Mr. President, I
think we should congratulate ourselves on having elected

~i

I

11

i.I

I

yC'u as the President of the twenty-eighth session of the
General Assembly, for it is my privilege to have known you
for many years as a man dedicated to the United Nations
and one who is an honour to Ecuador as well as to this
Organization.

I
l

I

133. As one who witnessed the founding of the United
Nations, I feel constrained not to keep silent with regard to
the balance of power and the spheres of influence that were
established even before our Organization came to function.
They were a travesty of the principle of self·determination,
which later, between 1949 and 1957, was elaborated into a
full-fledged right of all peoples and nations. But since 1945,
what have we witnessed but partition? Even before 1945,
before the United Nations was founded, special arrange·
ments were made among super-Powers to establish spheres of
influence to serve their special national interests. Much as
my delegation welcomes universality of membership of this
Organization, we protest, in the name of self-determination,
the fact that the German people, the Viet-Namese people,
the Palestinian people and the Korean people should have
been partitioned. Do the German people, whether liVing in
what is called the German Democratic Republic or in the
Federal Republic of Germany, differ from one another?
They were divided on ideological grounds, not on ethnological grounds. And we here, do we want to 'be false
witnesses to such arrangements as were made by the
super-i'owers when emotions ran high, when, admittedly,
they had lost millions of people, and when decisions were
taken not in calmness but while vengeance still ruled in the
;~earts of men-perhaps excusably, because they had suffered?
134. Twenty-eight or 30 years, three decades, have not
passed and we find ourselves here witnesses to divided
peoples, peoples divided in order to serve the interests of
those who want to divide this world. I think this is
shameful, inasmuch as it should be a cause for celebration
among us that no people should be excluded from
membership in this Organization.
135. Having said this, I would feel remiss if I did not
allude to what Mr. Tekoah said from this podium. The
partition of Palestine was in contravention of the principle
of self-determination that was enshrined in the Charter in
1945. If you want to assert that this was the only way to
resolve a problem, then why should we have principles?
The people of Palestine, in 1914, were 94 per cent Arab.
Arabs constituted 94 per cent of the population and the
Jews only 6 per cent. As of 1939, the Jewish population,
which had swollen because of immigration, amounted to '
less than one third of the population of Palestine.
136. And Mr. Tekoah has the temerity to speak of Arab
terrorists. Why did he not mention the Palestinians, who
have been robbed of their patrimony and their homeland
and who are scattered not only throughout the Arab world
but all over the world as refugees? He sees the mote in his
brother's eye but does not see the beam in his own eye. I
am quoting the New Testament; 1 do not know whether he
believes in it.
137. The world will not have peace so long as there is that
foreign element, not only in the Middle East but elsewhere.
Sometimes it is visible to the -oye, as when there is an influx

C'

._~,-,~

.•.

_.-- ...-.-.

_ ...... ~-_..=....._ ••••. ;...,--.-

!

'1

I

12

General Assembly - Twenty-eighth Session - Plenary Meetings

of immigrants into an area; and sometimes it is imisible, as
when subversion prevails in order to divide the world into
spheres of influence. Anything that is established on a
foundation of injustice is ultimately bound to totter and
fall down, no matter how skilful the diplomats may be, no
matter how welcome the detente between the Powers may
be to us if we wish to survive as a human species.
138. But let me say that, much as my Government
welcomes the admission of the so-called two Germanys, we
still believe it was wrong to divide the German people on
ideological grounds. By the principle of self-determination,
they should have decided as one people what they
would be.
139. And now, talking about the holocaust by Hitler,
which we all deplore-whether Hitler killed J"" or gentile it
was deplorable-let us not forget that the Second World
War cost the lives of over 60 million people. The Russians
alone lost 20 million; the Germans themselves may have
lost several million; and the Jews lost several million-I do
not know the exact number, but it is always a round figure:
6 million; never 6 million and a few thousand or le,ss than
6 million; it has become a cliche. But what about Dresden,
which was wiped out? I believe it was in East Germany. By
whom were all these civilians in Dresden wiped out? I will
not say by the Jews, but by the Allies. But that is war.
What about Hiroshima and Nagasaki, which were Wiped
out? What about the dignity and worth, not to speak of
the preciousness, of each human individual? These are not
mentioned. If we were to highlight the loss of only one
people belonging to one religion or another we would be
discriminating. I am neither German nor Japanese. But we
should mention those who were sacrificed, those civilians
ruillling into the millions. And no one dared say anything
because the great Mr. Churchill gave the world the phrase
"blood, toil, tears and sweat".
140. Let us be mindful-since Mr. Tekoah spoke of
history- that in 1917 the Allies, by which I mean the
'United Kingdom, France and their allies, were losing the
war even before the advent of the Revolution in Russia.
Who railroaded the United States-the host country-into
the First World War but the Zionists? Had it not been for
the Zionists the European countries would have settled
their affairs amongst one another. Russia was out of the
conflict following the Brest-Litovsk Treaty, and it was the
Zionists which railroaded the United States into the war.
Otherwise the Allies would have lost the war.
141. Of course the Kaiser was a tyrant, Hitler was a
tyrant, anyone who was against the Western Powers was a
tyrant. So why should not the Germans call their opponents tyrants? Let us set the record straight once and for
all, for our conscience dictates that we should not
obfuscate the facts.
142. Terrorism was referred to by Mr. Tekoah. Who
bombed the King David Hotel in Jerusalem? Who destroyed Deir Yasin, killing not only the human beings there
but the animals as well, and cut down the trees-Joshuastyle I believe? Who killed Lord Moyne? Who killed Count
Bernadotte? Who hanged Tommies from the branches of
trees in Palestine?

143. The poor Palestinians, expelled as they had been
from their country, thought, perhaps, the Zionists had
succeeded in establishing themselves there because they had
resorted to terrorism. But this is not the whole story. The
Palestinians were wrong in not taking into account that
major Powers, particularly the Western Powers, were behind
the Zionists in contravention of the principle of selfdetermination.
144. Those are the facts and they should be brought to
light time and again whenever anyone of us engages in
platitudes in order to propagandize from this podium. Let
Mr. Tekoah and anyone who supports him be aware that
my delegation and others are always ready to set the record
straight and adduce the historical facts dispassionately and
objectively, and to refute falsehoods which have been
repeated in the General Assembly, the Security Council and
other organs of this Organization.
145. We welcome the admission of the two Germanys, but
we hope that it will n:>t be long before ideologies will be
relegated to the background, and a neutral German State that
will not resort to arms will be unified, that a single State
will emerge from the two Germanys, so that it may be to
the honour of the United Nations that it did not forget the
principle and the right of self-determination.
146. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
procedural situation is as follows. No one has asked
officially for a separate vote under rule 91. The remarks
and reservations made by the representatives of Israel,
Guinea, Egypt and Saudi Arabia have been duly recorded.
Since no request for a separate vote has been presented,
may I take it that the General Assembly accepts the
recommendation of the Security Council and adopts draft
resolution A/L.698/Rev.l?

The

draft

resolution

was

adopted

(resolution

3050 (XXVIII)).

147. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): 1
declare the German Democratic R~public and the Federal
Repu blir: of Germany admitted to membership in the
United Nations.

The delegation of the German Democratic Republic was
escorted to its place in the General Assembly hall.
The delegation of the Federal Republic of Germany was
escorted to its place in the General Assembly hall.
148. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): We
turn now to draft resolution A/L.699 and Add.l on the
admission to membership in the United Nations of the
Commonwealth of the Bahamas. May , take it that the
General Assembly accepts the recommendation of the
Security Council and adopts the draft resolution unanimously?

The

draft

resolution

was

adopted

(resolution

3051 (XXVI11)).

149. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I
declare the Commonwealth of the Bahamas admitted to
membership in the United Nations.

-'
, I

i

!

2117th meeting - 18 September 1973

d been
;ts had
ley had
:y. The
I1t that
behind
)f self-

Ight to
ages in
m. Let
re that
record
Iyand
: been
cil and

1's, but

-viII be
te that
: State
be to
let the

): The
asked
marks
Israel,
)rded.
ented,
:s the
: draft

/ution

lh): I

~deraI

1

the

c was

' was

: We

1 the

the
the
the
nani-

tion

1): I

d to

13

The delegation of the Commonwealth of the Bahamas
was escorted to its place in the General Assembly hall.

international relations would be done away with for ever
and that peace would triumph everywhere in the world.

150. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I
believe that I am interpreting the feelings and thoughts of
the General Assembly when I speak on its behalf as well as
personally and greet the States that have just been admitted
to membership in the United Nations.

156. The fact that the General Assembly has today
supported the applications for member.ship in the United
Nations of the German Democratic Republic and the
Federal Republic of Germany, two sovereign States that
have recognized the Charter of the United Nations and have
undertaken to carry out all the obligations of membership
in the United Nations, genuinely reflects the vast and
irreversible changes that have taken place in the modern
world as a result of the tireless efforts of all peace-loving
and progressive forces, primarily of the countries in the
socialist community, throughout the whole post-war
period. This is a direct 'result of the relaxation of
international tension which has been achieved particularly
in recent years.

151. A few moments ago I expressed my belief that the
admission of the German Democratic Republic and the
Federal Republic of Germany to the United Nations opens
the gate to true universality, since it erases anachronistic
vestiges of power politics. May I now add that their
admission reaffirms the evolution of coexistence towards
co-operation and constitutes a noble example of the fact
that over and above ideological differences is the joint
interest of all in solving the major human problems? The
great German people, which has enriched human history in
all fields of creative effort-art, philosophy, science-will, I
am sure, make helpful contributions towards achieving the
goal of this Organization: international peace and security
in a world without injustice and without want.
152. It is with special emotion that I welcome also the
admission of the Commonwealth of the Bahamas to
membership. It is there that we find the baptismal font of
the modern world. The arrival of the three Spanish caravels
at the island of Guanahani was not by chance. It led to the
great feats that transfomled the world when an entire new
continent was added to the known world. It is therefore
particularly pleasant to me to welcome a State emerging
from colonial status and to wish it great success in its
endeavours,
153. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translation from Russian): Mr. President, the head of the
delegation of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics will in
his forthcoming statement welcome you to the post of
President of the twenty-eighth session of the General
Assembly on behalf of the Soviet delegation. Permit me to
confine myself to expressing my satisfaction at your
election to this high post.
154. The delegation of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics to this session of the General Assembly was very
happy to support the application of the German Democratic Republic for admission to membership in the United
Natiom . A/9069-S/1 0945/, and also the application of the
Federal Republic of Germany for admission to membership
in the United Nations I A/9070-S/10949j. We feel we must
draw attention to the unanimity with which the General
Assembly took the decision to admit these two German
States into the United Nations.
155. This event can be boldly described as a truly historic
landmark in the development of post-war international
relations in Europe, in the world and in the history of the
United Nations itself, which was born in the fire and
suffering of the Second World War in the grim years of the
struggle against aggression and fascism, as the hope of all
mankind and a guarantee that peace could be achieved and
made strong, that the horrors of world wars would never be
repeated, that the policy of force and its application in

-i

157. On 15 September we, together with'representatives
of other countries, welcomed at the airport in New York
the official delegation of the German Democratic Republic,
headed by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the German
Democratic Republic, Comrade Otto Winzer, which had
come to attend a session of the General Assembly for the
first time in the existence of the United Nations. For over
20 ye.. ~s here in the United Nations we have been struggling
for the restoration of justice to the German Democratic
Rep•. llic, for an end to discrimination against this sovereign
State within the United Nations system. Today justice has
triumphed.
158. The admission of the German Democratic Republic
to membership in the United Nations can only be seen as
further direct and especially important evidence of the
acknowledgement of the growing international role and
authority of the German Democratic Republic, the first
socialist State of workers and peasants on German soil,
which has consistently championed peace, international
security and social progress. The peace-loving foreign policy
of the Germaa De,nocratic Republic is important for the
cause of peace and the easing of tension in Europe, and for
the establishment of European co-operation. The role of
the German Democratic Republic as a factor for peace and
security in European and world affairs is constantly
growing. Today the German Democratic Republic has
diplomatic relations with 95 States in all continents of the
world. This international recognition of the German Democratic Republic is clear proof of the changes for the better
which have occurred in Europe, of the social and political
changes of historic significance, and of the completely
unfounded nature of the policy which was intended to lead
to diplomatic isolation in international relations and political discrimination within the United Nations system against
this socialist German State.
159. The Soviet Union has long been linked by firm bOhds
of very close and sincere friendship with the German
Democratic Republic, which has been an active participant
in the community of socialist countries. We were always
among those who gave whole-hearted support to this
country in its application for membership in the United
Nations. Today we can say, with a feeling of pride,
profound satisfaction and a feeling of duty done, that the
efforts of those who consistently and tirelessly supported
just and equal treatment for all States, and who defended

~f'·:

.,;

••

... ~~="",~,.~~,.=,.~.,,' '=·='·~=·~~==·······-····1"C·
14

General Assembly - Twenty-eighth Session - Plenary Meetings

and upheld the principle of the universality of the United
Nations, were not in vain. These efforts have been crowned
with success. The admission of the German Democratic
Republic to membership in the United Nations will without
any doubt serve the cause of the strengthening of general
peace and international security. This important step,
which is of great historic significance, is in the interest of all
peace-loving States, the United Nations itself, and the
peoples of Europe and the whole world.
160. The Gemlan Democratic Republic, with its highly
developed economy, advanced scientific and technical
experience and rich cultural traditions, is making a valuable
contribution to the development of international co-operation and economic, trade, scientific and technical and
cultural relations, and is ranked among the most developed
States of Europe and the whole world. No one can doubt
that, in its capacity as a ful! Member of the United Nations,
the German Democratic Republic will make ful! use of its
resources, its progressive political experience and its economic potential for the implementation of the noble
purposes of the United Nations and for the cause of
international co-operation.

i

?
(-F

::
,

r·
[-

r'

i~

~~

[.i
(

F'(.,.

ie
(

1 _~.

j,

>

161. We also welcome the admission of the Federal
Republic of Germany to membership in the United
Nations. As a full Member of the United Nations, the
Federal Republic of Germany, which is one of the
economically most highly developed countries in Europe
and the world, will have extensive opportunities to make its
contribution to international co:operation between all
States. We are convinced that there are excellent prospects
for relations of good-neighbourliness, mutual understanding
and co-operation between the Soviet Union and the Federal
Republic of Germany in the interest of peace and comprehensive and lasting economic, technical and cultural ties
between the two States, which were further developed as a
result of the visit to the Federal Republic of Germany in
May 1973 by Mr. Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev, General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of
the Soviet Union, and as a result of his fruitful negotiations
with Chancellor Brandt. The visit and the talks demonstrated most conVincingly that both States hive reached
a new stage in an earnest endeavour to establish peaceful
and mutually advantageous co-operation, which will be
beneficial not only to the peoples of the USSR and the
Federal Republic of Germany but also to Europe and the
whole world, in the broadest sense of the word.
162. We must express our satisfaction and conviction that
the trend toward the relaxation of international tension-and
. the strengthening of the policy of peaceful coexistence will
prevail over the negative tendencies of the dark times of the
"cold war" in world politics. In this connexion the
admission of the German Democratic Republic and the
Federal Republic of Germany into the United Nations is
one of the most eloquent proofs of the positive and
irreversible process which has made the peoples of the
world confident that the cause of peace and international
co-operation to which Members of the United Nations
aspire, as they are bound to do in accordance with the
purposes and the Charter of the United .Nations, will
inevitably prevail.
163. In welcoming the admission of the Gennan Democratic Republic and the Federal Republic of Germany to

membership in the United Nations, I am convinced that
their contribution to the activities of this international
organization will strengthen the forces of the partisans of
the cause of stable and lasting peace on earth.
164. Permit me to welcome yet another new Member to
the United Nations, the young independent State of the
Commonwealth of the Bahamas. We wish this country and
its people every success and progress along the path toward
independent development. The Soviet delegation takes this
opportunity to stress that the Soviet Union and all its
peoples support and will continue to support the peoples of
Asia, Africa and Latin America who are still in the grip of
colonialism in their just and heroic struggle for freedom,
independence, democracy and social progress. The General
Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist
Party of the Soviet Union, Mr. Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev,
speaking on the occasion on which he was awarded the
Lenin international prize for strengthening peace among
peoples said:
"We have always considered and we continue to
consider it today our bounden duty, because of our
Communist convictions and our socialist morality, to give
the broadest possible support to peoples struggling for the
just cause of freedom. This has always been the case, and
it will continue to be so in the future."
165. I am convinced that the Commonwealth of the
Bahamas will, along with the two German States which
have been admitted to membership in the United Nations
today, take its rightful place among the delegations of all
the other States Members of the United Nations and will
make a worthy contribution to its work. In deciding today
to admit three new Members into the United Nations the
Genera! Assembly has taken onc more important step
forward along the path towards the universality of this
Organization. We hope that during this session of the
General Assembly we will also be able to welcome the
Y'Jung Asian ~tate of the People's Republic of Bangladesh
as a Member of the United Nations.
166. Mr. MOJSOV (Yugoslavia): Mr. President, at the
outset I wish to state very briefly how pleased my
delegation is at having this first opportunity to welcome
you and congratulate you upon being elected President of
the twe'nty-eighth session of the General Assembly. We are
all well acquainted with your exceptional abilities and your
long experience in the work of the United Nations and we
are confident that, under your guidance, we shall fulfil
successfully the tasks facing us at thi~ important twentyeighth session of the General Assembly of the United
Nations. The head of my delegation, the Vice-President and
Federal Secretary for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Minfc, will of
course note this happy event more fully in his main speech
before the Assembly.
167. I should like also to express my delegation's appreciation and admiration for the dedicated and capable work of
Mr. Trepczynski in discharging the responsibilities of his
high office as President of the twenty-seventh session of the
General Assembly.

2117th meeting - 18 September 1973

vinced that
temational
Jartisans of

Member to
ate of the
)untry and
~th toward
takes this
and all its
peoples of
the grip of
: freedom,
1e General
:ommunist
Brezhnev,
larded the
Ice among

ntinue to
se of our
ty, to give
mg for the
~ case, and

:h of the
tes which
d Nations
Ions of all
s and will
ling today
~tions the
tant step
y of this
n of the
come the
angladesh

t, at the
ased my
welcome
~sident of
y. We are
and your
IS and we
lJll fulfil
t twenty= United
ident and
:, will of
in speech

apprecia~ work of
~s of his
)n of the

step towards the ever more complete universality of the
world Organization. Today's decision of the General Assembly-upon the unanin10us recommendation of the Security Council-to admit the German Democratic Republic
and the Federal Republic of Germany to membership in the
Unitec:l !,Jations constitutes a historic event in the life of Gur
Organization.
169. It is with particular pleasure that Yugoslavia welcomes and congratulates the two German States as new
Members because of the friendly, important and now firmly
established relations that we have with both of them. We
are looking forward very much to co-operation with them
in our joint and shared responsibilities in contributing to
the implementation of the worthy tasks of our Organization. Indeed the entry of the two German States, with their
talented people and great resources in many fields, cannot
but infuse new, added strength into the United Natbns. As
we had occasion to stress before, our world Organization is
growing stronger as its universality becomes more complete.
Everybody wants to enter our Organization and no one
leaves it: this is telling proof of its underlying strength and
constantly growing potential.
170. As a European country that suffered so much in the
Second World War against the Nazi aggressors, as a country
that waged a heroic struggle, liberated itself and then
defended its hard-won independence; as one of the founding Members of the United Nations, and as a non-aligned
and socialist country always active in the great efforts to
overcome the cold war and all divisions, whether in Europe
or elsewhere, my country attaches special significance to
the positive trends in Europe culminating in our decision
today. I would recall at this point that Yugoslavia, very
soon after the war, exerted very special efforts aimed at
normalizing relations in Europe and in overcoming its
divisions by recognizing the realities on its soil. We
recognized and established diplomatic relations with the
Federal Republic of Germany in 1952; and we established
diplomatic relations with the German Democratic Republic
in 1957. Some of these early efforts and contributions,
however, did not always meet with instant understanding
and recognition and with immediate acceptance at the time.
Yugoslavia was subjected to various pressures and reprisals
instead. However, we are glad to note that, ever since,
Europe has been moving towards widening co-operation. It
was actually at the Belgrade Conference in 1961 4 that an
urgent appeal was issued to stop the dangerous and sterile
confrontation dividing Europe and the world and to turn to
negotiations and coexistence.
171. It was actually our view from the beginning that the
recognition of realities in post-war Europe and Germany
was the only way to overcome those divisions. And here we
hope that the complex process known as the Conference on
Security and Co-operation in Europe will prove a major
advance along that road, as equal relations between all
States-relations founded on independence, sovereignty,
territorial integrity and non-interference in intt:rnal affairs
and free of the threat or use of force, irrespective of
differences or similarities in their social systems-provide
4 (First) Conference. of Heads of State or Government of
Non-Aligned Countries, held at Belgrade from I to 6 September
1961.

..1

IS

the only possible basis for stable co-operation, peace and
security in Europe and the world as a whole.
172. At the same time, we should like to emphasize here,
with all the force we can, that positive trends on our
continent must not result in a selfish, closed-in Europe. We
repeat that in today's world no one can fare well because
someone else fares badly. Europe, too, must know that
detente has to be universal, if all are to be safe, and that
peace and security for Europe cannot be long maintained
with dangerous crises and so-called local wars aflame in
regions next to it.
173. In its declaration attached to its application {A/
9069-S/1 0945J. the German Democratic Republic stated
its willingness to accept and conscientiously carry out the
obligations contained in the Charter of the United Nations.
The Federal Republic of Gennany, for its part, equally
stated {A/907D-S/10949J that it accepts the obligations
contained in the Charter of the United Nations and
solemnly undertakes to carry them out.
174. Consequently, we can now expect that their pursuance of the objectives and obligations of the Charter and
the implementation of all the relevant decisions of the
major organs of the United Nations-such as those directed
towards the liberation of the world from the anachronistic
and intolerable evils of colonialism and racism, so much and
so repugnantly persisting in the southern part of Africa, in
Namibia, Zimbabwe, South Africa, Mozambique, Angola,
Guinea-Bissau, Cape Verde and elsewhere-will remain or
become complete and unequivocal.
175. Finally, we very much hope that the admission of the
German Democratic Republic and the Federal Republic of
Germany to the United Nations will enhance their capabilities in investing their full share in promoting the peace,
security and economic development of all the members of
the international community everywhere.
176. And now I should like to turn to another happy
event, to another important decision taken by the General
Assembly today-namely, the admission of the Commonwealth of the Bahamas to the United Nations.
177. Thirteen years after the adoption of ilie Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples {re50/ution 1514 (XV)]. remnants of colonialism,
this most anachronistic phenomenon of our time, still
persist in various parts of the world. A close look at the
map of the Caribbean also reveals a multitude of colon!al
and neo-colonial situations. However, the struggle for
emancipation and independence has never ceased in that
part of the world. One of its most recent and significant
gains was the proclamation of the independence of the
Commonwealth of the Bahamas. In this connexion, I am
particularly glad to be able to welcome, on behalf of the
peoples and Government of YugoslaVia, the admission of
the Bahamas to the United Nations as an event of profound
significance for its people, for the Lati:1 American continent and for the international community as a whole. The
admission of the Commonwealth of the Bahamas to the
world Organization amounts to a further strengthening of
the role of the Caribbean and Latin American c~untries in
international relations.

16

General Assembly - Twenty-eighth Session - Plenary Meetings

178. The fight of the peoples of the Caribbean, together
with the other peoples of Latin America, against imperialism, colonialism, neo-" -10nialif. 1 and hegemony of
any sort, and for indepenu<:nce, freedom, political and
economic emancipation and progress, is an important
component of the struggle for progress and a happier future
in general, and this is the reason why it commands the
support of all progressive democratic forces. The nonaligned countries have always given spedal support to this
struggle as part of their own over-all endeavour. This
support also found expression at the recently-held Four'l)
Conference of Heads of State or Government of NonAligned Countries, held at Algiers from 5 to 9 September
1973.

in the person of Prime Minister Pindling, is here among us
today. We have been friends for many years. The American
Government has been represented in Nassau since 1821. We
look forward to continuing these close ties with the
Ballamas bilaterally and within this Organization.
,lm
186. The entry of the two German States into the United
Nations is a great symbolic act. The United Nations has
grown over the years from its original 51 Members to 135.
But it was not until today that it could be said even to
approach its goal of universality. The entry of the two
German States moves the United Nations much nearer to
this goal, enhancing its ability to function in the real world,
where real decisions are made and executed.

179. Yugoslavia, which achieved its freedom through
arduous struggle, fully supports t1'je fight of the peoples of
Latin America, considering the proclamation of the independence of the Bahamas and its admission to the United
Nations as one of the significant victories won as a result of
this struggle.

187. The United States is proud of the role which it has
played in making this event a reality. Beginning in 1969,
President Nixon laid out a new blueprint for peace designed
to replace conflict and confrontatior. by negotiation. His
progranlme was far more than atmospherics. He has since
1969 amply demonstrated his resolution to deal vigorously
and forthrightly with the most difficult issues of our time,
and to lessen the threat of nuclear arms in a historic
agreement with the Soviet Union.

180. In conclusion, may I congratlllat~ once again the
people of the Commonweahh of the Bahamas and express
my confidence that other Caribbean countries, too, will
scon follow the road taken by the Bahamas, namely, the
road lebding to the achievement of full independence and
integration into the family of the United Nations. Along
this road they will always enjoy, as has been the case in the
past, the full support of the peoples and Government of
Yugoslavia.
181. Mr. SCALI (United States of America): Mr. President, may I .()ff~r my warm congratulations and those of
the United States as you, the representative of a respected
neighbour, assume the pre~idency of this twe'nty-eighth
session of the General Assembly.
182. It is a special honour for me to speak as representative of the host country at this moment in history. Three
new Members have taken their places today in the supreme
parliament of mankind. Jne of them is a small "country ,
particularly meaningful to us because it is a neighbour and a
good neighbour.
183. The entry of the two German States is the culmination of a generation of diplomacy, both inside and outside
the United Nations, a plocess in which all parties have come
to recognize the realitie" of today's world. It has been Cl'
process in \\'l-tich step by step the world has recognized that
neither ideological con;Iicts, bhter memories nor war-bred
jealousies can be allowed to obstruct the builc.mg of a
better future.
184. By welcoming new Members, we have moved only
part way on the road to enduring peace. But accompanied
as it is by other moves toward international harmony, it is a
move that should cause mankind to :ake heart and
satisfaction.
185. We welcome the independent Bahamas to the United
Nations with particular affection: This newest American
Republic is a close neighbour with which we have much'
history in common. Like us, the Bahamas has a freely
elected and representative Government, the head of which,
.
------

I

II
1

~

1I

\

i

fII
I

188. In Europe the search for peace has meant seeking
improvements in the Berlin situation, altering the nature of
relations between East and West, reducing the military
confrontaticn of opposing coalitions, and lowering the
barriers to ravel, cultural and intellectual intercourse. It
has also meant moving with careful steps towards normaliZing diplomatic relations with the People's Republic of
China and other nations.
t

189. But progress through careful negotiation is not and
cannot be the work of one country or even a small group of
countries. We are working with the Soviet Union, in full
concert with our allies, to settle the differences of decades
and reduce tensions in Central Europe. A corner-stone of
these efforts has been the Quadripartite Agreement on
Berlin of 3 September 1971, a document which shows what
can be accomplished when there is readiness to reject the
outworn ideological positions and search for ways to solve
stubborn problems. The Agreement on Berlin demonstrates
anew that even the most rigid deadlock can be resolved
through patient negotiations and mutual accommodation.
This Agreement in turn was followed by the quadripartite
Declaration of 9 November 1972,S in which all four Powers
agreed to support United Nations membership for the two
German States. Today we have witnessed one of tpe fruits
of those agreements.
190. Throughout this process the Federal Republic of
Germany has played a major and constructive role. Its
policies have helped lay the groundwork for today's events.
It has taken and is continuing to take imaginative and
forward-looking steps to place its relationship with the
Soviet Union, other Eastern European countries, and the
German Democratic Republic on a sound and stable basis.
The Federal Republic is, moreover, taking these steps in full
consonance with its responsibilities for the maintenance of
peace, stability and security in the European continent.
5 Sec Official Records of the Security Council, Twenty-eiKhth
Year, Suppler/em for April, May and June 1973, documents
S!I09S2-!09SS .

191. The
the United
often leadin
Its contribl
mankind. N
community

192. We h
of the Ger
abide by th
to make its
economic, s
is the partie
Democratic
of the for
claims of t
the Nazi G
for its part,
this regard
193. The e
itual contri
attracted wi
Today we 1
in the imm
facing the U
194, The e
task for onl
Disease, hu
catastrophe
common he

----as
here alIWlI':

lt-

~The~
lSIi!U ~
.œo lieS ..ilIli

Ism

RDOOD.

i les inlo lit ~

~}iniled 'Saliool~

:1 Memben lO !
l'Id he said f'ifl
leAlI)' of Ihll

~m Dl>'ltt:ft l'At

,n àn the~W

Icd.

fiE! tole whidl i

8ePn~inli

, fOfpeatt~

~)'. negclii~

~l:'~IC-$.

ne MI

i:i todell.

d&\les of Cf"'!
;.lnns ln :li ~
MS medl~

acting tbf~

Iucing lht!il
and I(YW~
hik&1 Inltrie.l

$,tJf:p$ IOll'31~

\e"'t<ple' $ Reyiii

:(~h.1(]l)11

1:1 ,,'

t'n:.ll ~l!i'l

lw~l l'nJ.Œ, t

flf' t'If: fliCU cflt;
"'\. comtr-si~

1.le

A~ee';;le:

: wh,,,b !t,C'I"
.il ntu 10 n)'~
(a~r 'iill3~nl

l

k, hndf'i'l:'"llli1
~l.. .:<lifi Nf',
~ 1 a,"';.:-"om,:')~j;i

~

«he qU:l.eql

t.:h :aU (0\); F'
oership (t1'r t'li
d O·I·l~ of tht "
de raI RtrJ'~1
Islr'u.:lI\f tek
~.'r h.~J.1~·f~;
~

im3P!'..at'll

thHttlup \Il:,~
;,'-urnnes. ôJ;
d :;md shbkl
~ thes-e mW
Imilnlf",'~:
,Ji n ";(}fll ~~if!:

't'('

• '~~'~l. T..t1>.t•••
f
19'J3. 4;;~

21l7th meeting - 18 September 1973

191. The Federal Republic of Gennany is no stranger to
the United Nations. It has played a substantial, indeed
often leading, role in the specialized agencies of this body.
Hs contributions have already brought great benefits to
mankind. Now, with its full participation, the entire world
community stands to benefit.
192. We have also noted with appreciation the declaration
of the German Democratie Republic of its intention to
abide by the principles of the United Nations Charter and
to make its full contribution towards alleviating the world's
economic, social and humanitarian ills. In this connexion, it
is the particular hope of the United States that the German
Democratie Republic, which occupies part of the territory
of the former German Reich will also recognize the just
daims of those wno".suffered as a result of the actions of
the Nazi GovernmcliItJ. The Federal Republic of Germany,
for its part, took exemplary and commendable measures in
tlùs regard many years ago.
193. The econmic, technical, scientific, cultural and spiritual contributions of the Gennan people have justly
attracted wide admiration and greatly enriched the world.
Today we look forward to their full and active participation
in' the immense international economic and social tasks
facing the United Nations.
194. The effort to improve the condition of man is not a
task; for only a few: it is a burden ail nations must bear.
Disease, hunger, human misery, pollution and na tural
catastrophe oppress us aU. The earth, air and sea are a
common heritage and a common concern. The tools of

17

science, technology and education, which the German
people are so eminently qualified to provide, will he used to
benefit every nation. With the help of the two German
States, this world body will be better able to meet
mankind 's pressing problems.
195. Tlùs is a day of great pride for the peoples of the
world. The generation which fought the Second World War
is reassured by the entry of the two Gennan States into the
United Nations.
196. Those who have lived through the strife of the
post-war years can take he art. We leam from the past, for
only with such a perspective can we grasp the fuJI meaning
of fuis solemn moment. But 1 would suggest that the larger
meaning is found, not by looking behind, but by looking
ahead. The most serious differences among nations can and
must be resolved diplomaticaHy. There is no oUler way,
short of catastrophe, Ideological differences remain and are
immense, but here in the United Nations the principles of
universality and co-operation are and must be demonstrated
once more for ail to see. Is it too much to hopc t11at today
will also mark the beginning of a llew realism for this body
as it goes about its noble task on behalf of the peoples of aIl
the world?
197. As 1 welcome the two German States on behalf of
the United States. 1 express this ferven t hope: may peace,
may justice, be with us ail.

The meeting rose al 6.35 p.m.
