174

General A1sembly-Thirty-second Session

peoples in consultation with th'e Organization of African Unity, review their procedures. with respect to the
formulation and preparation of assrstance programmes
and projects and introduce greater flexibility in these
procedures so as to be able to extend the necessary
assistance without delay to help the colonial peoples
and their national liberation movements in their struggle
to exercise their inalienable right to self-determination
and independence in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
10. Urges those specialized agencies and organizations within the United Nations system which have not
already done so to include in the agenda of the regular
meetings of their governing bodies a separate item on
the progress made by those organizations in their implementation of the Declaration and other relevant resolutions of the United Nations;
11. Urges once again the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system,
in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council, to take ali
necessary measures to withhold any financia!, economic,
technical or other assistance from the Govemment of
South Africa and the illegal régime in Southern Rhodesia, to discontinue al! support to them until they
restare to the peoples of Namibia and Zimbabwe their
inalienable right to self-determination and independence
and to refrain from taking any action which might imply
recognition of, or support for, the legitirnacy of the
domination of the Territories by those régimes;
12. Notes with satisfaction the arrangements made
by severa! specialized agencies and organizations within
the United Nations system which enabl,e representatives
of the national liberation movements recognized by the
Organization of African Unity to participate fully as
observers in the proceedings relating to matters concerning their respective countries, and calls upon those
agencies and organizations which have not yet done so
to follow this example and to make the necessary arrangements without delay;
13. Recommends that all Govemments should intensify their efforts in the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system
of which they are members to ensure the full and effective impl'ementation of the Declaration and other relevant resolutions of the United Nations and, in that
connexion, should accord priority to the question of
providing assistance on an emergency basis to peoples
in the colonial Territories and to their national liberation movements;
14. Urges the executive heads of the specialized
agencies and other organizations within the United
Nations system, having regard to the recommendations
contained in paragraph 9 above, to formulate with the
active co-operation of the Organization of African
Unity and to submit, as a matter of priority, to their
governing and legislative organs concrete proposals for
the full implementation of the relevant United Nations
decisions, in particular specific programmes of assistance to the peoples in the colonial Territories and their
national liberation movements;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
assist the specialized agencies and other organizations
within the United Nations system in working out appropriate measures for implementing the present resolution and to prepare for submission to the relevant

bodies with the assistance of those agencies and other
organi;ations, a report on the action taken sin~ the
circulation of his previous report in implementat10n of
the relevant resolutions of the United Nations, including
the present resolution;
16. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
continue to consider, in consultation with the Special
Committee. appropriate measures for co-ordination of
the policies and activities of the specializ·ed agencies
and other organizations within the United Nations system in implementing the relcvant resolutions of the
General Assembly;
17. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
examine this question and to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-third session.
83rd plenary meeting
28 Novemher 1977

32/37.

United Nations Educational and Training
Programme for Southern Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions on the United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa,
in particular resolution 31/31 of 29 November 1976,
Recalling further its resolution 31/ 126 of 16 December 197 6 on emergency assistance for South African
refugee students,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on the Programme for 1976/77, 61
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General
on emergency assistance for South African student
refugees, 62
Recognizing that, because of the continuing influx
of refugee students from southern Africa into neighbouring States and the significant increases in the cost
of educational and training awards, additional funds
are essential if the Programme is to continue in operation at a satisfactory leve!,
Reaffirming that the Programme has been a significant and worthwhile effort of the international community and that its continuation and expansion during
this crucial period are desirable,
1. Expresses its appreciation to all those who have
made voluntary contributions to the United Nations
Educational and Training Programme for Southem
Africa;
2. Commends the Secretary-General and the Advisory Committee on the United Nations Educational
and Training Programme for Southern Africa for the
work they have accomplished in strengthening and expanding the Programme;
3. Appeals once again to ali States, organizations
and individuals to make generous contributions to the
Programme in order to ensure its continuation and
expansion in the light of the increased necds.

83rd plenary meeting
28 November 1977
61 A/32/283.
62 A/32/65 and Add.1.
