S/2008/597

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
10 September 2008
English
Original: French

Letter dated 9 September 2008 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council
I have the honour to convey the attached communication dated 22 August 2008
which I received from the Deputy Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Ban Ki-moon

08-50225 (E) 110908 160908

*0850225*

S/2008/597

Annex
Letter dated 22 August 2008 from the Deputy Secretary-General of
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization to the Secretary-General
[Original: English]
In accordance with United Nations Security Council resolutions 1386 (2001)
and 1510 (2003), I attach a report on the operations of the International Security
Assistance Force covering the period from February to April 2008 (see enclosure). I
would appreciate your making the report available to the Security Council.
(Signed) Claudio Bisogniero

2

08-50225

S/2008/597

Enclosure
Quarterly report to the United Nations on the operations of the
International Security Assistance Force
Introduction
1.
The present report covers the period from 1 February 2008 to 30 April 2008.
As of 26 April, total strength of the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF)
stood at 48,357 personnel from 26 NATO nations and 2,328 from 15 non-NATO
nations.
2.
Throughout the reporting period ISAF has continued to assist the Government
of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan in accordance with relevant United Nations
Security Council resolutions. From 1 February 2008 to 30 April 2008, ISAF has
suffered 202 casualties in total; 30 killed in action, 149 wounded in action,
2 non-battle deaths and 21 non-battle injuries. Key themes have been:
(a) Operational focus has been to maintain pressure on opposing militant
forces while maturing partnered relationships with the Afghan National Security
Forces. The Afghan National Army has continued to grow in both size and
capability. Combined operations, specifically in the southern and eastern regions,
have served to challenge the intentions of the opposing militant forces and develop a
more competent Afghan National Army;
(b) ISAF will continue to build on the momentum achieved from sustaining a
high operational tempo during the winter months. Significant ground troop
contributions by the United States of America and France will boost NATO capacity
in the east and south. The Afghan National Security Force will continue to be given
greater responsibility in the planning and execution of future operations. ISAF,
partnered with the Afghan National Security Force, will conduct operations to
expand the authority of the Government and provide security in order to facilitate
reconstruction and development by the international community. The next challenge
for the Afghan National Security Forces will be execution of a comprehensive
security plan to enable a successful pan-country voter registration for the
forthcoming elections;
Security situation
3.
Opposing militant force activity throughout Afghanistan this quarter was
influenced by significant losses to their leadership and safe-havens. The forces,
unable to establish larger formations capable of fighting against ISAF and coalition
forces, have focused most attacks against the Afghan National Security Forces,
especially the Afghan National Police. Most attacks by opposing militant forces
primarily involved improvised explosive devices. The opposing militant forces,
which have attempted to consolidate fighters and leadership, albeit with ineffective
results, have attempted to influence the ability of the Government to provide
security and development and protect their lines of communication while
simultaneously attacking the lines of communication of friendly forces. Regional
security situations are as follows:
(a) Regional Command Capital. The Regional Command Capital witnessed
a reduction in the number of attacks from opposing militant forces. The discovery of
a significant number of weapon caches, particularly in the Surobi District, is viewed

08-50225

3

S/2008/597

as a positive sign of increasing cooperation with local nationals. Due to the success
of the opposing militant forces during the Serena hotel attack last quarter, the threat
of a “spectacular” attack against high-value/high-payoff targets remains;
(b) Regional Command North. Although there has been a gradual overall
rise in the number of incidents throughout the region, the situation in Regional
Command North remained stable although subject to occasional outbreaks of
violence. The influence of key powerbrokers continues to prevent significant
consolidation of the opposing militant forces in Regional Command North. Due to
closer ties to the west and its northern border countries, Regional Command North
experienced the first and majority of demonstrations protesting the Danish cartoons
and the Dutch Member of Parliament’s video critical of Islam. Although currently at
low levels, political rhetoric has begun and is expected to increase, influenced
greatly by the northern front;
(c) Regional Command West. Major portions of Regional Command West
remain stable, in part due to successful regional control (as in Herat), and also due
to the development efforts of the international community. Weather influenced the
ability of the opposing militant forces to move and attack freely, with the majority
of attacks being conducted against the Afghan National Security Forces. Portions of
Regional Command West continue to be used by the opposing militant forces as
lines of communication and staging areas for movement into northern portions of
Regional Command South;
(d) Regional Command South. The majority of overall attacks have
occurred in this region. Leadership problems within the opposing militant forces
have affected their tactics and procedures. Nevertheless, cohesiveness among the
opposing militant forces, and especially the Taliban, is still highest in the southern
provinces, compared to the rest of the theatre. This is seen as a contributor to an
increased willingness of the opposing militant forces to accept larger numbers of
civilian casualties in terrorist-style attacks against public targets;
(e) Regional Command East. Combined operations (ISAF/National
Security) continually pressured opposing militant forces during the winter period.
These operations, along with coordinated security and development operations,
continue to gain the support of local tribes. Although infiltration of supplies and
fighters into the interior and indirect fires along the border with Pakistan are
increasing, opposing militant forces continue to struggle with leadership issues,
including internal fighting between leaders and tribes. The loss of influence in
certain regions will become a focus for the opposing militant forces as they try to
regain control.
Afghan National Army
4.
Despite a high operational tempo, the Afghan National Army continues to
make steady progress. It is projected that the Army will achieve established
performance goals in accordance with timelines set by the Combined Security
Transition Command-Afghanistan and the Afghan Government. Principle issues are:
(a) Capability. The Afghan National Army continues to show measurable
improvement but much remains to be done before it will be able to conduct
independent operations. The Army must show improvement in its ability to sustain
combat operations, conduct logistical planning and plan for and lead operations if it

4

08-50225

S/2008/597

is to evolve into a self-sufficient force. Afghan National Army forces display an
eagerness to assume more responsibility in the planning for and conducting of
operations, and the majority of ISAF operations are combined with the Army. Over
half of the Army units are considered capable of performing counter-insurgency
operations with external support from ISAF and coalition forces. The first units
have reached full operational capability, with more expected by the end of 2008;
(b) Manning. An increase in Afghan National Army manning to 80,000 has
been approved. As of 30 April 2008, assigned personnel were approximately 54,000,
with approximately 29,000 available for operations;
(c) Equipment. In general, the Afghan National Army equipment situation is
gradually improving but requires consistent support for the overall development of
the Army. Efforts by nations to support the Group of Eight lead nations in equipping
the Army are improving but remain far less than needed. Further support is required
to provide equipment as well as requisite training and support;
(d) Training. Persistent shortfalls in fielding operational mentor and liaison
teams remain a significant limiting factor for ANA development. These small teams
of officers and non-commissioned officers play a critical role in the growth of the
Army through daily interaction with Army units. In addition, the lack of operational
mentor and liaison teams indirectly effects the development of the Afghan National
Police since resources that could be used for police development are prioritized for
the teams. The generation of the teams remains a priority for NATO.
Afghan National Police
5.
The Afghan National Police still requires significant development to meet
desired level of capability. Although the police support the Afghan National Army
and coalition operations to some extent, with approximately 78,000 personnel,
substantial support from the international community is urgently required in order to
enable the police to perform their role of enhancing security within Afghanistan.
Coordination among international bodies involved in the development, training and
equipment of the police is critically important for extending the authority and reach
of the Government. This work includes:
(a) The requirement for additional police mentor teams, which serve as the
police version of the operational mentor and liaison teams, is still a significant issue.
Approximately 30 per cent of police mentor teams have been fielded throughout
Afghanistan. Fielding adequate numbers of teams remains a significant priority;
(b) Focused district development, which has initially started in the seven
districts, is the main ongoing project of the Combined Security Transition
Command-Afghanistan with regard to the development of the Afghan National
Police. The programme aims at enhancing the capability of the police; transforming
the Afghan Uniformed Police into a service loyal to the Afghan people and Afghan
national interests; building a “prosecutor-driven justice system”; strengthening the
linkage between the Afghan Uniformed Police and provincial, regional and national
leaders and staff; and developing the capability of the Afghan Ministry of the
Interior by mentoring its leadership. The first districts taking part in the focused
district development cycle are in the final stage of the programme and are going
through the mentoring and validation process. The second cycle, which involves

08-50225

5

S/2008/597

five districts, is in phase III, and district policemen are undergoing centralized
training in regional training centres.
Counter-narcotics
6.
The link between the illicit narcotics industry and insurgency has been
apparent over the reporting period, further fuelling instability and corruption, which
threatens all levels of governance, including police authority and the wider rule of
law. Ultimately, this also prevents meaningful reconstruction and development:
within its mandate and resources, ISAF continues to support the Government’s key
counter-narcotics interdiction forces, the Afghan Special Narcotics Force and the
National Interdiction Unit. The Government, supported by ISAF, has conducted a
pre-planting information operations campaign that appears to have had some good
results. ISAF has also provided logistical support to a number of Afghan interdiction
operations.
Neighbouring countries
7.
Events in Afghanistan have been influenced by internal politics and the overall
security situation in Pakistan. The Pakistani military has operated with mixed
success throughout the federally administered tribal areas and the North-West
Frontier Province, both to suppress militancy and control the border crossing points
into Afghanistan. Recent elections brought a new coalition Government into power.
The new Government has offered to negotiate with militants as part of its proposed
policy for economic and judicial reforms in the federally administered tribal areas
that will form the basis of a strategy to tackle militancy. Current ceasefires with
militants are likely, however, to contribute to the migration of fighters from Pakistan
into Afghanistan for the summer fighting season. The Tripartite Commission,
bringing together ISAF and the Afghan and Pakistani Chiefs of Army Staff, did not
meet during the reporting period. However, work among the Commission’s
subcommittees continued.
Judicial reform and rule of law
8.
ISAF visibility of the Afghan judicial and penal system remains limited. There
is no significant change from the last reporting period. Evidence suggests that the
penal system continues to suffer from overcrowding, corruption and poor recordkeeping. There is widespread corruption with a general lack of awareness and
understanding of the rule of law. The use of tribal or sharia law remains
predominant. The following observations are made:
(a) Passage of legislation by the Afghan Parliament continues at a slow pace.
The continued absence of legislation minimizes the ability of the judicial
institutions to enforce the law;
(b) Formal state institutions of justice require renewed and more coherent
efforts to strengthen and restructure. Several programmes are under way, with
international support for the development of infrastructure and training of judges
and prosecutors.

6

08-50225

S/2008/597

Disbandment of illegal armed groups
9.
ISAF support for efforts to disband illegal armed groups remains unchanged.
While the Government sets the pace of the programme and establishes programme
direction, ISAF representatives attend weekly meetings of the joint secretariat to
ascertain the support and assistance required. Such support is offered within ISAF
available resources. The district implementation of the disbandment programme is
currently in its third round of implementation.
Governance
10. Progress with governance remains slow. The reach and influence of the central
Government remains limited. Corruption, a culture of impunity and strong tribal
affiliations continue to undermine the fledgling parliamentary system stifling rapid
process of necessary legislation. Key developments and challenges are as follows:
(a) The creation of the Independent Directorate of Local Governments has
been a positive step in improving subnational government. The Directorate is a
pragmatic recognition of the need to connect local people to the central Government
and it emphasizes the importance of traditional tribal and community-based
structures for local governance. In that context, it has mooted the idea of the Afghan
Social Outreach Programme, which aims to make local communities more
responsible for their own security. The programme also aims to provide security and
development in return for loyalty towards the Government and cooperation against
the insurgency. In theory, the Independent Directorate of Local Governments is
responsible for the appointment of provincial and district governors and mayors.
Since its establishment in August 2007, the Directorate has appointed 70 to 75
district governors out of the 364 districts. Despite its promising start, the Directorate
is underresourced and it is still possible for appointments to be made without its
approval;
(b) The continuing development of capable, honest, impartial and sustainable
government institutions at the subnational level that are accessible to all Afghan
people is critical to establishing the credibility and legitimacy of Government
throughout the country. However, this vital process is hampered by antipathy
towards the central Government, widespread corruption and a lack of institutional
capacity in terms of both physical infrastructure and human capital. These problems
will take time and continued assistance from the international community to resolve.
A sustained improvement in the security situation is a necessary precursor to allow
for the introduction of improvements in governance and development. However, the
corrosive effects of corruption, nepotism and warlordism are rapidly eroding public
trust in Government and these issues must be addressed.
Development
11. The absence of a poverty reduction strategy, agreed to by the Government and
the international community, continues to hamper long-lasting and substantial
progress within the country. While efforts are undoubtedly proceeding in certain
areas, there is still a consistent concern for tangible change in the daily lives of
average Afghans. This concern for governmental and organizational legitimacy,
coupled with the potential for food insecurity, is of grave concern and must be
effectively countered in the near-term through an integrated approach by all
stakeholders in Afghanistan. More coordination of international efforts in mentoring

08-50225

7

S/2008/597

the central Government in effectively developing, prioritizing and sequencing its
framework for the implementation of the Afghanistan National Development
Strategy is needed.
12. NATO support to reconstruction and development efforts must also be
increased through a more focused and coherent strategy of nations to support the
Afghan Government development strategy. While provincial reconstruction teams
continue to extend the reach of the Government and the international community,
the coherence of their efforts must be adequately aligned with the National
Development Strategy and monitored to ensure effectiveness.
NATO cooperation with the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
13. On behalf of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), the JFCB hosted an Afghanistan Coordination Conference in Brunssum
from 26-29 February 2008. The conference, which was attended, inter alia, by
representatives of the Government and the international community, was held to
promote a more integrated approach by the represented parties.

8

08-50225
