228

General Assembly-Thirty-eighth Session

10. Also urges the administering Power, in cooperation with the territorial Government, to continue to
render the assistance necessary for the localization of the
civil service, particularly at senior levels;
11. Takes note of the continued participation of the
Territory in the work of the Caribbean Group for Cooperation and Economic Development, as well as such
regional organizations as the Caribbean Community and
the Caribbean Development Bank, and calls upon the
organizations of the United Nations system, as well as
donor Governments and regional organizations, to intensify their efforts to accelerate progress in the economic and
social life of the Territory;
12. Requests the Special Committee to continue the
examination of this question at its next session, including
the possible dispatch of a further visiting mission to
Montserrat at an appropriate time and in consultation
with the administering Power, and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session.
86th plenary meeting
7 December I 983

38/47. Question of the Turks and Caicos Islands
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question ofthc Turks and Caicos
Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 20
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and ali other
resolutions and decisions ofthe United Nations relating to
the Turks and Caicos Islands,
Taking into account the statement of the representative
of the administering Power relating to the Territory, 18 in
which he said that his Government would fully respect the
wishes of the people of the Turks and Caicos Islands in
determining the future constitutional status of the Territory, and bearing in mind the importance of fostering an
awareness among the people of the Territory of the possibilities open to them,
Conscious of the need to ensure the full and speedy
implementation of the Declaration in respect of the Territory,
Noting with appreciation the participation of the
administering Power in the work of the Special Committee
in regard to the Turks and Caicos Islands, thereby enabling
it to conduct a more meaningful examination of the situation in the Territory,
Aware of the special circumstances of the geographical
location and economic conditions of the Territory and
bearing in mind the necessity of diversifying and strengthening further its economy as a matter of priority in order
to promote economic stability and to develop a wider economic base for the Territory,
Recal/ing all relevant resolutions of the United Nations
relating to military bases and installations in colonial and
Non-Self-Governing Territories,
Noting the assistance rendered by the United Nations
Development Programme in the development of the Territory and welcoming the attendance of a delegation from
the Turks and Caicos Islands at the Fifth Annual Confer20 l hid.. chaps. 111- V and X XI 11.

ence of the Caribbean Group for Co-operation and Economic Development, held under the auspices ofthe World
Bank,
Noting the arrangements made for university training
abroad and for vocational training in the Territory,
Mindful that United Nations visiting missions provide
an effective means of ascertaining the situation in the
small Territories and expressing its satisfaction at the willingness ofthe administering Power to receive visiting missions in the Territories under its administration,
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Turks
and Caicos Islands; ~ 1
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of the
Turks and Caicos Islands to self-deterrnination and independence in conformity with the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV);

3. Reiterates the view that such factors as territorial
size, geographical location, size of population and limited
natural resources should in no way delay the speedy exercise by the people ofthe Territory oftheir inalienable right
as set out in the Declaration contained in General Assembly resolution 15 14 (X V), which fully applies to the Turks
and Caicos lslands;
4. Reiterates that it is the obligation ofthe administering Power to create such conditions in the Turks and Caicos Islands as will enable the people of the Territory to
exercise freely and without interference their inalienable
right to self-determination and independence in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), as well
as ali other relevant resolutions of the Assembly;
5. Reaffirms that it is the responsibility ofthe administering Power under the Charter of the United Nations to
develop its dependent Territories economically and
socially and urges the administering Power, in consultation with the territorial Government, to take the necessary
measures to promote the economic and social development of the Turks and Caicos Islands and, in particular, to
intensify and expand its programme of assistance in order
to accelerate the development of the economic and social
infrastructure of the Territory;
6. Emphasizes that greater attention should be paid to
diversification of the economy, particularly in the promotion of agriculture and fisheries, for the benefit of the people of the Territory;
7. Recalls that it is the responsibility ofthe administering Power, in accordance with the freely expressed wishes
of the people of the Territory, to safeguard, guarantee and
ensure the inalienable right ofthe people to the enjoyment
of their natural resources by taking effective measures to
guarantee their right to own and dispose ofthose resources
and to establish and maintain control oftheir future development;
8. Urges the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system, as well as regional
institutions such as the Caribbean Development Bank, to
continue to pay special attention to the development needs
of the Turks and Caicos Islands;
9. Reaffirms its strong conviction that the administering Power must ensure that military bases and installations
do not hinder the people of the Territory from exercising
their right to self~determination and independence in conformity with the purposes and principies of the Charter
~I Jl,,d., chap. XXIII

VII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

and urges the administering Power to take ali necessary
measures to comply fully with the relevant resolutions of
the United Nations relating to military bases and installations in colonial and Non-Self-Goveming Territories;
10. Requests the administering Power, in consultation
with the territorial Govemment, to continue to provide
the assistance necessary for the training of qualified local
personnel in the skills essential to the development of various sectors of society in the Territory;
11. Considers that the possibility of sending a further
visiting mission to the Turks and Caicos Islands at an
appropriate time should be kept under review;
12. Requests the Special Committee to continue the
examination of this question at its next session. including
the possible dispatch of a further visiting mission to the
Turks and Caicos Islands at an appropriate time and in
consultation with the administering Power, and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session.
86th plenary meeting
7 Decemher 1983

38/48. Question of the United States Virgin Islands
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question ofthe lJnited States Virgin Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
lmplementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 22
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of I 4 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of lndcpendence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and ali other
resolutions and decisions ofthe lJnited Nations relating to
the United States Virgin Islands,
Noting with appreciation the continued particípation of
the administering Power in the work of the Special Committee in regard to the lJnited States Virgin Islands,
thereby enabling it to conducta more informed and meaningful examination of the situation in the Territory, and
expressing its satisfaction at the willingness ofthe administering Power to receive visiting missions in the Territories
under its administration,
Having heard the statement of the representative of the
administering Power, 23
Recalling that it had urged the administering Power to
expedite the passage of legislation placed before the Congress ofthe United States of America conceming the problem of aliens in the Territory.
Noting that the territorial Govemment has intensified
its efforts to expand and diversify the economy and noting
also with concem that the intemational recession has
adversely affected the main sectors ofthe Territory's economy,
Reiterating the view that the participation ofTerritories
as associate members in organizations of the lJnited
Nations system is a part ofthe overall strategy of accelerating the decolonization process,
Noting with satisfaction the efforts to revitalize health
care programmes and to discourage juvenile delinquency,
the measures to improve crime prevention and the action
taken to expand and upgrade school facilities,
22 fbid., chaps. III, IV and XXIV.
23 /bid., Thirty-eighth Session. Fourth Committee, 15th meeting, paras. 2932.

229

1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the lmplementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the lJnited
States Virgin Islands: ·' 4
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of the
United States Virgin Islands to self-determination and
independcncc in conformity with the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. contained in General Assembly resolutíon 1514
(XV):

3. Reiterates the view that such factors as territorial
size, geographical location. size of population and limited
natural resources should in no way delay the speedy implementation ofthe Declaration contained in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV). which fully applies to the
United States Virgin Jslands:
4. Reiterates that it is the responsibility ofthe administering Power to create such conditions in the United States
Virgin lslands as will enable the people of the Territory
freely to exercise without interference their inalienable
right to self-determination and independence in conformity with General Assembly resolution I 514 (XV);
5. Cal/s upan the administering Power. taking into
account the freely expressed wishes of the people of the
United States Virgin lslands, to take ali necessary steps to
expedite the process of decolonization in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations and the Declaration, as well as ali other relevant
resolutíons and decisions of the General Assembly;
6. Welcomes the enactment by the Congress of thc
United States of America of the Virgin Islands Alien
Adjustment Act:
7. Takes note of the fact that the Govemor of thc
lJnited States Virgin Islands has introduced legislation to
provide for a constitutional conventíon to discuss political
status altematives and has recommended that a referendum on the Convention's proposals be held simultaneously with the general election in 1984;
8. Reaffirms the responsibility of the administering
Power under the Charter for the economic and social
development of the Tcrritory:
9. Urges the administering Power, in co-operation with
the territorial Govemment, to strengthen the economy of
the Territory by taking additional measures of diversification in ali fields and developing an adequate infrastructure
with a view to reducing its economic dependence on the
administering Power:
1O. Notes with satisfaction the recommendation of the
Virgin Islands Status Commission that the Territory
become an associate member of the Economic Commission for Latin America and calls upon the administering
Power to facilitate the applicatíon ofthe Territory for associate membership in the Economic Commission for Latin
America and its subsidiary bodies, including the Caribbean Development and Co-operation Committee;
11. Urges the administering Power, in co-operation
with the Govemment of the lJnited States Virgin Islands.
to safeguard the inalienable right of the people of the Territory to the enjoyment oftheir natural resources by taking
effective measures which guarantee the right of the people
to own and dispose of those resources and to establish and
maintain control of their future development;
12. Urges the administering Power, in co-operation
with the territorial Govemment. to continue to improve
24 lh1d., Thirty-eighth Ses.,wn. S11pp/eme11t No. 23 (A/38/23), chap. XXIV.
