TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR

th
MEETING: 9 MAY 1968

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1424) . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Page

1

. ,,.,..... .. .. ,. ... ,.. ....... .... ..,..

1

The situation in the Middle East:
(‘a) Letter dated 25 April 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8560);
lb) Report of the Secretary-General under General Assembly resolution
2254 (ES-V) relating to Jerusalem (S/8 146) . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda

S/PV. 1424

NOTE
Symbbls of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a Unifed Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. , .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutioas and Decisions of the
Secutity Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN

HUNDRED

AND TWENTY-FOURTH

Held in New York on Thursday,
President: Lord CARADON
(United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1424)

1. Adoption of the agenda,
2. The situation in the Middle East:
(al Letter dated 25 April 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressedto the President
of the Security Council (S/8560);
(b) Report of the Secretary-General under General
Assembly resolution 2254 (ES-V) relating to Jerusalem (S/8146).
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 25 April 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/8560);
Report of the Secretary-General under General
Assembly resolution 2254 (ES-V) relating to Jerusalem
(S/8146)

1. The PRESIDENT:
Pakistan,

I call pn the representative of

2. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): Before I speak on a point of
order which I wish to raise and which concerns the tone
and level of debate in the Security Council, and even the
authority of this primary organ, I should like to rectify an
inadvertent omission that I made at our 1422nd meeting on
6 May, This was all the more regrettable becauseit was the
omission of the spontaneous expression of my delegation’s
sincere sentiments. These sentiments relate to you,
Mr. President, and to your distinguished predecessor in
office, to both of whom I wish to pay a respectful tribute.
3. Ambassador Yakov Malik presided over ‘the deliberations of the Security Council with the authority and
mastery of all aspects of the work of the Council which we

MEETING

9 May 1968, at 4 p.m.

have come to associate with him over the years. I should
like to convey to him the appreciation of my delegation for
the firm, impartial and wise guidance that he gave to all of
US last month when he presided over the Security Council.
4. You, Mr. President, bring to the conduct of our
business all the arts and skills ,of politics an,d diplomacy,
combined with great devotion to principle. Our proceedings
have been enlivened by your elegant wit and graceful
humour. Our resolutions bear the impress of your high
statesmanship. Your weight and influence have alwaysbeen
cast on the side of that which unites us, despite what
sometimes regrettably divides us. We look forward to
working under your leadership with complete confidence in
your outstanding ability, surenessof judgement and generosity of spirit.
5. I am sure that I will have the occasion later this month
to convey my delegation’s respectful regard for
Mr. Goldberg, the representative of the United States.
6. I now come to my point of order. During our meetings
from March until now on the Middle East question, we have
witnessed a situation which is unprecedented in the history
of the Security Council. It has never happened before in the
Council that a parry to a dispute under consideration which
is invited under Article 32 of the Charter to participate in
the discussion relating to the dispute has proceeded to
question the composition of the Security Council by
challenging the legality or propriety of the election of its
non-permanent members or disputing the qualifications of
its members, permanent and non-permanent, to express
their viewson matters before the Council.
7. We regret that this has been happening now. There have
been a number of occasions during our present and recent
debates on the Middle East when the representative of
Israel has questioned the qualifications of several members
of the Council to speak on the matter under discussion.
8. Now, Mr. President, I am quite conscious that, as you
very rightly said at our 1422nd meeting, ‘Certainly in this
Council it is our custom to allow wide latitude in debate”. I
would be the last to question the right, and perhaps indeed
the duty, of the Israeli or any other representative to
answer in detail each argument which he finds unacceptable. He can be as vehement as he finds necessary for the
presentation of his case, or even for his own satisfaction.
We also realize that sometimes, unfortunately, ad hominem
arguments intrude into a debate. Even this is perhaps not
entirely avoidable. But it is one thing to give a non-member
of the Security Council the opportunity for the fullest
participation without vote in a discussion; it is quite

another for that party to use the opportunity for attempts
to bring the Council into discredit and thus to undermine
the very basis of our debates.

15. Let me make it clear that what I have said does not
apply to any remark or statement made by a member of the
Council regarding the credentials of representatives or the
validity of representation of Member States in the Council.

9. The basis of our debates and of the decision-making
process in this Council is the mutual trust and confidence
of the members of the Council. All our Governments have
their individual foreign policies and national interests, and
it is true that these sometimes create a divergence of views.
But transcending that divergence there is the certainty that
on matters affecting international peace and security we are
all equally anxious to promote the application of the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.

16. I am sure that my suggestion will not restrict any
legitimate right or circumscribe the scope of the arguments
that an invited party may wish to advance in defence of its
position or in response to arguments raised by members of
the Council in the discussion relating to matters before it.
17. Before I conclude, Mr. President, I must say how
gratified my delegation wasthat at the 1422nd meeting you
gave and upheld the ruling that “we should take special care
to confine what is said in this debate to the subject on
which we are called”. You thus barred any reference to the
internal affairs of Member States which are unrelated to the
agenda. My delegation hopes that we shall proceed with our
debates in strict respect for and accord with your ruling,
which alone can ensure coherence and dignity ‘in our
deliberations.

10. When a party comes to the Security Council and
attacks the qualification of a member of the Council, what
does it try to do except to sow distrust and dissension
among members and to make the pronouncements or
proposals of that member State, however objectively
conceived on the merits of the caseas seenby that member,
suspect in the eyes of the others? If such attempts are
encouraged, the result will be an erosion of the very basis of
our working together in a common search for peace.

18. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of the
United States on a point of order.

11. On his first appearance here at the 1401st meeting of
the Security Council, the representative of Israel chose to
admonish the Council to rise above what he called the
Council’s “disabilities” resulting from the inclusion in it of
States that do not recognize, or have no diplomatic
relations with, Israel.

19. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): I have
listened, as I always do, with close attention to the
comments made by the representative of Pakistan, our
colleague and friend, Ambassador Shahi. I should like to
make the following observation in this connexion.

12. Now, we have the formulation of a strange doctrine.
The doctrine is that the force and juridical value of the
resolutions of the Security Council are to be determined
not by the Council’s competence under the Charter, but by
the qualifications, asjudged by Israel, of the members who
sponsor or vote for those resolutions.

20. It has been the invariable practice in this Council to
permit free expressions of view both by Council members
and by representatives of delegations invited to addressthe
Council. In fact, in discussions on substantive matters the
rules of procedure make no distinction between members
and non-members; and this is clear from rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure.

13. Members of the Security Council are either permanent
or elected by a two-thirds majority of the General
Assembly. If, as the Israeli representative said the other day
at our 1422nd meeting, Israel considers it a legitimate right
to question the credibility or qualifications of any member
represented here and taking the floor and also to challenge
the validity of the election of non-permanent members,
why should this supposed right be denied to other States
which have reason to be dissatisfied with an election to the
Council or with the decisions of the Council? If Israel can
claim this right, so can others. It is not necessaryfor me to
name them. They will also say that the resolutions of the
Council have no force because the Council includes
members that have no diplomatic relations with them. The
election of the non-permanent members would become
impeachable in their judgement. Would not the authority of
the Council thus be impaired?

21. While I agree, of course, with’Mr. Shahi and with all
members of the Council that it is important for speakersto
direct their comments to the questions before the
Council-and we hope that all speakers will do so-it has
been the tradition in the Council to permit a wide
expression of views and to allow those addressing the
Council to make the statements which they deem pertinent,
without interruption and without being subject to points of
order.
22. In my view, rights of reply are the appropriate place to
take issue with the substance, the relevance or indeed the
propriety of a previous speaker’s comments.
23. Statements about the United States which, in the view
of my delegation, are not appropriate to this Council have
been made in the past by non-members as well as by
members. When necessary, I have exercised my right of
reply, and I have not interrupted and do not intend to
interrupt other speakers in the midst of their remarks or to
challenge their right to say what is on their minds.

14. I would therefore submit that no remark by any party
appearing before the Council under Articles 3 1 or 32 of the
Charter will be in order if it challenges the validity of the
election of a non-permanent member and the right of any
member to. speak on the matter on the Council’s agenda,
and that if such a,remark is made and its nature pointed out
by a member of the Council it should be officially
expunged from the record.

24. I do not believe we should seek to apply more
stringent guidelines to one speaker, member or nonmember, than we have applied in the past to any other. The
2

entire philosophy and practice of the Council is here
involved, and indeed its impartiality.

members of the Council, has a duty to abide by the agenda
which the Council itself has adopted; otherwise the
approved agenda would have no meaning and no value. But,
at the same time, I am sure that we would all join together,
as I noticed the two distinguished and experienced ambassadors did this afternoon, in reaftirming that it is the clear
duty of the Council and the President of the Council to
endeavour to allow and to encourage free expression on a
basis of absolute equality. That is a precious tradition
which in this Council particularly we should be determined
to preserve.

25, As a judge-if I may be permitted to say so-1 have had
occasion to hear remarks directed at my court, its composition and its impartiality. It has been my experience in that
capacity that the best way to deal with such remarks,
whether in a courtroom or in this Council, is by the
objectiveness of the decision that is made and not by a
denial of free speech to anyone.
26. The PRESIDENT:
Pakistan.

I call on the representative of
31. I will therefore proceed now from the comments that
have so far been made to the businessof the day.

27. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan):, In an intervention on a point
of order, I should like to make it clear that I am entirely in
favour of free speech, unrestricted free speech, on the
substance of the problem. The point that I raised was
limited to the question of whether a party, a non-member
of the Council, appearing before the Council is entitled to
challenge the rights or the competence of a duly elected
member of the Council or to question the election of a
non-permanent member of the Council. I should like to
make it clear that this is the point that I raised. Otherwise, I
entirely agree with what our distinguished colleague
Mr. Goldberg has said in regard to freedom of speech. I
thought I should make that clear.
28. The PRESIDENT:
United States.

32. I call on the representative of the Soviet Union on a
point of order.
33. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translated ffom Russian): I should like to express my

gratitude to the representative of Pakistan for his kind
words about me. I reservethe right to expressmy views on
the question he raised after I have studied the text of his
statement in greater detail.
34. With regard to the comments made by the representative of the United States, I would make only one remark:
namely, that the representative of Israel should not take
advantage of a broad interpretation in order, in the future
discussion of the item before us, to depart from the
substance of the question under discussion and attempt to
divert the attentibn of the members of the Council to
matters which have nbthing to do with Isrqel, the Security
Council or the agenda of the Security Council. The fact
that the representative of Pakistan has drawn our attention
to this matter justifies its examination by the Security
Council without any special ruling; the’ ruling given by you,
Mr. President, at our last meeting is sufficient. It is
undoubtedly something which must be borne in mind by
anyone whom the Council is kind enough to invite to take
part in its discussionsof an agendaitem.

I call on the representative of the

29. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States): I have never had
any doubt as to Ambassador Shahi’s complete dedication to
the cause of free speech, whether in this Council or outside
the Council. I should like to point out, however, the very
practical situation which we face and which necessitates
that we embrace free speech even when it relates to the
subjects that Ambassador Shahi has talked about. There is
no change of venue from this Council This is the Security
Council. In the light of these circumstances, there is no
appropriate way in which free speech can be honoured
unless we honour it with all of its import. It is not, I am
sure, to the liking of any member of the Council that the
composition of the Council which has been determined in
accordance with the rules of the IJnited Nations be
challenged or discussed; but nevertheless, this is something I
think we must accept in order to safeguard the right of
every sovereign nation Member of the United Nations to
appear here and have its say. The right of reply is a very
effective way to deal with statements that are made and
that reflect in any way upon any member of the Council.

35. The PRESIDENT:
Pakistan.

I call on the representative of

36. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): Mr. President, I have asked for
the floor again just to thank you for the statement that you
have made. I did not request a ruling. The object of my
statement was to invite my colleagues in the Council to
reflect upon what I have said. It is my devout hope that
everyone concerned will observe the rules of procedure of
the Security Council, in letter and in spirit, so that we can
proceed to discuss the matters before us with the widest
possible freedom and without the necessity of a ruling, and
I hope that there will never be occasion for such a request.

30. The PRESIDENT: I should like to express my very
sincere gratitude to Ambassador Shahi for the overgenerous comments which he was good enough to make
about me, and then go on to say that the point of order
which he raised and the comments made by the representative of the United States are important to all of us. There is
no question of calling for a ruling from the President, but I
am sure that we wish to reflect on what has been said, and
it may be that on a subsequent occasion we shall wish to
pursue the points that have been raised. At/this stage, I will
make only the very general reflection that there are two
purposes we have to keep in mind in the Council. The first
is that the President, on behalf of the Council and like all

37. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
previously taken by the Council, I shall now invite the
representatives of Jordan and Israel to take places at the
Council table in order to participate, without the right to
vote, in the discussion.
At the invitation of the Pvesident, Mrq M. H. EI-Farra
(Jordan) and Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) took places at the
Council table.

3

actions by any of the States in the area as altering the status
of Jerusalem. My Government has publicly stated that such
unilateral measures, including expropriation of land and
legislative administrative action taken by the Government
of Israel, cannot be considered as other than interim and
provisional and cannot affect the present international
status or the final and permanent status of Jerusalem.

38. The PRESIDENT: The Council will now continue its
consideration of the question before it. The first speaker on
my list is the representative of the United States.
39. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): It may
be helpful at this point in our debate to recall briefly the
road towards peace that we in this Council have travelled
together during this past difficult year, and then to look
forward to seewhat the next step ought to be.

./

,,

40. We all remember that althouah a cease-fire was
achieved in a matter of days after the-outbreak of fighting
in June, it required over five months of debate and
diplomacy before we were able to join together in a positive
and united effort for peace. That effort waslaunched by
the unanimous action of the Security Council in adopting
resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967. The resolution affirmed “. . , that the fulfilment of Charter principles
requires the establishment of a just and lasting peacein the
Middle East . . .” It set forth certain fundamental principles
and provisions in that connexion, and it asked the
Secretary-General to designate a Special Representative
“ . . . to establish and maintain contacts with the States
concerned in order to promote agreement and assistefforts
to achieve a peaceful and accepted settlement . . .” in
accordance with those provisions and principles.
41. Our Secretary-General thereupon designated as Special
Representative a very able and experienced diplomat,
Mr. Gunnar Jarring. From that day to this, Mr. Jarring, with
admirable skill, discretion and perseverancehas developed
and maintained his contacts with the States concerned in
pursuance of the mandate given him in resolution
242 (1967).

46. As regards the military parade carried out by Israel iu
Jerusalem on 2 May, the attitude of the United States was
made clear by our votes in this Council. We shared the
concern which the Council expressed in its resolution of 27
April [250 (1968)j that the parade would aggravate tensions in the area. We therefore joined in the Council’s
unanimous adoption of that resolution, calling on Israel to
refrain from holding the parade. -4nd we again joined in the
unanimous resolution of 2 May (251(1968)], deeply deploring what had occurred-as indeed we have deplored
publicly and in this Council any act& which tends to
aggravatetension in the area.
47. At this stage of our debate my delegation has given
careful thought to the course which the Security Council
should now follow. It is our considered view that we must
not return to the unsuccessful approach of the past-that of
attempting to deal separately with individual aspectsof the
Middle East problem, however important they may be in
themselves. Rather, we must continue on the course we
embarked on last November-that of seeking to promote an
agreed, peaceful and accepted settlement embracing all the
aspects of the complex and multifaceted MiddIe East
problem comprehended in our resolution of 22 November
[242 (1967)].

48. Accordingly, the United States, while agreeing that
Jerusalem is a most important issue, does not believe that
the problem of Jerusalem can realistically be solved apart’
from other aspects of the situation in the Middle East dealt
with in the 22 November resolution. Neither do we believe
that Jerusalem can be excluded from the scope of the 22
November resolution. Rather, we consider it basic to a
peaceful settlement in conformity with the 22 November
resolution that the solution of all aspects of the Middle East
problem, including Jerusalem, must be achieved by an
agreed and accepted peaceful settlement. In the achieve
ment of such a settlement the parties themselves must
necessarily be engaged. And such a settlement, if it is to
achieve our stated goal-and I quote the language of the 22
November resolution-of “a just and lasting peace”, must
take into account the legitimate interests of all concerned,
It is above all to the resolution of 22 November that we
must return. That resolution is the lodestar that illuminates
our journey towards peace. I now reaffirm once again that
the United States continues to support Security Council
resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November unreservedly, in its
entirety, and in all its parts.

42. The task given to the Special Representative is, of
course, as we all know and appreciate, inherently very
difficult, and it has not been made easier by the further
incidents and actions of various kinds which have occurred
between some of the parties and which have engaged the
attention of this Council. As far as my country is
concerned, we have sought at every turn to support the
peace-making efforts of Mr. Jarring and to minimize any
damage that those incidents and actions might causeto the
hopes for his success.We have done so in the sincere belief
that both our duty as a member of the Council and our
interest in greater stability in the area require us to promote
progress towards a just, equitable and lasting peace in the
Middle East.
43. In that spirit we have made clear-not only in this
Council but also directly to the Governments concernedour strong opposition to all unilateral measures which
might prejudge a future settlement and to all acts of
renewed violence in the area, whatever form it takes or
from whatever quarter it comes. All such measures and
actions increase tension in the area.

49. Indeed, in the view of the United States the time has
come when the Security Council could make a most
constructive contribution to progress towards peace by
giving an explicit expression of its support for the Special
Representative, Mr. Jarring, in his peace-making efforts. I
strongly believe that such an expression of support from
this Council is called for at this time.

44. It is in this context and perspective that I should like
now to address myself to the particular problem of
Jerusalem.
45. The position of the United States regarding Jerusalem
is well known and has been frequently expressed. The
United States does not accept or recognize unilateral
4

50. On behalf of the United States, therefore, let me offer
the sug@stion that we promptly find a means to make clear
this Council’s continued, united will to promote the cause
of peace in the Middle East by supporting Mr. Jarring’s
efforts in pursuance of his mandate under resolution
242 (1967). Specifically, we profoundly believe that the
very best way for the Security Council to support resolution 242 (1967) is to call upon all the parties to refrain
from any and all actions that might prejudice Mr. Jarring’s
efforts and to extend to the Secretary-General’s representative full co-operation in carrying out this most difficult
mission.
51. This is a time, as indeed it always is in the Council, for
statesmanship by the Council, not for ignoring any of the
problems at hand but for proceeding, in the best tradition
of the Council, to do what we can in the interest of
achieving a permanent peace in the area. We were united on
22 November; and in the unity of fifteen members of this
Council, of varying views, of different ideologies, coming
from all parts of the world, lies the greatest hope for peace
and stability in the Middle East. We must preserve that
,unity, and we must preserve the common desire that, I am
sure, is shared in this Council to take constructive action to
see to it that the peace-making process which we initiated
on 22 November is carried on, and carried on in such a
manner that the goal we all fervently hope and pray for will
be achieved.
52. Mr. BOYE (Senegal) (translated from French): Before
stating the opinion of my Government on the particular
item before us, Mr. President, I should like to wish you all
success in the performance of your duties. The Senegalese
delegation will always be happy to collaborate closely with
you in the interests of the international community and in
order to make our work yield results.

53. I should also like to express my admiration for your
predecessor for the competence, wisdom and skill with
which he presided over our ‘meetings last month. My
delegation has pleasure in congratulating the representative
of a great and friendly country, which has excellent
relations with my own. I believe that in the course of this
month I shall also have the occasion to express my
admiration for Ambassador Goldberg.
54. I now turn to the problem on which we have been
focusing our attention for some days. My delegation has of
course had an opportunity of expressing its views on the
annexation of the old city of Jerusalem when’we discussed
the military parade of 2 May, which, notwithstanding the
Council’s unanimous resolution, took place in the circumstances and with the equipment we all know of. It was a
matter of deep regret to my Government that Israel did not
respect that resolution, which was intended to reduce
tension in the Middle East and facilitate the task of the
Secretary-General’s Special Representative. The parade did
take place and we have all read the press reports. The article
in l%e New York Times, which strongly condemned the
parade censured by the Council is a typical example.
55. I should like to make my country’s position on this
matter absolutely clear. To begin,with, Senegal has always
respected and always will respect United Nations resolutions, as it formally undertook to do when it became a

Member. Consequently, it respects General Assembly resolution 181 (II) of 29 November 1947 which created a
Jewish and an Arab State in Palestine and placed the
administration of Jerusalem under international control. It
cannot therefore be said that we have anything against the
Jewish people. The Jew, the Arab and the Negro have
suffered throughout history. These three great peoples,
which have been described by Mr. Senghor, the Senegalese
Head of State, as a “trilogy of suffering”, have been the
victims of persecutions which should have brought them
together and taught them to live peacefully side by side,
But in the present state of affairs, we must, with the same
clarity, state our opinion on the problem of the Middle East
in general and on that of Jerusalem in particular.
56. We have cultural, ethnic and moral ties with the Arab
people. But the Israeli-Arab problem is neither ethnic nor
religious, rather, it is a political problem. We also have
special geographical, historical and political ties with the
Arab people. It should be remembered that out of 100
million Arabs, 80 million live in Africa and belong to the
Organization of African Unity. Nor should it be forgotten
that it is the Arabs who are troubled today.
57. That is why we support our Arab brothers in their
quest for a just peace under the auspices of the United
Nations. Senegal is totally opposed to war and violence as a
means of resolving disputes between nations. This position
was already taken by the Senegalesedeputies to the French
Parliament in 1956 when they voted against the Suez
expedition.
58. Equally, we believe that since the State of Israel was
created by the United Nations, the negotiations should take
place under the auspices of the United Nations. Consequently, we have high hopes for the mission of Mr. Jarring,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General. My
Government also wishes to make it clear that military
occupation, and particularly the annexation of another
country’s territory, is totally unacceptable. The negotiations should therefore aim at restoring the status quo and,
above all, at ensuring respect for United Nations decisions.
This would require the withdrawal of Israel troops to their
original lines.
59. It is not our intention to go over past history,
although we could have done so on the basis of documents
that we believe to be authentic. We think it more realistic
to consider recent history and examine the events that have
taken plasm.
60. Immediately after the so-called six days’ war, the
Israel authorities adopted far-reaching measures for extend.
ing Israel sovereignty over parts of the city which were not
under their control prior to June 1967. Evidence of this is
contained in the report of the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative [see S/8146 of 12 September 19671,
submitted in pursuance of General Assembly resolution
2254 (ES-V). According to his report, the Israel authorities
have passed legislation and adopted regulations for the
purpose of incorporating into the State of Israel the old
city of Jerusalem and certain neighbouring areas previously
under the control of Jordan. We are aware of all the
provisions of the act of 27 June 1967, relating to the legal
and administrative organization of the State of Israel and

-

of the terrifories, and withdrawal is a condition that
must be fulfilled before any other aspect can be examined
or any other step taken. This is not the question I am
bringing before the Council. I am bringing before the
Council a complaint calling for the taking of certain steps,
certain interim measures if you will, to stop the continued
violation of General Assembly resolutions 2253 (ES-V) and
2254 (ES-V)-to stop Israeli actions altering the status of
Jerusalem, actions which, if permitted to continue, will
make future consideration and future implementation of
the resolutions difficult. That is my complaint. The
problem of Jerusalem as such is not before the Council
now. Jerusalem is part and parcel of the territories now
occupied illegally by the Israeli authorities. In my complaint I made that very clear. I said that the Assembly
adopted two resolutions with 99 votes in favour. In spite of
that, the Israelis continue to violate the resolutions. They
continue to bulldoze Arab property. They continue to
expropriate lands owned by the Arab people in Jerusalem.
They continue to destroy mosques in the Maghrabi quarter.
The other day Mr. Tekoah made a statement that no
mosque had been destroyed. The Council has the report of
the tribunal and the map attached to the report [see
S/8427 and Add.1 of 23 February 19681. It is clear from
the map that there was a mosque there, which does not
exist any more. That is the finding of the ad hoc tribunal.
These continued violations of the Council’s resolutions, the
continued bulldozing of Arab property and land, the
continued legislation aiming at annexation, the continued
acts committed by Israel to bring about a complete
annexation of Jerusalem: these are the matters before the
Council. I have not come before the Council to seek a
solution with regard to any aspect of the situation in the
Middle East. I am here before the Council to beg it to make
the Israelis abide by the two resolutions of the General
Assembly. I am here before the Council to request this
interim measure.
68. The question before the Council is therefore a very
simple one. Does the Security Council, the highest organ of
the United Nations, want the bulldozing to continue or
does it want human rights to be protected-the individual
rights of the people who won the land and the property?
Either bulldozing or human rights-this is the choice before
the Council. I think the Council should help the man in the
area by adopting a measure-an interim measure-requesting
the Israelis to stop their violations. Any attempt to inject
the idea that I am bringing another question for substantive
discussion and solution is a diversion, because that is not
the question before the Council. I have repeatedly said this
before. I regret if I did not make this point clear and hope
that I am making it clear now, particularly to the United
States. I am requesting an interim measure to follow up the
two resolutions adopted in the Assembly with 99 votes in
favour. What is wrong with adopting another resolution
now condemning the continued contemptuous behaviour of
Israel, requesting the implementation of the resolutions,
fixing a time for such implementation and requesting that
within that time an answer be given to the Security
Council? These are important steps which will not only
help Jordan but also help the Council to maintain its
dignity and prestige as a body to which the small Powersin
the United Nations can appeal.
69. I should like to emphasize the fact that no incidents
but those of Jerusalem, no action but that with regard to

amending the Ordinance on communes. The effect of all
those provisions was the gradual annexation of the entire
city of Jerusalem and an increase in the total municipal area
controlled by the Israelis to more than 100 square
kilometres.

parcel

61. The saddest circumstance, however, and one which
often tends to be forgotten, is the plight of the unfortunate
Pales@ians who, after the annexation of their native land,
trooped away hungry and wretched, to swell the already
numerous ranks of refugees scattered in camps in the
United Arab Republic, Jordan, Lebanon and Syria. The
Government of Senegal is familiar with the special problem
of refugees because of the freedom fighters of Guinea
(Bissau), who are being maltreated and tortured by the
Salazar Government.
62. It is for this reason and on the basis of the principle of
self-determination of peoples and their right to govern
themselves on their native soil that the Government of
Senegal cannot remain indifferent to the fate of the
Palestinian refugees. We know and appreciate the work of
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees, but we believe that those who, twenty years ago,
were responsible for creating the present situation in the
Middle East should show far greater concern for the fate of
the Palestinian refugees. Since the occupation of Jerusalem
more than 10,000 persons have left the homes where they
had always lived peacefully and in perfect harmony.

63. No one should have the right to challenge the status of
the Holy City. Convinced of this truth, my delegation
makes a pressing appeal to Israel to facilitate Mr. Jarring’s
mission and to all men of goodwill to have the courage to
find a just and lasting solution to this drama which is
partially rending the world, so that the trilogy of suffering
may be appeased on a continent where the brotherhood of
former times will be recreated.
64. The PRESIDENT: I give the floor to the representative of Jordan,
6.5. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): I have listened very carefully to the statement made by the representative of the
United States and I feel that certain points raised in that
statement require clarification, I am sorry if I did not
present my case clearly. We are only human and sometimes
perhaps we make mistakes. If I did not make my caseclear,
I beg the Council’s indulgence.
66. The representative of the United States said that
Jerusalem wasthe most important issue. While agreeing that
Jerusalem is the most important issue, the United States
does not believe that the problem of Jerusalem can
realistically be solved apart from other aspects of the
situation in the Middle East dealt with in the resolution of
22 November [242 (1967)].
67. Let me make it very clear to every member around
this table that I am not bringing the question of Jerusalem
before the Council for a solution; nor am I bringing any
aspect of the situation in the Middle East at this stage
before the Council..The Security Council adopted resolution 242 (1967), calling for certain steps to be taken. One
of them is the complete withdrawal of Israeli armed forces
from territories occupied last June. Jerusalem is part and
6

Jerusalem, no complaint but that of Jordan are before the
Council. This fact is perfectly clear and does not call for
further clarification.
70. My delegation appeals to the Council not to delay this
question any further. This is an urgent question. It calls for
every member of the Council faithful to the values of the
Charter and to the responsibility entrusted to every
member to take and endorse effective action which would
help not only Jordan but also the man in the area working
to bring peace to the land of peace. It would also help the
Security Council to prove that it is the hope of every small
Member of the United Nations.
71. The PRESIDENT:
Israel.

I call on the representative of

72. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): Thank you, Mr. President, for
granting me the right of reply and I ask your indulgence
and that of the members of the Security Council if I
preface my reply with a brief observation.
73. I can fully understand the predicament in which the
representative of Pakistan and his Government find themselves. Indeed, it is not simple to claim certain prerogatives
and considerations for one’s self and then deny them to
others. The representative of Pakistan stated at the Security
Council meeting of 20 September 1965 :
“I must say at the very outset that it is not the policy
of my Government to join issue with any individual
member of the Security Council. As a Member of the
United Nations, and as a party to a dispute that has
tragically persisted for eighteen years and remains unsolved on the agenda of the Council, my Government, I
believe, has a right to expect at least two things from
anyone who participates in the judgement-making processesof this Council.
“First, he must be objective enough not to cast
reflexion upon, far less to question, the basis, the raison
d’&tre, of the statehood of a Member State. Second, he
must not in any manner denigrate the value of those
decisions of the Council itself which govern the consideration of an issue and which have been repeatedly
affirmed over a number of years.” [See 1242nd meeting,
paras. 8 and 9.1

74. I believe that there have been sufficient decisions of
the Council and the General Assembly recognizing Israel’s
right to existence and to peace. Pakistan is a country which
openly denies Israel’s right to exist and actively supports
continued warfare against Israel. On behalf of my delegation I cannot but question whether countries in standing
violation of the United Nations Charter or countries
preaching in this very Council the destruction of a Member
State should have the right to advise us on the character
and level of the Security Council’s debate or on decorum.
For centuries Jews have been killed with due decorum and
efficiency. For nineteen years Arab States have been waging
a war of aggression against Israel with all due propriety and
decorum. It is not an international obligation nor our
intention to allow States which pursue their belligerent and
malevolent designs against Israel and its people to set rules
of decorum or propriety in debate which would facilitate

their campaign of hate and denial of Israel’s basic rights as a
Member State of the United Nations.
75. At previous meetings I have analysed the situation
prevailing in Jerusalem at present and the reaction to the
situation *by heads of churches, leaders of local communities and foreign observers, as well as the attitude of the
people themselves. I emphasized in particular that the
people are the city. The welfare of Jerusalem and its future
cannot depend on questionable claims and allegations born
in the passion of debating contests. Jerusalem is the life of
its people-200,000 Jews, 60,000 Arabs and 5,000 of other
nationalities. These people have been innocent victims ,of
international conflict for nineteen years. Their hope lies in
never returning again to the grim past.
76. The past-the nightmare of barbed wire and minefields, of bombardment, of sniping from the old city walls,
of the desecration of Holy Places and the prevention of free
access to them, the past of hate and hostility is best
illustrated in the poster which I bring before the Security
Council, a caricature circulated in Jerusalem under Jordanian rule &d published in the Jordanian daily newspaper
AZ-Manar on 28 January 1965. It showsa Jew, the Star of
David on his clothes and fear in his eyes, kneeling under the
guillotine’s axe ready for the slaughter. The Arabic caption
under the caricature reads: “No words needed”.
77. The past is symbolized by the text book, one of many
similar ones, used in the second year of high school in the
sector of Jerusalem occupied by Jordan. In this text book,
entitled Arab Society, we read: “You Arab boys and girls
must cling to the slogan ‘Israel must disappear for ever’ “.
78. That wasthe past-dark and sanguinary.
79. The present is characterized by the following description by Sister Stephanie Stueber, which appeared in the
Jesuit publication America of 3 February 1968:
“Throngs of Jewish pilgrims, old and young, of Muslim
pilgrims, of Christian pilgrims, were going to their own
holy places, and to each other’s holy places-places that
some had been barred from for twenty years and some
had never seen. Jewswere seeking out their fathers’ and
grandfathers’ tombs in the desecrated cemetery lying
beyond the Golden Gate in the eastern part of Jerusalem.
“Arab and Jew intermingled in the Old City. Colourful
in their oriental dress, Arab families strolled through
modem Jerusalem, bought squash from Israeli storekeepers, peered into shop windows, enjoyed the parks
and wide streets, smiled back at the joy of happy,
carefree children.”
80. The present is a venture in coexistence. In today’s
Jerusalem, as I pointed out at the 1422nd,Security CoLincil
meeting of 6 May 1968, Jewsand Arabs live together, build
together and dream together the dream of peace. Not only
do all Arab institutions continue to function normally, but
united endeavours, undertakings in which Jews and Arabs
join hands together for the common good, are beginning to
develop.
81. The present is not characterized by the atmosphere of
malevolence and alienation that Arab spokesmen have tried

’

88. Our attitude towards Israel is based on the 1947
resolution of the General Assembly [181 (II)], and if Israel
chooses to expand by force we do not think that we are
automatically compelled to accord it recognition in disregard of international obligations. The concept of recognition is very clear in international law. It is not in
accordance with international law that a Member State of
the United Nations should be able to demand and compel
recognition by the very fact of membership. We know that
there are several Member States in the United Nations
which have not extended diplomatic recognition to other
Member States, and we do not think that membership of
this Grganization automatically entitles a State to diplomatic recognition, which is governed by the rules of
international law. All sovereign Governments exercise their
independent judgement on the question of recognition.

to create here. The present is characterized by meetings
between Jewish and Arab school children, by the participation of forty Arab students in the municipal youth
orchestra, by tours of Israel organized for hundreds of Arab
school pupils and adults. The present is marked by
Jewish-Arab symposia held regularly with the participation
of Arab leaders, including former ministers in the Jordanian
cabinet, high government officials, journalists and scholars.
These symposia are attended by hundreds of citizens, Arabs
and Jews alike. Hundreds of Arabs and Jews are studying
each other’s language in specially conducted courses. Joint
Jewish-Arab sports events are held regularly.
82. For the first time, eastern Jerusalem has Arab theatrical activities. Arab theatre ensembles from Israel have
begun their performances in the city, while a local Arab
theatre group has been organized and is preparing to appear
shortly on stage. The municipality is constructing a special
theatre hall in east Jerusalem. The world-renowned Kha
ledia Library, one of the best in the Arab world, which has
been closed for the last decade because the Jordanians were
not interested in opening it, is about to be reactivated. The
Moslem Museum adjacent to the Al Aqsa Mosque, which
remained bolted and neglected for years, has already been
reopened. Negotiations are under way to reopen the
Palestine Ethnological Museum, abandoned and closed
during the Jordanian occupation.

89. I do not wish to prescribe rules of decorum to the
representative of Israel. That is a matter for the Members of
the Council and the United Nations to judge for themselves.
90. The representative of Israel quoted from a previous
statement made by Pakistan in the Security Council,
presumably in 1965. It is noticeable that even as a
non-member of the Council Pakistan stated that it does not
join issue with any individual member of the Council.
91. We have stated two conditions. First, members must
be objective, and second, they must uphold the CounciI’s
resolutions. Israel’s statehood, it is obvious from the history
of the case, has certain conditions and circumstances
attached to it which make it a sui generis case.

83. Old friends, long-time Jewish and Arab residents of
Jerusalem, have found each other again after nineteen years
of separation. There are reunions again of Arabs and Jews
in Israeli homes in Jerusalem and elsewhere in Israel. Jews
once more visit Arab families in the eastern part of the city.

92. I do not wish to prolong the debate further. I believe
that what I have said is sufficient for the occasion.

84, This is the situation which Jordan, in the name of
belligerency and destruction and desecration, wishes to
undermine here. Jordan does not speak for Jerusalem’s
happiness, Jordan does not speak on behalf of the city’s
population, or even on behalf of the 20 per cent which is
Arab. Jordan speaksonly in the name of those forces which
are not yet ready for peace and understanding with Israel.
It is, however, peace and understanding that our peoples
desire. It is peace and understanding that we must be
helped to find.

93. The PRESIDENT:
Jordan.

I call on the representative of

94. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): I would just like to say that
Mr. Tekoab spoke about everything but the resolutions. He
spoke about every aspect of life-at least as he pictures
it-m Jerusalem, but he did not say a single word about the
implementation
of the two resolutions or about the
continued expropriation of Arab lands, or about the
continued bulldozing of Arab property, or about the
continued violation of the two General Assembly resolutions [2253 (ES- V) and 22.54 (ES- V)] .

85. The Arab Mayor of Nazareth, addressing the Arab
Governments on 5 April 1968, said:
“The Arab States have tried war and brought upon
themselves ruin a&destruction. Let them now try peace.
Let them put aside the deceptive dreams of destroying
Israel and come to the peace table,”

95. I am sure that by now the issue is very clear: a
clear-cut violation of two Assembly resolutions is involved.
Urgent action is required to stop these Israeli acts. I do not
think it would serve any fruitful purpose for the Council to
indulge in the consideration of questions that are not
before it. This afternoon both, the representative of the
United States and the Israeli spokesman have referred to
matters that are not before the Council.

86. It is in the spirit of this brotherly appeal by Mr. Mussa
Khatili, Mayor of Nazareth, that we too appeal to the
Government of Jordan and other Arab Governments: for
the good of the Arab and Israeli nations let us join together
in a concerted, dedicated effort to attain peace at last, so
that our peoples shall know war no more.

96. I have not at this time brought the question of
Jerusalem before the Council for an overall solution, I am
requesting the Council to adopt an urgent meausure. The
Council has taken a decision about withdrawal, I am not
asking the Council to reconsider its decision. That decision
is final; it is there; it must be implemented. But to lay the
groundwork for implementation, the Council has to take
action to stop what is going on. To inject foreign matter
into every meeting, to try to divert attention from the

87. Mr. SHAHI (Pakistan): I wish to reply briefly to the
representative of Israel. The Pakistan Government does not
consider itself in any predicament. Its record, its policies
and its views are clear and unequivocal. I reject his charge
that Pakistan has called for continued warfare with Israel or
the destruction of a Member State.
8

subject under discussion, is quite out of place in the
Council.

marked inside the Maghrabi quarter on the chart before
him. As I stated at the last meeting, there are in fact none,
The representative of Jordan referred to a mosque in the
comer of the Maghrabi quarter, marked on the chart
submitted by him to the Security Council. This mosque has
not been touched by anyone, except perhaps in the
imagination of the Jordanian representative himself. It
stands where it has always stood, and the Jordanian
representative is welcome to visit it.

97. I should now like to make a short observation.
Mr. Tekoah keeps fabricating statements. Every time we
hear of a new incident, a new picture is painted for the
Council. At the last meeting he said: “. . . contrary to what
we heard at the last meeting, there were no mosques among
the Maghrabi houses.” [1423rd meeting, para. 50.1 That is
false, as we can see from the report of the ad hoc tribunal,
formed by your Government, Mr. President, with the
approval of the League of Nations, which visited the
Maghrabi quarter. It had a plan, designated as “Plan at
A-A”, which appears in document S/8427/Add.l of 23
February 1968. On &hat plan the Maghrabi quarter and the
mosque can be seen in the lower right-hand comer. That
mosque does not exist today. It was bulldozed by the
Israelis. Out of respect for the Council, I can find no words
to describe their action. That mosque, I repeat, does not
exist today in the Maghrabi quarter. Yet Mr. Tekoah comes
here to say that the mosque never existed, in spite of this
clear-cut evidence, this, document, this finding by the
tribunal.

104. The PRESIDENT:
Jordan.

I call on the representative of

105. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): The statement of the
representative of Israel does not rebut the evidence. The
Maghrabi quarter is there. I did not make the statement
that the two mosques I am referring to do not exist any
longer before I had made 100 per cent sure-not 99 per
cent, but 100 per cent. There is an attempt to distort the
facts. I say that one of the two mosques is shown on the
plan, but it does not exist any longer, it was bulldozed. Nor
does the other mosque, which wasbuilt by the Grand Mufti
of Jerusalem after 1930, after this map was made, exist
now in the Maghrabi quarter. Both mosques have disappeared; they were bulldozed by the Israeli people. Therefore, I do not think it is at all convincing that Mr. Tekoah
come here and state: “This is not true.” I am referring to
facts, and I stand by them. Let us have the Mixed Armistice
Commission send its observers. The Council was very
anxious to have observersstay in certain parts of the area.
Let us have observersgo to Jerusalem, where their mandate
lies, and let them seewhat is going on. Let them report no?
only on this crime, for this is only one of many. Let us send,
the observersin accordancewith your Armistice Agreement
and the Security Council mandate. Let us have the
machinery function in Jerusalem. Reference was made in
the Secretary-General’s report-and we are grateful to him
for this-to observerswith reference to the parade. This is a
reminder. Let us have the observers go there and witness
what goes on. Perhaps the presence of the United Nations
in the City of the Prince of Peace would make the Israelis
discontinue their arrogance and their continual violations
and defiances, which are not mentioned here by the Israelis
but are completely evaded.

98. The other mosque I mentioned was built after 1930
and does not appear on this plan. It too has disappeared
today; it wasbulldozed after the occupation of Jerusalem,
which is 100 per cent Arab, not 20 per cent Arab. It too
was bulldozed; it does not appear in the Maghrabi quarter.
99. Finally, I will not answer any of these new assertions
about a new way of life in Jerusalem-happy, beautiful, and
the like’. I leave it to the Council to make its own
evaluation, because I have answered these assertions time
and time again. I have, however, one thing to say, namely
that it will not be the first or the second or the third or the
fourth distortion of facts by Mr. Tekoah before this
Council. Nor will it be the first forgery that the Council has
witnessed coming from Zionism. I had the opportunity to
put before you the “Lavon affair”, where signatures of the
Minister for Defence of Israel were forged in order to issue
a request to two Zionists belonging to a terrorist gang in
Cairo, Moshe Marzook and Samuel Azzar by name. They
operated in Cairo. They destroyed American libraries and
American installations in order to upset friendly relations
between what was then Egypt and the United States of
America.

106. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I apologize to you, Mr. President, and to members of the Council. I have no desire to
prolong this debate. I hope, however, that the representative of Jordan will understand that I am not entirely ready
to accept his qualifications for discussing matters of fact
and geography. The other day he submitted a letter to the
President of the Council ‘in which he indicated that the
Jordan River flowed out of the Dead Sea. As far as we
know, the Jordan River has since the time of its creation
been flowing into the Dead Sea.

100. Those are the facts. For your information, also, let
me read out just one quotation, and then I shall conclude. I
want Mr. Tekoah to hear this quotation; it is from the
Jewish Newsletter of 6 March 1961 and describes the whole
situation. It says:
“On 12 September 1960 Israeli Courts were busy trying
forgery cases. The former Ambassador to Austria had
forged documents against Amos Ben-Gurion-and got a
fifteen-year sentence.”

107. The PRESIDENT: I have no other speakers on my
list for today. We therefore have to consider plans for our
future work, with the purpose of bringing this debate to an
urgent conclusion. After referring the matter to members, I
wish to say that consultations will proceed without
interruption or delay, and I ask all members to be ready to
meet in full Council tomorrow afternoon at 3.30, subject to
prior confirmation of that time.

101. Shall I continue? I think that will be enough, and I
conclude my statement.
102. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
Israel.
103, Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I have noted that the representative of Jordan has admitted that there are no mosques

The meeting rose at 6 p.m.
9

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

United
Notions
publications
the world.
Consult
your

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
bookstore
or write

from bookstores
ond distributors
lo: United
Nations,
Sales Section,

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

throughout
New York

or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

UNIES

Les publications
der Nations
Unies
sent en vente
dons
les libroiries
et les agencer
d6porltaires
du monde entier.
Informez.vour
aupr&s
de votre libroirie
ov adrerrez-vous
6:
Notions
Unier, Section des venter, New York ou Genive.

HAK

IlOIlY’iHTb

MSAAHMFI

OPTAHH3AuMH

06bEAHHEHHblX

HAL(IIA

Il:l;(aluul
Oprnniual~nn OG~~r~nlmiihrs
IIallui!
~loitillo
fiynwca
n lillIl8illl~lS
3larawllax
11
:II’ClIT~‘TIIIS 110 nws ~~~$lOll~S wapa. IhO~NTC
NIptlnlill
06 Il:\Xauans
n 1lnlllPI
Iillll;l;llOY
Mara:lllllC
Il.111 llI!Ul1ITC 110 ZlrIQRCJ’: O~~ralIn3aI(llH
t-hhC~llllClllll,lX
~~al~lll”l. CCtillllH
lJ0
llpO,Ja;liC
ll3~all~fi,
IhO-fiOl)Ii
Llll ~OllCLlZL.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

Los publitacioner
de 10s Naciones
Unidos
ertbn
en todos porter
del mundo.
Consulte
o su librero
Ventas, Nveva
York o Ginebra.

UNIDAS

en vento en librerias
y COIOI distribuidoror
o dirljare
a: Nociones
Unidos,
Secci6n

de
