230

General Assembly- Fortieth Session

implementation of the International Covenants on Human
Rights,
I. Recognizes that equal attention should be given to
the implementation, promotion and protection of economic, social and cultural rights and civil and political rights;
2. Appeals to all States, on the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the International Covenants on Human Rights, to pursue policies directed to the
full implementation of the rights contained therein;
3. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to continue its consideration of the realization of economic,
social and cultural rights and to submit to the General
Assembly at its forty-second session, through the Economic and Social Council, its views and recommendations
on these human rights;
4. Welcomes the decision of the Economic and Social
Council, in its resolution 1985/17 of 28 May 1985, to
establish the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights, which will be entrusted from 1987 on with the
important task of overseeing the implementation of the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights;
5. Encourages Governments to give careful consideration to nominations for membership of the Committee on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights in due recognition
of the status of Committee members as experts with recognized competence in the field of human rights, serving in
their personal capacity;
6. Urges the Secretary-General to take determined
steps, within existing resources, to give publicity to the
Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and
to ensure that it receives full administrative support in
order to enable it to commence its functions effectively;
7. Decides to convene, on 16 December 1986, during
its forty-first session, a commemorative plenary meeting
of the General Assembly devoted to the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the International Covenants on
Human Rights;
8. Decides also to discuss at its forty-first session,
under the item entitled "International Covenants on
Human Rights", the question of the indivisibility and
interdependence of economic, social, cultural, civil and
political rights.
116th plenary meeting
13 December I 98 5

40/115. International Covenants on Human Rights
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 33/51 of 14 December 1978,
34/45 of 23 November 1979, 35/132 of 11 December
1980, 36/58 of 25 November 1981, 37 /191 of 18 December 1982, 38/116 and 38/117 of 16 December 1983, and
39/136 and 39/138 of 14 December 1984,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General 116 on
the status of the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, 7 the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights 7 and the Optional Protocol to
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,7
Noting with appreciation that, following its appeal, more
Member States have acceded to the International Covenants on Human Rights, 24
Recognizing the important role of the Human Rights
Committee in the implementation of the International
116 A/40/605.
11 7 Official Records of the General Assembly. f'onieth Session. Supplemem
No. 40 (A/40/40).

Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional
Protocol thereto,
Taking into account the useful work of the Sessional
Working Group of Governmental Experts on the Implementation of the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights,
Bearing in mind the important responsibilities of the
Economic and Social Council in relation to the International Covenants on Human Rights,
Calling attention to the twentieth anniversary, in 1986,
of the adoption of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
I. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Human Rights Committee on its twenty-third, twentyfourth and twenty-fifth sessions, 117 and expresses its satisfaction with the serious and constructive manner in which
the Committee is continuing to perform its functions;
2. Expresses its appreciation to those States parties to
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
that have submitted their reports to the Human Rights
Committee under article 40 of the Covenant and urges
States parties that have not yet done so to submit their
reports as speedily as possible;
3. Urges those States parties to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights that have been
requested by the Human Rights Committee to provide
additional information to comply with that request;
4. Commends those States parties to the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights that
have submitted their reports under article 16 of the Covenant and urges States that have not yet done so to submit
their reports as soon as possible;
5. Notes with satisfaction that the majority of States
parties to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and an increasing number of States parties to
the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, have been represented by experts for the presentation of their reports, thereby assisting the Human
Rights Committee and the Economic and Social Council
in their work, and hopes that all States parties to both
Covenants will arrange such representation in the future;
6. Again urges all States that have not yet done so to
become parties to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, as well as to consider
acceding to the Optional Protocol to the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;
7. Invites the States parties to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights to consider making the
declaration provided for in article 41 of the Covenant;
8. Emphasizes the importance of the strictest compliance by States parties with their obligations under the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and, where applicable, the Optional Protor,ol to
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;
9. Stresses the importance of avoiding the erosion of
human rights by derogation and underlines the necessity of
strict observance of the agreed conditions and procedures
for derogation;
I 0. Recommends to States parties that they continually
review whether any reservation made in respect of the provisions of the International Covenants on Human Rights
should be upheld:

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

l l. Urges States parties to continue to pay active attention to the protection and promotion of civil and political
rights, as well as economic, social and cultural rights;
12. Welcomes the decision of the Economic and Social
Council, in its resolution 1985/ 17 of 28 May 1985, to
establish the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights, which will be entrusted from 1987 on with the
important task of overseeing the implementation of the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the Human
Rights Committee informed of the relevant activities of
the General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council,
the Commission on Human Rights, the Sub-Commission
on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination and the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, and also to transmit the
annual reports of the Human Rights Committee to those
bodies;
14. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to
the General Assembly at its forty-first session a report on
the status of the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights and the Optional Protocol to the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;
15. Again urges the Secretary-General, taking into
account the suggestions of the Human Rights Committee,
to take determined steps within existing resources to give
more publicity to the work of the Committee and, similarly, to the work of the Economic and Social Council and
to improve administrative and related arrangements to
enable them to carry out their respective functions effectively under the International Covenants on Human
Rights;
16. Welcomes the progress already made towards the
publication of the official public records of the Human
Rights Committee in bound volumes and looks forward to
receiving in the near future the volumes covering the first
two sessions;
17. Encourages all Governments to publish the texts
of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights and the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights in as many
languages as possible and to distribute them and make
them known as widely as possible in their territories;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the
Centre for Human Rights of the Secretariat effectively
assists the Human Rights Committee and the Economic
and Social Council in the implementation of their respective functions under the International Covenants on
Human Rights.
116th plenary meeting
13 December 1985

40/116. Reporting obligations of States parties to
United Nations conventions on human
rights
The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolution 37/44 of 3 December 1982, in
which it noted with concern the critical situation with
regard to overdue reports under the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimi-

nation 11 and affirmed the necessity of considering that situation within the overall framework of all reporting
obligations of States parties to United Nations conventions on human rights,
Recalling also its resolution 38/ 117 of 16 December
1983, in which it noted that many delays were also occurring in the submission of reports under the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 7 as
indicated by the Secretary-General in his first report on the
overall situation with regard to reporting obligations; 18
Recalling further its resolution 39/138 of 14 December
1984 in which the General Assembly, having considered
the r;port of the meeting of the Chairmen of the supervisory bodies entrusted with the consideration of reports
submitted under United Nations conventions on human
rights and of the Commission on Human Rights, held at
Geneva on 16 and 17 August 1984, 119 expressed its concern about the problems experienced by those bodies in
the functioning of the reporting procedures and its conviction of the need to improve the existing reporting system
in order to resolve the problems experienced both by those
bodies and by the States parties to the various conventions
on human rights,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
containing updated information as at I June 1985 on the
general situation of the submission of reports o~States parties to United Nations conventions on human nghts 120 and
a compilation of the general guidelines elaborated by the
various human rights bodies under the human rights
instruments containing reporting obligations, 121
Noting with deep concern that the number of reports
overdue from States parties to at least one of the conventions on human rights has increased seriously and may
even increase further unless appropriate steps are taken to
ascertain better the root causes of the situation and to
devise appropriate types of action that can progressively
remove the difficulties being experienced,
Recalling, in this respect, Commission on Human
Rights resolution 1985/26 of 11 March 1985 30 concerning
the programme of advisory services in the field of human
rights, 122 and also resolution 1985/45 of 14 March 1985, 30
in which the Commission, having considered the status of
the International Covenants on Human Rights, 24
requested the Secretary-General to consider ways and
means of making advice and assistance available to States
parties to these instruments in the preparation of their
reports,
Recognizing once again and with deeper concern the burden that several coexisting reporting systems place upon
Member States that are parties to various conventions,
which in future may become more acute in relation to the
ratification of other conventions,
Reiterating the importance it attaches to the fulfilment
of obligations under international conventions on human
rights, including reporting obligations,
I. Takes note with appreciation of the very comprehensive second report of the Secretary-General on reporting obligations of States parties to United Nations conventions on human rights, which contains:
(a) Updated information on the general situation of
the submission of reports of States parties to the five conventions currently in force;
(b) Consideration of and suggestions on the question of
consolidating the guidelines of the supervisory bodies

118 A/38/393.

Ill A/40/600/Add.l, annex

J 19 N 39/484, annex.

i225ee F.JCN.4/1985/30.

120 A/40/600, sect. II.

231
