A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/200
13 March 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 100 (c)

RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/49/610/Add.3)]

49/200. Situation of human rights in Cuba

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming that all Member States have an obligation to promote and protect human rights and
fundamental freedoms as stated in the Charter of the United Nations and elaborated in the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, 1/ the International Covenants on Human Rights 2/ and other applicable human rights
instruments,
Reaffirming also that all Member States have an obligation to fulfil the commitments they have freely
undertaken under the various international instruments,
Recalling its resolution 48/142 of 20 December 1993, in which it regretted profoundly the numerous
reports of violations of basic human rights and fundamental freedoms,

1/

Resolution 217 A (III).

2/

Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

95-77197

/...

A/RES/49/200
Page 2

Taking particular note of Commission on Human Rights resolution 1994/71 of 9 March 1994, 3/ in
which the Commission recognized with deep appreciation the efforts of the Special Rapporteur to carry out his
mandate concerning the situation of human rights in Cuba,
Expressing concern about ongoing reports of serious violations of human rights in Cuba, as outlined in
the interim report on the situation of human rights in Cuba submitted to the General Assembly by the Special
Rapporteur, 4/
Recalling the continued failure of the Government of Cuba to cooperate with the Commission on
Human Rights with regard to its resolution 1994/71 by refusing to permit the Special Rapporteur to visit Cuba,
and the refusal of the Government of Cuba to respond to the most recent request by the Special Rapporteur to
visit Cuba pursuant to his mandate,
Noting the recent visit to Cuba of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
1.
report; 4/
2.

Commends the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights for his interim

Expresses its full support for the work of the Special Rapporteur;

3.
Calls once more upon the Government of Cuba to cooperate fully with the Special Rapporteur
by permitting him full and free access to establish contact with the Government and the citizens of Cuba so that
he may fulfil the mandate entrusted to him;
4.
Regrets profoundly the numerous reports of violations of basic human rights and fundamental
freedoms that are described in the report of the Special Rapporteur to the Commission on Human Rights 5/ and
in his interim report; 4/
5.
Requests that the Government of Cuba recognize the right of political parties and nongovernmental organizations to function legally in the country, allow for freedom of expression, information and
assembly and the freedom to demonstrate peacefully, and that it review sentences for crimes of a political nature;
6.
Calls upon the Government of Cuba to adopt the other measures proposed in the interim report
of the Special Rapporteur to bring the observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms in Cuba up to
international standards in accordance with international law and applicable international human rights instruments
and to end all violations of human rights by, inter alia, ratifying international human rights instruments, ceasing
the persecution and punishment of citizens for reasons related to freedom of expression and peaceful association,
respecting due process and granting permission for access to the prisons by national independent groups and
international humanitarian agencies;
7.

Decides to continue its consideration of this question at its fiftieth session.

3/ See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1994, Supplement No. 4 and corrigendum
(E/1994/24 and Corr.1), chap. II, sect. A.
4/

A/49/544, annex.

5/

E/CN.4/1994/51.
/...

A/RES/49/200
Page 3

94th plenary meeting
23 December 1994
