General AINIDbly-Foarteenth Sesaioa

48

desirability of having further attention given by the
Advisory Committee to such matters.,

I
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions for
its reports, in particular the report on the administrative budgets of the specialized agencies for 1960211 and
the over-all report on the special studies made by
the Advisory Committee at the headquarters of the
agencies ;26
2. Extends its appreciation to the specialized agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency for
the co-operation and courtesies offered to the Advisory
Committee in connexion with its studies and visits;
3. Invites the atiention of the International Atomic
Energy Agency and the International Telecommunication Union to the reports of the Advisory Committee
on its special studies made at those agencies ;27
4. Also invites the attention of all the specialized
agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency
to the over-all report of the Advisory Committee and to
the report on the 1960 administrative budgets of the
agencies;
5. Requests the Advisory Committee to keep under
review the growth and developments of the offices,
operations and conferences of the United Nations and
of the agencies, at locations away from their headquarters, and to report to the General Assembly, at its
fifteenth session, on the possibilities of further administrative and budgetary co-ordination;
II
1. Authorizes the Advisory Committee on Administrative ;:ind Budgetary Questions to examine and report
on co-ordination and on the administrative and budgetary aspects of special programmes of the United
Nations, at the request of a principal organ or of the
body responsible for the special programme;
2. Authorises the Advisory Committee also, in fulfilment of its functions under rule 158 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, to meet as it deems
necessary and appropriate at the various offices of the
United Nations and at the headquarters of the specialized agencies and the International Atomic Energy
Agency, and at the request of those agencies, to advise
them on administrative and financial matters.
846th plenary meeting,
5 December 1959.

1438 (XIV). Panel of External Auditors

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the SecretaryGenera128 on the Joint Panel of Auditors established
by General Assembly resolution 347 (IV) of 24 November 1949,
Decides that the provisions annexed to the present
resolution shall replace those set out in annex B of
resolution 347 (IV).
.846th plenary meeting,
5 December 1959.
211 /bid., agenda item 49, document A/4257.

ANNEX
1. The members of the United Nations Board of Audi.tor~
and the appointe,t exter 11al auditors of the specialized agencies
and of the International Atomic Energy Agency shall constitute a Panel of External Auditors, the purpose of which
shall be to further the co-ordination of the audits for which its
members are responsihle and to exchange information on
methods and findings.
2. The Panel may submit to the executive heads of the participating organizations any observations or recommendations
it may wish to make in relation to the accounts and financial
procedures of the organizations conrerncd.
3. The executive heads of the participating org-,mizations
may, through their auditor (or auditor~), submit to the Panel
for ;1s opinioll or re<'.otnmendation any matter within its competence.
4. The Panel shall elect its chairman and adopt its rules of
procedure. Meetings shall be held when necessary, but normally
not less frequently than once every two years.
5. Costs of the meetings of the Panel shall be borne by the
participating organizations.

1439 (XIV). United Nations International School

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations International School29
as well as the report by the Board of Trustees of the
School, 30
Recalling its resolution 1297 (XIII) of 5 December
1958 requesting the Secretary-General to use his good
offices to assist the School to find suitable permanent
accommodation and approving a grant-in-aid in respect
of the school year 1958-1959,
Recognizing the increasing urgency of providing permanent accommodation for the School,
Believing it necessary that the financial solvency of
the School should be assured,
Noting the suggestion of the Secretary-General that
a continuing fund should be established for assistance
to the International School to be financed by the net
proceeds from the operation of the United Nations
Gift Centre,
1. Reaffirms its hope that steps will be taken to make
the United Nations International School available to
the children of the largest possible number of members
of delegations, United Nations staff members, and
others associated with the United Nations;
2. Invites the Board of Trustees of the School to
establish an International School Fund;
3. Decides to contribute to the Fund for a period
of five years such continuing financial assistance as the
General Assembly may consider necessary;
4. Decides to make a contribution of $100,000 to
the Fund in 1960 for the purpose of liquidating the
operating deficit at the end of the 1959-1960 school
year and for such other purposes of the School as the
Board of Trustees deems fit;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to use
his good offices to assist the Board of Trustees of the
School in finding suitable permanent accommodation for
the School in the immediate vicinity of United Nations
Headquarters, in developing plans for a building, and
in pursuing its efforts to raise funds from private

~ Ibid., document A/4172.
21 Ibid., documents A/4135 and A/4148.

28 /l;,id., document A/C.5/795.

51, document A/4'293.
so Ibid., document A/4'293, annex.

29 /bid., agenda item
