UNITED NATION&
_.--

SECURITY
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FOURTH

YEAR

MEETING:

2f77th

NEW

COUNCIL

,

3 DECEMBER

-YORK

‘CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2177) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Letter dated 25 November 1979 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/13646) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1
1
1

WPV.2177

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations’ dctcyments are composed of capital letters combiii
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations,
.
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. , .) are normally published in quap. terfy Suppfements
of the @Fcr2Recora!r of rk Security &u&i. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the !k&ity
Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutionsand Decisionsof thf
Securify Cixuzcil. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resoluti&s
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.
..

2177th ilEETING
Held in New York on Monday, 3 December 1979, at 4 p.m.
president:

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia, France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and .Northem Ireland, United States of
America, Zambia.
pl7dshal

vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

Mr. CFIEN Chu (China).

. _

_

_

-

_-

At the invitation of- the Resident, Mr. Bauer (Austria),
Mr. Elliott (BeIgiun& Mr. Ramphul (Mauritius), and
1Mr. ,Mahnga (Swaziilmtd) rook the piaces reserved for
them aithe side of the Council chamber.
3. Mr. PALACIOS de VIZZIO (Bolivia) (interpretation
j?om Spanish): At a meeting held today, the Latin American
‘Group of States, of which -my country is a member,
approved a special declaration with regard to the item
before the Council at the present time. On behalf of that
Group, I should like to read out this document:

agenda (ShgendaAl77)

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. Letter dated. 25 November 1979 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/13646)

[The speaker read out the annex to documen t S/13675.]

T?te meethg was called to order at 5.30p.m

4. The PRESIDENT (interpretationfiom
Chinese): The
next speaker on my list is the representative of Swaziland. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make a
statement.

The agen& was adopted.

5. Mr. MALINGA
(Swaziland): On behalf of the Swaxiland delegation, I should like to express to you, Mr. President, our sincere congratulations on your assumption of
your high olEce. You have conducted the Council’s deliberations in a most able manner. We also extend our congratulations to your predecessor, the representative of Bolivia,
who, like yourself, has wholeheartedly devoted his energy
and diplomatic skill to the search for an amicable solution
to this grave problem.

Letter dated 25 November 1979 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security
(S/13646)
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Chinese): In
accordance with decisions taken at previous meetings
[2172nd, 2175th and 2176th meetings], I invite the mpresentatives of Australia, Canada, Egypt, the Federal Republic of
Germany, Italy, Japan, Liberia, Malawi, the Netherlands,
Panama, Spain, Sri Lanka, Yugoslavia and Zaire to take the
seats reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

6. I must also add that without the full co-operation and
wise guidance of all the members of the Council, your task
would have been made more difficult. The unanimous
appeal by the Council for the immediate release of the
hostages is indeed indicative of their collective wisdom.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Anderson (Australia)),
Mr. Barton (Canada), Mr. Rbdel Meguid (Egypt) Mr. von
We&mar (F-e&al Republic of Germany), Mr. La Rocca
(Italy), Mr. Niribon’ (Japan), Mr. T&man (Liberia),
Mr. Muwamba (Malawi), Mr. Scheltema (Nether&u&),
Mr. Illueca (Panama), Mr. de Pinit?.. (Spain). Mr. FenrrmdO
(Sri Lanka), Mr. Komatina (Yugoslavia) and Mr, Kamanaa
wa Kamaruks (Zaire) took the places reservedfor them at the
st& of the Council chontber.

7. As a Member of the United Nations, Swaziland joins
the rest of humanity in expressing its support for the initiative of the Secretary-General. Hi decision to call a meeting
of the Security Council was in the interest of maintaining
international peace and security. The delegation of Swaxiland fully supports him. We also share the view that the
events in Iran pose a threat to international peace and
security. The Secretary-General’s historic decision under
Article 99 of the Charter to propose an urgent meeting to
deal with this explosive matter demonstrated hi high qualities of politicaljudgement,
tact and integrity.

2. ‘Ihe PRESIDENT
(interpretation jFom Chinese): I
should like to inform the members of the Council that I
have received letters from the representatives of Austria,
Belgium, Mauritius and Swaziland, in which they ask to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
agenda. In accordance with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right to

8. Swaziland believes in the peaceful settlement of disputes. Recourse to violence as a means of settling dif1

fercnces between States is, in our opinion, counterproductive because, in the final analysis, it is always the
innocent who in the end suffer the most. It is our strict
adherence to the principles of the Charter that prompted us
to join the President of the General Assembly, the President
of the Security Council and the Secretary-General in their
humanitarian gesture of seeking an immediate release of
the American hostages held at Teheran. We too appeal to
the authorities in that country to heed the voice of humanity
expressed in this forum and from this capital of nations.

the hostages. We have learned that the people of Iran
adhere with zeal to the Islamic faith. Hence, they should
demonstrate to the world that Allah is merciful by being
exemplary. The quality of mercy, as we are told, is inherent
in that religion.
14. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Chinese): The
next speaker is the representative of Austria. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make a statement.
15. Mr. BAUER (Austria): Mr. President, may I express
to you and to the other members of the Security Council the
gratitude of my Government for being permitted to address
the Council on the most serious matter that is before it. I
should also like to join previous speakers in thanking the
Secretary-General for his timely initiative in requesting this
meeting of the Council under the prerogatives of Article 99
of the Charter.

9. Like those representatives who have spoken previously,
the delegation of Swaziland is of the opinion that the seizure
of the American Embassy at Teheran and the detention of
its diplomatic personnel is indeed a violation of intemational law and the principles of the Charter. We are also
disturbed by the fact that this illegal act has received official
endorsement from the Government of Iran. Such a precedent is dangerous. Its future implications are too dreadful to
imagine.

16. The issue at stake touches upon the most fundamental
premises of the conduct of international relations and the
maintenance of peace and security.
, ~_

10. This act tampers with a highly delicate peace equilibrium,tiich
was largely brought about by the universal
observance of the rule of law. Though imperfect, many
a time international law has over the years proved
effective in balancing inter-State relations. Diplomatic personnel, under the protection of international law and recognixed norms, are agents which bring about this peace
equilibrium. To expose them to illegal seixure is to tamper
with the very fabric of peace. Customary international law
has aiways recognimd their inviolability.

-

17. All throughout the history of sovereign nations, the
inviolability of diplomats and diplomatic premises and their
immunity from legal prosecution in the. host country and
the duty of Governments adequately to protect diplomatic
personnel and property have constituted the cornerstone of
diplomatic intercourse that is essential for a peaceful interaction between States. This basic tenet of international law
has been rea.fErmed in the Vienna Conventions on diplomatic consular relations, which have been ratified by the
great majority of Member States, among them the United
States and Iran. The holding of hostages in the Embassy of
the United States in Iran, as well as in the Iranian Ministry
of Foreign AfIahs, thus constitutes a most serious and
unprecedented violation of fundamental norms of intemational law. It also infringes upon basic and elementary
humanitarian considerations and the:dignity of the human
person, the safeguarding of-which is one of the most basic
elements of. Austrian policy. Apart from these legal and,
political considerations, I offer an expression of the deepfelt sympathy of the Austrian people with the plight of the
hostages as well as with their families.

11. Iran is a small country, a non-aligned country. Its
survival depends upon the observance of international law
by all nations. As a group, we small non-aligned countries
depend on mobilizing the mobile body of international
public opinion. We strive to focus it on our socialcconomic
plight. From the statements that I have heard so far, it
would seem that this mobile body of international public
opinion would be in Iran’s favour were it to release the
hostages. The world watches with dismay the development
of venomous relations between these two Member States.
The level of tension between them is fast approaching a
lethal point. Unless a solution is found urgently, an explosion is inevitable. Its disastrous consequences will no doubt
engulf not only that region but the entire world.

18. For these reasons, the Austrian Government joins in
the appeals made by the President of the Security Council
and the President of the General Assembly, as well as by all
previous speakers in this debate. We call upon the Iranian
authorities to heed these appeals, to release the hostages
without any preconditions and guarantee their safe
conduct.

12. It is basically because of this apprehension that my
delegation found it necessary to associate itself with those
who are interceding for peace. We appeal to all the parties
concerned to exercise maximum restraint. This delegation
does not believe that the people of Iran seek international
instability as the price of redressing the injustice and abuse
of human rights they are alleged to have sufTered under the
Shah. As I have already said, we in Swaziland believe that
disputes between States should be settled in accordance
with the principles of international law and the Charter of
the United Nations. A confrontation situation often leads to
disaster, and, as always, the innocent suffer. This showdown approach to conflict has no victors.

19. We fully recognize the seriousness of the tensions that
have arisen between the Governments of the Islamic Republic of Iran and the United States. We are confident that after
the release of the hostages these tensions can be solved by
means of negotiations and other appropriate instruments
that are at the disposal of the ‘two Governments. We urge
them to respect the principle of peaceful settlement of disputes and to exercise the utmost restraint in their actions.

13. We cannot over-emphasize the need for both parties
to create a conducive atmosphere, and such an atmosphere
can be brought about only through the immediate release of

20. The PRESIDENT (interprtktion from Chinese): The
next speaker is the representative of Belgium. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make a statement.
2

21. Mr. ELLIOTT (Belgium) (intetprefationfromFrench):
Mr. President, first of all I should like to convey to you the
sincere congratulations of my delegation on your assump
tion of the important post of President of the Security
Council for this month. I should also like to express our
gratitude to your predecessor, the representative of Bolivia,
for the way in which he conducted the proceedings of the
Council during November.

27. As a oountry whose existence depends preeminently
on
these essential rules, Belgium issues ----- the safeguarding of-----an urgent appeal to Iran to free the diplomats taken hostage. Like so many previous speakers, my delegation
exhorts Iran to understand that any grievances it may have
will be better understood if the wrong done to the hostages
is first redressed. In taking that step, Iran would above all be
doing a service to its own honour, and would thus be .
helping to allay the international anxiety which has been
aroused by this crisis and the threat it has posed to intemational peace and security.
.

22. For the fourth time only in the long history of the
United Nations, the Secretary-General has felt impelled to
make use of the prerogatives conferred upon him by the
Charter.

28. Mr. President, I should like to thank you personally
for having given the opportunity to my delegation to
express the deep concern of the Belgian authorities and the
Belgian people. We should like to express our appreciation
to your predecessor for having been the faithful interpreter
of the Security Council’s deep concern. We pledge our total
confidence and full support to the Secretary-General, who
is sparing no effort to resolve this distressing crisis.

23. The Secretary-General has explained his views on the
subject of the gravity of the facts which prompted him to
take the decision to call for an urgent meeting of the Security Council. In his letter of 25 November, he stressedthat the
international community was becoming increasingly concerned that the dangerous level of tension between the two
countries, the United States and Iran, threatened peace and
stability in the region and could have disastrous consequences for the entire world.

29. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Chinese): The
next speaker is the representative of Mauritius. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make a statement.

24. The facts justifying this alarming appeal are very well
known. First of all, there was the taking of diplomats as
hostages in the very premises of their embassy. This in itself
and without any doubt constitutes a flagrant violation of
the international conventions which govern diplomatic relations among countries. Many speakers have stressed this
fact and also the responsibility of the host country in this
respect. The preamble of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations* ,of 1961 states explicitly that respect for the
rules of diplomatic immunity is closely linked to the safeguarding of international peace and security and is indispensable for the promotion of friendly relations among nations.
____- _ __ _
.25. Apart from these basically legal considerations, we
wish to convey the emotions of the people of Belgium at the
sight of the hostages and their plight, whose captivity has
gone on now for a month. The Belgian authorities have
expressed their solidarity with the people who are being held
captive and have expressed their sympathy to their families
and to the American people. In this spirit, Belgium associated itself with the declaration made by the Heads of State
or Government of the nine Member States of the European
Community, which met in the European Council at Dublin
on 30 November [S/13668].

30. Mr. RAMPHUL (Mauritius): Mr. President, 1 thank
you and, through you, the members of the Security Council
for giving me an opportunity to participate in the debate of
a most important issue confronting Iran and the United
States. I am particularly happy to do so under your presidency, Sir, since your great and proud country, the People’s
Republic of China, was chronologically the first State to
recognixe the independence and sovereignty of my small
island country, Mauritius.
31. The present crisis between Iran and the Unitd States is
extremely delicate, diflicult and dangerous. It is imperative
that we ‘move fast to defuse it. My delegation is therefore
grateful to the Secretary-General for having courageously
and rightly taken the initiative to secure the convening
of a meeting of the Council. We applaud and fully support
Mr. Kurt Waldheim’s efforts.
32. There can be no doubt that the people of Iran have
very serious and genuine grievances, nor can there be any
doubt that the methods which they are using to redress the
‘wrong done to them are absolutely unacceptable to the
international community. Innocent persons must not be
made to atone for the sins of others. Flagrant violations of
international laws, conventions and treaties, and diplomatic practice dating from time immemorial, cannot, must
not, will not be’tolerated by the international community. It
has become obvious that emotion alone cannot achieve
justice and that reason must prevail. Nor will the language
of military threats resolve anything.

26. No one has sought to challenge the right of the Iranian
people to determine their own national and cultural identity. The events of the Iranian revolution have demonstrated how profound was the will of that people to assert
itself and to mould its own future in total freedom. That
process of national self-assertion should be allowed to go on
without any outside interference. It is understandable that
this process should have been marked by demonstrations in
reaction to the abuses and injustices of the regime to which
the revolution put an end. But the prestige of Iran, its
revolution, its ancient culture and its religion are all illserved by acts which violate the fundamental rules of relations among States.
’ United

Nations,

Zkeuty

33. My delegation therefore fully supports previous statements made in the Council requesting Iran to vacate the
United States Embassy at Teheran and to release forthwith
all the accredited United States diplomats so that they may
return safe and sound to their respective homes and families, taking into consideration that we are fast approaching
festivities sacred to their religious beliefs.

Series, vol. 500, p. 95.

3

.-

34. In thii connexion, I wish to inform the Council that
my Government sent messages on 17 and 24 November to
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and to the head of the
Revolutionary Council of Iran, respectively. I pray and
hope that, in his wisdom, Ayatollah Khomeini, the Imam,
will dispense compassion and mercy, as taught in the Holy
Koran.
35. My delegation holds the view that, once the hostages
have been released, modalities can be found to deal with the
charges made separately. In the meantime, we hope that
the Secretary-General will continue his laudable efforts
towards achieving a solution which will bring Iran and the
United States around a table for negotiations which will
- help to resolve the thorny problem with which we are faced
and which may yet bring about a renewed friendship and

better understanding between these two great countries and
their peoples.
36. May I conclude by saying that the Iranian GovemY
ment and people have succeeded in making their case clear
to the world. They must now stop, and refrain from pursuing a path which will lead them to isolation in the interna-’
tional community. Indeed, utmost restraint on the part of
both Iran and the United States is called for.
37. Perhaps, to avoid such threats to international peace
and security in the future, the United Nations should start
looking into the possibility of creating a special machinery
to monitor situations where leaders submit their people to
oppression.
The meeting rose at 6.05 p.m.

Unite 1 Nations
publications
may be obtained
throughout
the world.
Consult
your bookstore
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sent en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
d&ositaires
du mondc entier. Intonnes-vous
aup&
de votre libraire
ou adrassez-vous
B : Nations Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou GenBve.
KAK

COMO

IlOJIYYEITb

CONSEGUIR

HSlAHNJi

OPl-AHH3A~&iH

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
estin
buidoras
en todas pa&s
de1 mundo.
Cons&e
Unidas, SeccMn de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations, New York

OE’bEflHHEHHhIX

Price: sus.

NACIONES

HAlUfFS

UNIDAS

en venta en librerfas
y casas distria su librero
o dirfjase
a: Naciones

1.50

79-70002-March

1982-2.250
