United Nations

A/RES/68/171

General Assembly

Distr.: General
23 January 2014

Sixty-eighth session
Agenda item 69 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 18 December 2013
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/68/456/Add.2)]

68/171. National institutions for the promotion and protection
of human rights
The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on national institutions for the promotion
and protection of human rights, the most recent of which was resolution 66/169 of
19 December 2011, and those of the Commission on Human Rights and the Human
Rights Council concerning national institutions and their role in the promotion and
protection of human rights, the most recent of which are Council resolutions 20/14
of 5 July 2012 1 and 23/17 of 13 June 2013, 2
Welcoming the rapidly growing interest throughout the world in the creation
and strengthening of independent, pluralistic national institutions for the promotion
and protection of human rights,
Recalling the principles relating to the status of national institutions for the
promotion and protection of human rights (the Paris Principles), 3 and welcoming the
twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the principles,
Reaffirming the important role that such national institutions play and will
continue to play in promoting and protecting human rights and fundamental
freedoms, in strengthening participation and the rule of law and in developing and
enhancing public awareness of those rights and freedoms,
Recalling its resolution 67/163 of 20 December 2012 on the role of the
Ombudsman, mediator and other national human rights institutions in the promotion
and protection of human rights,
Recognizing the important role of the United Nations, in particular the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, in assisting the
development of independent and effective national human rights institutions, guided
_______________
1
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53 and
corrigendum (A/67/53 and Corr.1), chap. IV, sect. A.
2
Ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/68/53), chap. V, sect. A.
3
Resolution 48/134, annex.

13-44971 (E)

*1344971*

Please recycle

A/RES/68/171

National institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights

by the Paris Principles, and recognizing also in this regard the potential for
strengthened and complementary cooperation among the United Nations, the
International Coordinating Committee of National Institutions for the Promotion
and Protection of Human Rights and those national institutions in the promotion and
protection of human rights,
Recalling the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the
World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June l993, 4 which reaffirmed the important
and constructive role played by national human rights institutions, in particular in
their advisory capacity to the competent authorities and their role in preventing and
remedying human rights violations, in disseminating information on human rights
and in education in human rights,
Reaffirming that all human rights are universal, indivisible, interrelated,
interdependent and mutually reinforcing, and that all human rights must be treated
in a fair and equal manner, on the same footing and with the same emphasis,
Bearing in mind the significance of national and regional particularities and
various historical, cultural and religious backgrounds, and that all States, regardless
of their political, economic and cultural systems, have the duty to promote and
protect all human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Recalling the programme of action adopted by national institutions for the
promotion and protection of human rights at their meeting held in Vienna in June
1993 during the World Conference on Human Rights, in which it was recommended
that United Nations activities and programmes should be reinforced to meet the
requests for assistance from States wishing to establish or strengthen their national
institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights,
Taking note with appreciation of the reports of the Secretary-General on national
institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights 5 and on the process
currently utilized by the International Coordinating Committee of National
Institutions for the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights to accredit national
institutions in compliance with the Paris Principles, 6
Welcoming the strengthening in all regions of regional cooperation among
national human rights institutions, and noting with appreciation the continuing work
of the Network of African National Human Rights Institutions, the Network of
National Institutions for the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights in the
Americas, the Asia-Pacific Forum of National Human Rights Institutions and the
European Group of National Human Rights Institutions,
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General 7 and
1.
the conclusions contained therein;
2.
Reaffirms the importance of the development of effective, independent
and pluralistic national institutions for the promotion and protection of human
rights, in accordance with the Paris Principles;3
3.
Recognizes the role of independent national institutions for the
promotion and protection of human rights in working together with Governments to
_______________
4

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
A/HRC/23/27.
6
A/HRC/16/77.
7
A/68/208.
5

2/5

National institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights

A/RES/68/171

ensure full respect for human rights at the national level, including by contributing
to follow-up actions, as appropriate, to the recommendations resulting from the
international human rights mechanisms;
Welcomes the increasingly important role of national institutions for the
4.
promotion and protection of human rights in supporting cooperation between their
Governments and the United Nations in the promotion and protection of human
rights;
Underlines the value of national human rights institutions, established
5.
and operating in accordance with the Paris Principles, in the continued monitoring
of existing legislation and consistently informing the State about the impact of such
legislation on the activities of human rights defenders, including by making relevant
and concrete recommendations;
Recognizes the role that national human rights institutions can play in
6.
preventing and addressing cases of reprisals as part of supporting the cooperation
between their Governments and the United Nations in the promotion of human
rights, including by contributing to follow-up actions, as appropriate, to
recommendations made by international human rights mechanisms;
Also recognizes that, in accordance with the Vienna Declaration and
7.
Programme of Action,4 it is the right of each State to choose the framework for
national institutions that is best suited to its particular needs at the national level in
order to promote human rights in accordance with international human rights
standards;
Encourages Member States to establish effective, independent and
8.
pluralistic national institutions or, where they already exist, to strengthen them for
the promotion and protection of all human rights and fundamental freedoms for all,
as outlined in the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action;
Welcomes the growing number of States establishing or considering the
9.
establishment of national institutions for the promotion and protection of human
rights, and welcomes in particular the growing number of States that have accepted
recommendations to establish national institutions compliant with the Paris
Principles made through the universal periodic review and, where relevant, by treaty
bodies and special procedures;
10. Encourages national institutions for the promotion and protection of
human rights established by Member States to continue to play an active role in
preventing and combating all violations of human rights as enumerated in the
Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action and relevant international
instruments;
11. Recognizes that national human rights institutions and their respective
members and staff should not face any form of reprisal or intimidation, including
political pressure, physical intimidation, harassment or unjustifiable budgetary
limitations, as a result of activities undertaken in accordance with their respective
mandates, including when taking up individual cases or when reporting on serious
or systematic violations in their countries;
12. Also recognizes the role played by national institutions for the promotion
and protection of human rights in the Human Rights Council, including its universal
periodic review mechanism, in both preparation and follow-up, and the special
procedures, as well as in the human rights treaty bodies, in accordance with Council

3/5

A/RES/68/171

National institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights

resolutions 5/1 and 5/2 of 18 June 2007 8 and Commission on Human Rights
resolution 2005/74 of 20 April 2005; 9
13. Welcomes the strengthening of opportunities for national human rights
institutions compliant with the Paris Principles to contribute to the work of the
Human Rights Council, as stipulated in the Council review outcome document
annexed to Council resolution 16/21 of 25 March 2011 10 adopted by the General
Assembly in its resolution 65/281 of 17 June 2011, and encourages national human
rights institutions to make use of these participatory opportunities;
14. Also welcomes the contribution of national human rights institutions
compliant with the Paris Principles to the work of the United Nations, including of
the Commission on the Status of Women, the Conference of States Parties to the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, the Open-ended Working
Group on Ageing and the ongoing intergovernmental process of the General
Assembly on strengthening and enhancing the effective functioning of the human
rights treaty body system;
15. Encourages national human rights institutions compliant with the Paris
Principles to continue to participate in and to contribute to deliberations in all
relevant United Nations mechanisms and processes in accordance with their
respective mandates, including the discussions on the post-2015 development
agenda;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to focus in his next report to the General
Assembly on the current participation of national human rights institutions
compliant with the Paris Principles in the work of the Assembly and related
processes, with a view to exploring the feasibility of enabling national human rights
institutions compliant with the Paris Principles to participate independently in
relevant United Nations mechanisms and processes in accordance with their
respective mandates and based on practices and arrangements agreed upon in
Assembly resolution 60/251 of 15 March 2006, Human Rights Council resolutions
5/1 and 5/2 of 18 June 2007 and 16/21 of 25 March 2011 and Commission on
Human Rights resolution 2005/74 of 20 April 2005, while ensuring their most
effective contribution;
17. Stresses the importance of the financial and administrative independence
and stability of national human rights institutions for the promotion and protection
of human rights, and notes with satisfaction the efforts of those States that have
provided their national institutions with more autonomy and independence,
including by giving them an investigative role or enhancing such a role, and
encourages other Governments to consider taking similar steps;
18. Urges the Secretary-General to continue to give high priority to requests
from Member States for assistance in the establishment and strengthening of
national human rights institutions;
19. Underlines the importance of the autonomy and independence of
ombudsman institutions, encourages increased cooperation between national human
_______________
8

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/62/53),
chap. IV, sect. A.
9
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2005, Supplement No. 3 and corrigenda
(E/2005/23 and Corr.1 and 2), chap. II, sect. A.
10
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement 53 (A/66/53), chap. II,
sect. A.

4/5

National institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights

A/RES/68/171

rights institutions and regional and international associations of ombudsmen, and
also encourages ombudsman institutions to actively draw on the standards
enumerated in international instruments and the Paris Principles to strengthen their
independence and increase their capacity to act as national human rights protection
mechanisms;
20. Commends the high priority given by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights to work on national human rights
institutions, encourages the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
in view of the expanded activities relating to national institutions, to ensure that
appropriate arrangements are made and budgetary resources provided to continue
and further extend activities in support of national institutions, and invites
Governments to contribute additional voluntary funds to that end;
21. Encourages all United Nations human rights mechanisms and agencies,
funds and programmes to work within their respective mandates with Member
States and national institutions in the promotion and protection of human rights with
respect to, inter alia, projects in the area of good governance and the rule of law, and
in this regard welcomes the efforts made by the High Commissioner to develop
partnerships in support of national institutions, including the tripartite partnership
among the United Nations Development Programme, the Office of the High
Commissioner and the International Coordinating Committee of National
Institutions for the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights;
22. Welcomes the important role played by the International Coordinating
Committee, in close cooperation with the Office of the High Commissioner, in
assisting Governments, when requested, in the establishment and strengthening of
national human rights institutions in accordance with the Paris Principles, in
assessing the conformity of national human rights institutions with the Paris
Principles and in providing technical assistance to strengthen national human rights
institutions, upon request, with a view to enhancing their compliance with the Paris
Principles, and calls upon Member States and other stakeholders, including United
Nations agencies, to follow up on the recommendations of the Subcommittee on
Accreditation of the International Coordinating Committee, with a view to enabling
national human rights institutions to fully comply with the Paris Principles in both
law and practice;
23. Encourages national institutions, including ombudsman and mediator
institutions, to seek accreditation status through the International Coordinating
Committee;
24. Encourages all Member States to take appropriate steps to promote the
exchange of information and experience concerning the establishment and effective
operation of national human rights institutions and to support the work of the
International Coordinating Committee and its regional coordinating networks in this
regard, including through support for the relevant technical assistance programmes
of the Office of the High Commissioner;
25. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide the assistance
necessary for holding international and regional meetings of national institutions,
including meetings of the International Coordinating Committee, in cooperation
with the Office of the High Commissioner;
26. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at
its seventieth session on the implementation of the present resolution.
70th plenary meeting
18 December 2013

5/5
