S/2020/1183

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
22 December 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 18 December 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs; Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations;
and Mr. Atul Khare, Under-Secretary-General for Operational Support, as well as
the statements delivered by the representatives of Belgium, China, the Dominican
Republic, Estonia, France, Germany, Indonesia (on behalf of Indonesia and Viet
Nam), the Niger (on behalf of the Niger, South Africa and Tunisia as well as Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines), the Russian Federation, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, and the United States of America in connection with
the video-teleconference on the “Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
and South Sudan” convened on Tuesday, 8 December 2020. A statement was also
delivered by the representative of the Sudan.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to Permanent Representatives of
the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light
of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic,
these briefings and statements will be issued as an official document of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Jerry Matthews Matjila
President of the Security Council

20-17604 (E) 231220 180121

*2017604*

S/2020/1183

Annex I
Statement by the Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, Rosemary DiCarlo
I thank the South African presidency of the Security Council for this
opportunity to brief the Council today on the situation in the Sudan.
Since my last briefing in September (see S/PV.8761), the Sudan has made
progress in its democratic transition. The Juba Agreement for Peace in the Sudan
between the transitional Government, the Sudan Revolutionary Front alliance and
the Sudan Liberation Army-Minni Minawi faction was signed on 3 October and
enshrined in the Constitutional Document on 2 November.
The amended Constitutional Document extends the transitional period to
39 months from the date of signature of the Juba peace agreement. It expands the
membership of the Sovereign Council from 11 to 14 members and provides for the
signatories to select 25 per cent of ministerial portfolios and 75 seats out of the
300 in the Transitional Legislative Council. It also provides for the establishment
of the Council of Partners for the Transitional Period and exempts representatives
of the signatories from the ban on running for office in elections that will follow
this period.
The formation of the Transitional Legislative Council has now been postponed
until 31 December. All political stakeholders will need to engage in constructive
consultations to ensure the creation of an inclusive and representative body that
reflects the diversity of the Sudan’s social and political landscape and includes
significant representation of women.
Despite the progress observed, political forces are increasingly fragmented.
Disagreements have surfaced particularly over the mandate and functions of the
Council of Partners for the Transitional Period that was established on 1 December.
Key political stakeholders expressed concern that the nominally advisory and
coordination body may have been given additional powers that would undermine
those of other transitional institutions.
While initially supportive, the Council of Ministers and the Forces for
Freedom and Change subsequently rejected the suggested authority of the Council
of Partners and its current composition and deplored the lack of women and youth
representation. The Council of Ministers also called for the swift formation of the
Transitional Legislative Council, emphasizing its exclusive power of oversight and
accountability, and its role in guiding the transitional period.
I hope that consensus can be found to ensure the functioning of clearly defined
transitional institutions that are inclusive and effective. I also echo the transitional
Government’s call for the swift formation of the legislative body pursuant to the
Constitutional Document.
Let me note that while the transitional authorities have committed to the
promotion of gender equality, women remain underrepresented in transitional
structures. There are only three women among the Cabinet’s 18 ministers, and the
Council of Partners has only one female representative. I welcome the efforts of
women’s organizations to develop a common agenda in promoting the inclusion of
women. The equal right to political participation and representation of women in
decision-making at all levels of the transition is an integral part of democratization.
I commend the transitional Government’s efforts in relation to legal reforms that
promote gender equality.

2/31

20-17604

S/2020/1183

The dire economic situation continues to cast a dark and long shadow
over all the foregoing efforts. Restrictions occasioned by the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19), including the five-month-long shutdown to prevent the spread of the
disease resulted in a severe decline in economic activity and a loss of approximately
42 per cent of State revenues.
Given the Sudan’s arrears, the country has been unable to avail itself of debt
relief. The increased spending on emergency health programmes, coupled with a
decline in public revenues, has led to a budget deficit of approximately $250 million
per month. Rampant inflation and exchange rate fluctuations are negatively affecting
the amounts of funding available for programme delivery. Further, the inflation
rate increased to 229.85 per cent in October, negatively affecting United Nations
agencies’ and partners’ operations.
On 19 December, we will mark the second anniversary of the revolution in the
Sudan. Demonstrations continue to intermittently occur across the country because
of the economic crisis, voicing demands for Government reform and rejection of the
amendments to the Constitutional Document. Some have been accompanied by loss
of life and injuries.
The COVID-19 pandemic has further aggravated humanitarian needs, which
have also been driven by severe flooding, intercommunal violence and prolonged
displacement. In recent weeks, over 48,000 people have fled the conflict in the Tigray
region of Ethiopia and sought refuge in the Sudan, which has put an additional strain
on the Sudanese authorities.
In the International Monetary Fund’s staff-monitored programme, which was
signed in September, the transitional Government agreed to implement the removal
of subsidies and undertake macroeconomic reforms, which have caused serious
hardships for the population in the short term. It is critical that the international
community continue supporting the country’s economic recovery through funding
the basic income cash transfer programme known as the Sudan Family Support
Programme, which is intended to mitigate the social impact of the transitional
Government’s economic reform agenda.
I once again welcome the intention of the United States to rescind the Sudan’s
designation as a State sponsor of terrorism, a change that will facilitate the country’s
access to critical international financial assistance. I also welcome the commitment
of President Emmanuel Macron of France to holding an international economic
conference in Paris next year in support of the Sudan.
After a thorough planning process involving the United Nations system, the
United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS),
began to deploy to Khartoum in October. The team is now continuing its consultations
with transitional authorities regarding priorities for this time-bound mission.
The transitional Government has underscored the need for UNITAMS to have
a light footprint, which is how the Mission has been configured. The Mission will
focus on the four objectives outlined in resolution 2524 (2020): assisting the political
transition; supporting peace processes; bolstering peacebuilding, civilian protection
and the rule of law; and promoting the mobilization of economic, development
and humanitarian assistance. The Mission will provide good offices, technical
support and capacity-building. It will also leverage the work of the United Nations
country team.
UNITAMS is headquartered in Khartoum but will establish field offices in
Darfur, the Two Areas and Eastern Sudan. Let me stress that UNITAMS will be a
fully integrated Mission, and the Mission staff and the United Nations country team
20-176043/31

S/2020/1183

are now developing an integrated strategic framework and coordination structures
to maximize United Nations support and effectiveness. Our goal is for UNITAMS,
together with the country team, to begin delivering on all the Mission’s strategic
objectives by 1 January 2021.
As the Mission establishes itself, we count on the transitional Government’s
continued support. In that regard, I urge the transitional Government to finalize the
status-of-mission agreement for UNITAMS.
UNITAMS is also working closely with the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) in anticipation of its drawdown. The
protection of civilians remains a concern, especially for women and children,
who face a multitude of risks in areas still under the control of armed groups. The
protection of civilians will be the responsibility of the transitional Government, but
UNITAMS will provide support and help to create a protective environment for
vulnerable populations.
I welcome the steps the Government has taken to address that issue,
including through the formulation of a national plan for civilian protection and the
announcement that 12,000 members of a protection force will be deployed to Darfur.
National and local authorities have made a strong commitment to ensuring basic
security and protection across the Sudan. UNITAMS will support the transitional
Government by helping to create a protective environment.
Joint UNAMID-UNITAMS teams are conducting assessment visits focused on
the protection of civilians to ensure that lessons learned from UNAMID are applied
and sustained. UNITAMS will have child protection advisers, women’s protection
advisers, human rights officers and police trainers to support the transitional
Government’s efforts.
However, the effective protection of civilians can be achieved only through
the Sudan’s own efforts. Key to such efforts will be the implementation of the Juba
peace agreement, which is a major step towards ending years of conflict in the
country, addressing the root causes and building sustainable peace.
The Sudan is at a critical juncture. It can move forward decisively in its
transition, but that process could still be derailed by the many challenges it faces.
It is incumbent on all of us to support the Sudan in its efforts to achieve democratic
governance, economic prosperity and an inclusive society for all Sudanese people.

4/31

20-17604

S/2020/1183

Annex II
Statement by the Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations,
Jean-Pierre Lacroix
I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity to brief the Security Council. The African
Union-United Nations joint special report (S/2020/1155), and its annex, on the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), provide an
update on the situation in Darfur. I will focus my remarks on the recommendations
contained in the joint special report and what we foresee as the next steps
and key issues.
The joint special report recommendations should be considered in the
broader context of milestone political developments, such as the signing of the Juba
Agreement for Peace in the Sudan on 3 October and the Government’s national plan
for the protection of civilians (see S/2020/429, annex), which was submitted to the
Security Council earlier this year. They constitute a solid basis for addressing the
root causes of the conflict in Darfur and other areas of the Sudan, and also create the
necessary institutional framework for the parties to the peace agreement to jointly
assume the primary responsibility to protect civilians.
In that context, the African Union (AU) and the United Nations have had
extensive discussions on the way forward for UNAMID. We held a Tripartite
Coordination Mechanism meeting in Khartoum at the end of October and met with
other Government officials at the national and Darfur state levels during my joint
visit with Mr. Chergui, AU Commissioner for Peace and Security. Details of those
discussions are presented in the joint special report.
What is evident from those consultations is the firm and unequivocal resolve of
the transitional Government to assume responsibility for the protection of civilians.
We welcome and support that commitment. The national plan for the protection of
civilians, developed by the transitional Government, is a comprehensive document
that can serve as a basis for the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in Sudan (UNITAMS) and the United Nations country team to develop a
complementary support strategy going forward. Pursuant to decree 360 of 13 October,
the Government has begun to deploy to Darfur a civilian protection force, whose size
and reach are intended to surpass that of UNAMID. This new security arrangement
is also in line with the Juba peace agreement, which included the establishment
of the joint security-keeping force, composed of Government forces and signatory
armed movements, to maintain security and protect civilians in Darfur.
During the reporting period, Darfur has seen a spike in clashes involving
Sudan Liberation Army (SLA)-Abdul Wahid elements and in intercommunal
violence. Attacks against internally displaced persons (IDPs), civilians and protesters
have also continued throughout the year. That reflects trends related to seasonal
migration, but also anxiety and uncertainty among the Darfuri constituencies about
the ongoing transition at the national and state levels. The situation in volatile IDP
camps, such as in Kalma in South Darfur, Sortony in North Darfur, and Hamadiya
in Central Darfur, and the areas around Golo, in the Jebel Marra region, will be of
particular concern, as the Government forces do not yet have a sustained presence
there, or even access. We believe that the recent positive indications by SLA-Abdul
Wahid of potential involvement in the peace process could bring about a change in
the disposition and situation of those constituencies.
In the light of these developments, the Tripartite Coordination Mechanism
recommended the termination of UNAMID at the end of its current mandate,
31 December 2020, followed by a six-month period of drawdown and liquidation
20-176045/31

S/2020/1183

thereafter. The drawdown process will be a major undertaking in Darfur, and I would
like to point out a few critical issues for the consideration of the Security Council.
First, there is a need to coordinate international support for the Government
and the parties to the Juba peace agreement, particularly its civilian protection force,
in its efforts to protect civilians. This force is to be deployed to Darfur as UNAMID
draws down. In that context, it is critical that we clarify the expectations and roles
of UNAMID and the Government during the drawdown, in line with the UNAMID
status-of-mission agreement.
If the Security Council decides to terminate UNAMID’s mandate on
31 December 2020, our troops and formed police units will cease operations
as of 1 January 2021. Our remaining contingents would then be dedicated to the
protection of the remaining UNAMID personnel, team sites and assets during the
drawdown, while preparing for exit. In the event of a major security incident or
threat to civilians in Darfur during this period, the onus would be on the transitional
Sudanese authorities and the relevant institutions to respond, as UNAMID would not
be able to intervene after 31 December if the mandate has ended.
Secondly, it is critical that the transition from UNAMID to UNITAMS
consolidate the gains made in peacebuilding. The State liaison functions funded
by UNAMID have been a unique, innovative vehicle for joint planning and
programming with the United Nations country team. UNAMID will continue
supporting State liaison functions and other areas of substantive civilian support
for peacebuilding, community engagement, human rights monitoring and police and
rule of law assistance, including joint patrols with the Sudanese police, until the last
day of its mandate, 31 December, if the mandate is not renewed. We must ensure that
UNITAMS and the United Nations country team will be able to assist the Government
during the drawdown period in maintaining peacebuilding support and enhancing
protections so as to prevent a relapse of the conflict in fragile communities.
Thirdly, coordinated political advocacy is required in order to support an
orderly and safe drawdown of UNAMID and closure of the team sites. UNAMID
is engaging both the central and local authorities, as well as community members,
to ensure their cooperation during the drawdown, and also to address the claims
and grievances of former national staff, which are increasingly being manifested
through protests and demonstrations. The closure of team sites requires labourintensive processes for environmental clean-up, repatriation and disposal of assets
and equipment, including contingent- and United Nations-owned equipment — all of
which must be secured throughout the process.
The transitional Government has pledged its full support for the facilitation
of an orderly and safe drawdown and liquidation process, as agreed in the outcome
document of the Tripartite Coordination Mechanism on 25 October. However, at
the local level, the operation is facing resistance from State authorities and local
communities with regard to the removal and withdrawal of assets and equipment
from the team sites. If the drawdown process is further accelerated, the Government
would need to provide further concrete support at all levels to facilitate the process,
including the identification of feasible and viable civilian end-users for the team
sites and a robust security plan to prevent looting and other untoward incidents.
Under-Secretary-General Khare will speak more on that issue.
Notwithstanding those challenges, there is a real opportunity to end the
decades-long conflict in Darfur through the implementation of the Juba peace
agreement. The immediate peace dividends, the permanent ceasefire and the
deployment of the joint security-keeping forces will change the dynamics on the
ground and enhance ongoing Government efforts to gain the confidence of the local
6/31

20-17604

S/2020/1183

communities. That is the critical area for the United Nations and other international
partners to further consider optimal modalities for support, in discussion with
the parties.
Finally, I would like to reiterate our appreciation for the African Union in
managing the unprecedented hybrid mission. I would also like to commend the work
of our colleagues in UNAMID. There were trying times in the history of UNAMID,
but we believe that the presence of the mission averted large-scale violence in the
difficult terrains and operating environments that it has faced. It is the responsibility
of the transitional authorities of the Sudan and the parties to the Juba peace
agreement, with the support of the international community, to safeguard the gains
made by UNAMID.

20-176047/31

S/2020/1183

Annex III
Statement by the Under-Secretary-General for Operational
Support, Atul Khare
I am grateful for this opportunity to contribute to this important discussion.
Building on the statements of Under-Secretary-Generals Lacroix and DiCarlo, I will
focus my remarks on the operational support aspects of the possible drawdown and
closure of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID)
and the continuing start-up of the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in Sudan (UNITAMS). In doing so, I will highlight a number of key issues
warranting the Council’s attention.
UNAMID has long operated as a tripartite partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union, working closely with the Government of the Sudan.
That cooperation will never be as important as during the tasks involved in a safe
and orderly drawdown and closure of the mission.
In the best of circumstances, drawing down and closing one of the largest
operations ever conducted under the auspices of the United Nations would be a major
undertaking. UNAMID continues to deploy well over 6,000 military and police
personnel, most of them within 22 contingents. The more than 1,500 remaining
civilian staff include some 700 international staff. Together, they are spread across
the logistics and operations base in El Fasher, mission headquarters in Zalingei and
13 team sites in Darfur, as well as in Khartoum and Port Sudan. The 22 contingents
represent immeasurable value in equipment deployed by contributing countries. In
addition, more than 10,000 mission assets plus inventory remain. The orderly and
safe drawdown of the personnel of a mission of this size is clearly an endeavour of
no less than six months, to be followed by a 9 to 12 month period of asset disposal
and liquidation, with the ongoing full cooperation of the Government of the Sudan
and local authorities.
A compressed timeline and the inherent logistical challenges of closing the
various team sites, repatriating uniformed personnel and their equipment, separating
or reassigning remaining staff and properly disposing of the mission’s assets will
be an enormous task. As the Council is aware, Darfur is a landlocked area, and
the mission relies on a single, medium-sized runway to support strategic passenger
movements. Furthermore, the movement of equipment and inventories across vast
distances, both within Darfur and from Darfur to Port Sudan, will become paramount
to the success of the drawdown.
The mission currently relies on force protection provided by contingents as the
backbone of its security arrangements. In the event of a drawdown, UNAMID would
therefore increasingly rely on the Government of the Sudan to provide security to
the staff and assets of the mission. Past experiences in the drawdown of UNAMID
also demonstrate the need for the proper provision of security by the Government of
the Sudan.
Recognizing those imperatives, the Security Council may wish to consider
options for maintaining a modest, inwardly focused guard unit capability during the
drawdown. That may be especially important given the need for Sudanese security
forces to focus on the protection of civilians.
In addition, we are committed to the regulatory requirements of the
Government of the Sudan under the status-of-mission agreement, where applicable,
but coordinated and responsive approvals will be equally important. That includes
efforts to ensure environmental restoration in each of our sites. Furthermore,

8/31

20-17604

S/2020/1183

visas for staff who are critical to the drawdown, along with some additional surge
capacities, remain essential.
The challenges ahead increase the strategic risks of a protracted drawdown
and closure. Following the Tripartite Coordination Mechanism meeting in October,
my Department and the mission jointly reviewed and updated UNAMID drawdown
and closure planning to prepare for the expiration of the UNAMID mandate on
31 December 2020. Through briefings and discussion with the Government of the
Sudan, we dedicated one day to establishing a coordination mechanism, for which
officials visited El Fasher. The challenge remains daunting.
My hope is that a streamlined coordination mechanism will provide a basis for
addressing the challenges I have outlined today, but it must be augmented by ongoing
engagement with the Government at the political level. The leadership of remaining
United Nations personnel and the full cooperation of troop- and police-contributing
countries, will also be important ingredients for a safe and orderly drawdown and
handover of programmatic responsibilities to UNITAMS, the country team and
Government institutions.
Similarly, the Government’s ongoing and full cooperation will be critical
in establishing UNITAMS in parallel to the closure of UNAMID. Almost 30 staff
members have been recruited on a temporary basis for the new mission, and we
continue to rely on the Government of the Sudan for the prompt processing of visa
requests so as to allow them to take up their duties. In addition, the transfer of
UNAMID facilities and equipment to support the establishment of UNITAMS and
the work of the country team remains critical.
Lastly, I would like to express my gratitude to the African Union, which has
been our partner in this endeavour. I also commend the efforts of the mission to
prepare for a responsible and accountable drawdown and closure so as to safeguard
the legacy of the mission and the Organization. I count on the Council’s support in
its forthcoming resolution.

20-176049/31

S/2020/1183

Annex IV
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Belgium to
the United Nations, Karen Van Vlierberge
[Original: French]
I thank Under-Secretaries-General Ms. DiCarlo, Mr. Khare and Mr. Lacroix
for their briefings. I will focus on three aspects: the political context, the humanitarian
and human rights situation and the prospects for Darfur.
First of all, Belgium would like to welcome the progress made by the Sudan
in its democratic transition. The signing of the Juba agreements on 3 October
was an important step. Belgium nevertheless calls on the parties to continue their
commitment through constructive dialogue and to rapidly implement the agreements
reached. We call on the groups that remained absent to return to the negotiating
table. That is essential to ensure a lasting peace. The informal talks with Abdelaziz
Al-Hilu’s group are a step in the right direction.
Belgium welcomes the fact that the Juba agreement endorses the importance
of justice, accountability and reconciliation for the transition. We welcome the
commitment of the parties to transitional justice mechanisms, such as the truth and
reconciliation commission and the special court for crimes committed in Darfur.
We have noted the intention of the Sudanese authorities to cooperate with the
International Criminal Court, whose work we support. Land ownership and use are
another crucial issue covered by the Juba Agreement for Peace in the Sudan. These
issues are closely linked to the challenge of the return of internally displaced persons
and peacebuilding.
Support for reconciliation is one of the strategic priorities of the United
Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan. We are encouraged
by the preparations for the start of operations of this new mission. As an integrated
mission, we hope that it can apply a comprehensive approach in its support for
political transition.
The European Union (EU) will also provide its political support to the Sudan
in a dialogue in the coming weeks. The European Union continues to deliver on the
commitments it made at the Sudan Partnership Conference last June, reaffirming the
Sudan as a long-term priority partner. Last week’s announcement of an additional
humanitarian aid package for Ethiopian refugees fleeing the conflict in Tigray,
bringing the total amount of EU humanitarian aid to the Sudan to €65.5 million in
2020, is testimony to that.
The humanitarian situation in the Sudan remains of great concern.
Displacement caused by tensions between communities is compounded by the
impact of severe flooding, the coronavirus pandemic and other infectious diseases.
The 45,000 Ethiopian refugees must also be taken into account. Belgium welcomes
the work of the humanitarian aid workers who have provided assistance to 8 million
people in 2020. Nevertheless, we are appalled by the ongoing serious violations
against children in the Sudan, in particular murders and sexual assaults. Moreover,
it is unacceptable that groups that signed the peace agreement continue to recruit
children. We also call on the Sudanese authorities to stop using schools and hospitals
for their military operations. In that regard, we recall the Safe Schools Declaration,
which the Sudan endorsed in December 2015.
These concerns are in line with the priority we accord to the protection of
civilians. This month, the Security Council is due to take a decision on how the
mission in Darfur should implement its withdrawal. We note the persistence of
10/31

20-17604

S/2020/1183

intercommunal conflicts and armed conflicts involving the Sudan Liberation ArmyAbdul Wahid faction, a non-signatory to the peace agreement. We hear the concern of
the population at the prospect of the departure of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), while the military and police components
of the mission are still carrying out regular patrols. We welcome the commitment
of the authorities to taking responsibility for the protection of civilians, including
through the deployment of a joint force, and the support of the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan for the implementation of the
national plan for the protection of civilians.
However, these important commitments will take time to materialize on the
ground. Belgium therefore calls for caution when discussing the possible closure
of UNAMID. The challenge is twofold: to ensure a smooth transfer regarding the
protection of civilians from UNAMID to the Sudanese authorities and to avoid
losing the gains of so many years of a presence in Darfur.

20-1760411/31

S/2020/1183

Annex V
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Dai Bing
[Original: Chinese]
I thank Under-Secretaries-General DiCarlo, Lacroix and Khare for their
briefings. I would like to welcome Ambassador Barbara Woodward, Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom, to her new position and to this meeting.
The past three months have seen important progress in the Sudanese peace
process and political transition and the positive momentum maintained in the range
of reforms undertaken by the Government. On the other hand, economic difficulties,
the coronavirus disease and widespread floods continue to pose serious challenges
to the country’s governance and its people’s lives. The international community
should pay more attention and do more to help the Sudan move towards peace and
development. In that context, I would like to underscore the following three points.
First, the peace agreement should be fully implemented. China welcomes
the signing of the Juba Agreement for Peace in the Sudan between the transitional
Government of the Sudan and the other parties and commends South Sudan’s
important contribution to that end. This has been a key step forward in the transition
process and an important opportunity for the Sudan to achieve comprehensive
and lasting peace. China encourages the signatories to the agreement to fulfil
their commitments in earnest and to push for the full implementation of the peace
agreement and calls on the parties that have not yet signed the agreement to join
the peace process as soon as possible. China looks forward to all parties working
together to achieve the transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding in the Sudan.
China supports the United Nations in adjusting the disbursement of the multi-donor
trust fund to scale up funding for peacebuilding purposes.
Secondly, addressing socioeconomic challenges should be prioritized.
The Sudan is faced with a dire economic situation, a lack of fuel and other basic
commodities and a record level of inflation. The pandemic and the floods have
exacerbated the current difficulties, with more than a fifth of the population facing
food shortages and in urgent need of humanitarian assistance. China supports the
Sudanese Government’s economic and financial reforms, welcomes the adoption of
the debt-relief package by the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank and
calls on the international community to prioritize the easing of the country’s debt
burden, increase investment in and humanitarian assistance to Sudan and support its
socioeconomic development and capacity-building for governance. We also call on
the countries concerned to genuinely lift their unilateral coercive measures against
the Sudan without delay. As the situation in the Sudan and Darfur gradually improves,
the Council should promptly review the sanctions imposed on the Sudan and work
out a road map for lifting them. China has provided the Sudan with many shipments
of supplies for combating the pandemic and sent medical teams to the country. We
will continue to do what we can to help the country achieve sustainable development.
Thirdly, an orderly transition from the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) to the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS) must be ensured. Over the past
13 years of its deployment, UNAMID has played an important role in promoting
the peace process, maintaining stability in Darfur and supporting the reconstruction
of that region. It has been an example of the United Nations and the African Union
successfully cooperating to solve African problems, and we should draw upon that
experience going forward. As the UNAMID mandate ends on 31 December, we
12/31

20-17604

S/2020/1183

should remember all its staff members, who have contributed to the improvement of
the situation in Darfur over the past 13 years. They have every reason to be happy
that UNAMID will have completed its mission so successfully.
China looks forward to the handover and orderly transition from UNAMID to
UNITAMS. China calls on the Secretary-General to appoint a Special Representative
for the Sudan as soon as possible. UNITAMS should fully take into account the views
of the Sudanese Government when performing its duties, act in strict accordance
with the resolutions of the Security Council, focus on supporting the core tasks of
the Sudan’s political transition process and avoid interfering in the Sudan’s internal
affairs. At the same time, it should actively respond to requests of the Sudanese
Government, assist the country in promoting sustainable development and mobilize
the international community to increase assistance.
We have taken note that the advance team for UNITAMS is formulating a
comprehensive strategic framework for UNITAMS and other United Nations
agencies on the ground. We hope that those entities can work closely together to
increase efficiency and avoid stepping on each other’s toes.

20-1760413/31

S/2020/1183

Annex VI
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Dominican Republic to
the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
We would like to start by thanking Under-Secretaries-General DiCarlo,
Lacroix and Khare for their valuable briefings.
We welcome the signing of the Juba Agreement for Peace in the Sudan and the
presentation of the national plan on civilian protection, which are vital elements for
the new Government and important measures for restoring confidence and regaining
stability. Both instruments represent starting points for the protection of civilians
and for addressing the root causes of the conflict.
There is no doubt that, if the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS) is equipped with the right policies, resources,
leadership and political support, it will be afforded the opportunity to become an
essential tool for the transition in the country. However, to fulfil that task, the Mission
requires complete and genuine commitment from the Sudanese Government.
UNITAMS support to the Sudanese Government in protecting civilians is
vital. All efforts in that regard must be a priority and a shared responsibility. We
continue to advocate for UNITAMS to provide new opportunities to broaden the
approach to protecting unarmed civilians. However, much remains to be done.
Unfortunately, intercommunal violence remains a concern, highlighting
the fragility of the political transition and the potential risk of further violence
following the withdrawal of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur. In addition to being in the midst of that fragile transition, the Sudan
faces a deteriorating economic situation, popular mistrust and inadequate judicial
mechanisms, all of which is occurring while the country is facing the outbreak of
the coronavirus disease pandemic, the effects of historic flooding and increasing
humanitarian needs.
According to the latest reports, some 65 per cent of Sudanese live below the
poverty level and more than 9 million are in need of humanitarian assistance. At the
same time, insecurity and human rights violations persist. Women and girls continue
to be exposed to sexual violence, both in internally displaced persons camps and
throughout the country. In that respect, the Mission’s human rights capabilities
will be critical in Darfur. The reporting and monitoring of human rights violations
remains essential, as does the establishment of judicial institutions to end the culture
of impunity that persists in the Sudan. Accordingly, we welcome the transitional
Government’s commitment to cooperating with the International Criminal Court
(ICC), which was expressed during ICC Prosecutor Bensouda’s high-level visit to
the Sudan last October.
We continue to advocate in favour of the inclusion of women in the political
process. We join with Azza Hasan, coordinator of the Sudanese Women’s Group for
Peace and Security, who said that “[t]he revolution came to change concepts”, but
that “women and other vulnerable and marginalized groups in the various states
of the Sudan have not yet obtained their rights as required”. While recognizing
improvements in the protection of women’s rights and gender equality, we reiterate
our call for the achievement of 40 per cent representation of women in decisionmaking processes.
Beyond the Mission itself, the Sudan’s political transition remains fragile.
Successfully addressing that challenge will require strong commitment and creative
14/31

20-17604

S/2020/1183

decision-making. As that process evolves, tangible progress on human rights, social
justice, the administration of justice and inclusive governance will ultimately define
whether the aspirations of the Sudanese people become a reality. UNITAMS, even
with its imperfections, has a real opportunity to become a valuable tool for that
purpose, with the support of the international community and such regional bodies
as the African Union.

20-1760415/31

S/2020/1183

Annex VII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Estonia to the
United Nations, Sven Jürgenson
I join others in thanking the briefers for their insightful overviews. Allow
me also to extend a very warm welcome to the new Permanent Representative of
the United Kingdom, Her Excellency Dame Barbara Woodward. I look forward
to working with her on the Sudan as well as on other matters on the Security
Council’s agenda.
Despite multiple challenges, including the coronavirus disease pandemic, the
Sudan has made great efforts to succeed with its historic transition. It is therefore
of the utmost importance that the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS) be fully operational at the earliest opportunity to
support the country in its efforts, and particularly in the four mandated strategic areas.
First, it is crucial that the Sudan receive the support of UNITAMS in order to
progress with the political transition to democracy. In that regard, the focus should
be on institution-building, as strong institutions form the backbone of democracy.
We would like to acknowledge the Sudan for the significant steps it has already
taken and would encourage the country to continue on that path of reform and
institution-building.
Secondly, we congratulate the Sudan on the signing of the Juba peace
agreement on 3 October. The implementation of the agreement now becomes key, and
the support of UNITAMS in its implementation cannot be overemphasized. I would
also like to underscore the importance of the inclusion of women in that process. In
addition, we call on the parties that have not yet joined the peace agreement to do
so urgently.
Thirdly, it is critical for the Sudan to receive the support of UNITAMS in
assisting with peacebuilding, the protection of civilians and the rule of law. In that
regard, we welcome the willingness of the Sudan to address civilian protection head
on, but also recognize some of the capacity constraints where the United Nations
can be helpful.
Fourthly, given the economic hardship that the Sudan has seen in 2020, it is
crucial for UNITAMS, together with international financial institutions, to put their
full weight behind supporting the economic recovery. We would also like to welcome
the intention to remove the Sudan from the list of State sponsors of terrorism.
UNITAMS was established with the sole purpose of supporting the
Sudan during its historic transition. It is very important for that messaging to be
communicated clearly and through meaningful action to the Sudanese people. Given
the immense challenges that the Sudan is facing, it is crucial that UNITAMS have
sufficient capacity and adequate resources and be fit for purpose to offer support in
all areas in which the Sudan needs it. We also reiterate our call to have the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General appointed at the earliest opportunity.
Allow me now to turn to the topic of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). By the end of December, the Security Council will
have to make a decision about the future of UNAMID. Estonia supports a responsible
withdrawal that is not politicized but based on the needs on the ground. Rushing the
withdrawal risks losing the significant gains made by UNAMID over the years.
Lastly, I would like to express our deep appreciation to the Sudan for offering
its generous support to the Ethiopian refugees who are fleeing the fighting and
violence in the Tigray region. Those actions prove once again why we must invest
16/31

20-17604

S/2020/1183

in a stable, strong and prosperous Sudan, as it gives so much back to the region. The
international community must spare no effort to offer its support for the aspirations
of the Sudanese people to achieve democracy, peace and prosperity.

20-1760417/31

S/2020/1183

Annex VIII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of France to
the United Nations, Nathalie Broadhurst Estival
[Original: English and French]
I would like to begin by thanking Ms. DiCarlo, Mr. Lacroix and Mr. Khare for
their briefings. I would like to emphasize three points.
First, France’s priority remains supporting the democratic transition in the
Sudan. I pay tribute to the political will that the transitional Government continues
to demonstrate in a context of increasing difficulties. That is reflected in the pursuit
of institutional, economic and financial reforms, as well the efforts to begin the
implementation of the Juba peace agreement. I refer in particular to the Government’s
efforts to engage in discussions with all parties. We call on those who remain outside
the peace process to join it without further delay.
We further welcome the Sudan’s efforts to tackle impunity and ensure respect
for human rights, particularly through cooperation with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the International Criminal Court.
The planned ratification of two important conventions, including the International
Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance,
is extremely encouraging. Those advances must of course be followed up by
tangible action.
We hope that the procedure for removing the Sudan from the United States list
of State sponsors of terrorism will be completed as soon as possible. That is indeed
a crucial step towards achieving a successful democratic transition. As President
Emmanuel Macron has promised, France will organize a high-level conference to
support the Sudanese transition as soon as the Sudan is removed from that list. The
event could be held in the first half of 2021.
A number of challenges further compound the difficulties of the transition
itself. The acceptance of reforms has been weakened by economic difficulties,
and the humanitarian situation has worsened in connection with the persistence of
insecurity in Darfur, the effects of the coronavirus disease pandemic, the effects of
the floods and the situation in Ethiopia.
As such, we welcome the Sudan’s efforts to host nearly 50,000 Ethiopian
refugees in eastern Sudan. The mobilization of humanitarian assistance from
all United Nations agencies and the Sudan’s international partners is absolutely
necessary. France, together with its European partners and the European Union, will
of course play its full part.
In that context — and this will be my last point — France supports the swift
operationalization of the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission
in the Sudan (UNITAMS) and the appointment of a Special Representative of the
Secretary-General to continue United Nations support on the ground. In Darfur,
the transition from the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) to UNITAMS should be carried out in an orderly fashion.
France recognizes the willingness of the Sudanese authorities to assume full
responsibility for the protection of civilians in Darfur and encourages the Government
to continue implementing its national plan for the protection of civilians, with the
assistance of UNITAMS. Yet civilians, particularly women and children, continue
to face violence on the ground. The continuation of peacebuilding activities is also
indispensable for building trust among populations who remain traumatized by the
level of insecurity.
18/31

20-17604

S/2020/1183

Lastly, it is necessary to accelerate capacity-building and support the
implementation of the peace process. In that regard, the participation of women is
of course a major issue, as many speakers have stated. It is the responsibility of
the Security Council to ensure that UNAMID’s withdrawal takes due account of
the reality on the ground and all of its challenges, as it has always done for its
peacekeeping operations. In that regard, I would like to thank Mr. Lacroix and
Mr. Khare for setting out in detail the prerequisites of a process that the Security
Council must now identify.

20-1760419/31

S/2020/1183

Annex IX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Germany to the
United Nations, Christoph Heusgen
Let me start my intervention by picking up where Rosemary DiCarlo,
Under-Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, left off. We are
at a critical juncture with regard to the Sudan. The transition process could still
derail, which makes it necessary that we look seriously at the situation. There are
enormous challenges for the Government of Prime Minister Hamdok. At this stage, I
would like to once again underline Germany’s full support for the Government. We
want the Government to succeed, and we will do everything from our side to make
that possible.
The difficulties of the transitional institutions in meeting their deadlines
are depressing to hear once again. With regard to gender equality and women’s
representation, the transitional bodies are not meeting the expectations that we have
voiced repeatedly here in the Security Council. That is really frustrating.
We know that peace processes work only when more women are involved.
Again and again, we have been let down — but more important, civil society and
women have been let down. The situation is very difficult in the Sudan: the floods,
the harvest, the coronavirus disease, additional illnesses owing to the floods and
50,000 refugees from the Tigray region. I commend the Government of the Sudan for
what it has been doing to accommodate the refugees under difficult circumstances.
As if that were not enough, I read the daily press briefing by the Spokesperson
of the Secretary-General this morning concerning the report (S/2020/1155) of
infighting over the control of gold mines, attacks against Government forces and
27,000 displaced persons. The situation is very difficult. Therefore, we have been
a driving force, together with our British friends, in supplying United Nations help
and seeing to it that the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in
the Sudan (UNITAMS) actually takes up its work.
I am very encouraged by what I heard from both Ms. DiCarlo and Mr. Lacroix
with regard to the build-up of UNITAMS. I think it is very important that, from the
very first day, UNITAMS be able to do the work that we have designed here as it
supports the Government. It is very good that it is a fully integrated team. Germany
will support it with additional voluntary contributions and personnel.
With regard to the drawdown of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), Mr. President, you will recall that I recently raised
the issue that it is very important that the Council make a decision on the drawdown
of UNAMID. We heard that from the three briefers, in particular from Mr. Khare.
I would like to thank him again for outlining all the challenges that we face in the
immediate drawdown. We therefore have to coordinate with the Sudanese authorities
who will take over the protection of civilians.
We might see a situation where security incidents occur and our Blue Helmets
would not able to intervene if we do not provide them with a legal basis to complete
their drawdown. What kind of an impression would we leave on the population if we
had Blue Helmets sitting there and not doing anything? Furthermore, we heard that
there is resistance from the local authorities against allowing the drawdown. Some
months ago, we heard reports about the looting of United Nations premises that were
supposed to go to Sudanese educational institutions. We cannot allow that to happen
again, because it would tarnish the image of the Government, the United Nations and
the Security Council.

20/31

20-17604

S/2020/1183

Therefore, my plea again to you, Mr. President, is to have a serious look at our
obligation as the Security Council. We have to make a decision on the drawdown.
We have to decide how to cooperate with the Sudanese Government in the most
effective way possible in order to cope with all the challenges we face. I like the
proposal of Mr. Khare, which is to have a coordination mechanism that looks at all
those questions. But we have to mandate it. We have to assume our responsibility.
We cannot just let UNAMID go.

20-1760421/31

S/2020/1183

Annex X
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Indonesia to the
United Nations, Dian Djani
Allow me to begin by welcoming our new colleague, the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom, Ambassador Barbara Woodward.
I will be reading out the joint statement of the members of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) in the Security Council — Indonesia and
Viet Nam.
We would first like to thank the briefers for their comprehensive briefings.
Our two delegations commend the commitment of the Government of the Sudan
to implementing its national plan for the protection of civilians. We are confident
that, following the historic peace agreement, advancement towards a peaceful and
prosperous Sudan will take place with greater momentum.
Against that background, we would like to highlight three important points.
The first is continued cooperation with the region. As members of ASEAN,
we firmly believe in the virtue of regional cooperation to support peacebuilding.
We acknowledge the role of the Government of South Sudan, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) and the African Union in the Sudan’s transition
and call for the continuation of such cooperation in the Sudan after the drawdown of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).
We emphasize that a smooth transition to the United Nations Integrated
Transition Assistance Mission in Sudan (UNITAMS) can be achieved only through
close coordination among the United Nations, the Government of the Sudan, the
African Union and IGAD in order to preserve the gains achieved for long-term peace
and development in the Sudan.
The second point entails improving the security and economic situation. We
echo the Secretary-General’s observation that peace in the Sudan will be complete
only once all conflicts come to an end. We are concerned about the persistent
intercommunal violence and civil unrest in numerous parts of the country, as well
as the incident between protesters and UNAMID formed police units in El Fasher
on 16 November.
The peace agreement has to be felt by all Sudanese. For them to feel
confident in the transition, they need to feel safe and all violence should end. In
that regard, we welcome the cooperation between the Government and the Sudan
with UNAMID, including through joint patrols by UNAMID and the Sudan Police
Force. We look forward to the continuation of that exercise until the termination of
UNAMID’s mandate.
It is important for that spirit of cooperation to continue with UNITAMS. At
the same time, the international community should also strengthen its efforts to
support economic development in the country, which is facing critical challenges
due to the coronavirus disease pandemic, heavy flooding and other natural disasters.
The Government has been facing a budget deficit of approximately $250 million
per month. In that regard, the Sudan’s access to international financial assistance,
investment and debt relief should be further facilitated.
The third point concerns ensuring full support to both UNITAMS and
UNAMID. We welcome last October’s Tripartite Coordination Mechanism meeting
among the United Nations, the African Union and the Government of the Sudan.
That is a testament to the commitment of the Government of the Sudan to ensuring
a smooth drawdown of UNAMID and transition to UNITAMS.
22/31

20-17604

S/2020/1183

As troop- and police-contributing countries to UNAMID and other United
Nations peacekeeping missions, Indonesia and Viet Nam emphasize the importance
of ensuring the safety, security and well-being of all peacekeepers during the
liquidation process. The same support should also be rendered to UNITAMS in
ensuring the full implementation of its mandate. We would also like to emphasize
the importance of the appointment of a Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the Sudan in accordance with resolution 2524 (2020).
To conclude, our two delegations once again emphasize our firm commitment
in supporting the Sudan in its transition towards permanent peace, security
and prosperity.

20-1760423/31

S/2020/1183

Annex XI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Niger to the
United Nations, Abdou Abarry
[Original: French]
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the Group of African countries on the
Security Council — the Niger, South Africa and Tunisia — as well as Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines (A3+1).
The A3+1 thanks the Secretary-General for his reports on the situation in
the Sudan and the activities of the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS) (S/2020/1155) and on the drawdown of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and a follow-on
presence (S/2020/1115).
We would also like to thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo
and Mr. Atul Khare for their briefings and efforts in support of the ongoing peace
process in the Sudan.
Our statement focuses on three main points — the political and security
situation; the socioeconomic and humanitarian situation; and the issue of
coordinating the transition to the establishment of UNITAMS following the
drawdown of UNAMID.
First, with regard to the political and security situation, the A3+1 welcomes
the initiatives that led to the signing of the Juba Agreement for Peace in the
Sudan on 3 October. Despite lingering challenges, the signing of the Agreement
demonstrates the willingness of the parties to the conflict to strive for lasting peace
in the Sudan, under the auspices of the transitional Government. To that end, we call
on all signatories and partners of the Sudan to honour their obligations to ensure
the effective and efficient implementation of the Agreement, which would include
progress on issues such as gender equality, the protection of human rights and the
rule of law.
The ongoing peacebuilding process requires all parties to commit to the
Agreement and to work actively to clarify and address all outstanding issues. That
would facilitate the mobilization of the trust fund integrating the strategic, technical
and planning dimensions of activities in support of the peacebuilding process.
We commend the collaboration of the African Union and the United Nations
as well as the leading role played by subregional bodies and neighbouring countries,
namely, the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and South Sudan, in the
peace process.
In addition, the upsurge in intercommunal violence and the clashes between
Government forces and certain armed groups that remain outside the Agreement
attest to the need for continued efforts to address the root causes of the conflicts,
in particular poverty and unemployment. In that regard, we call on Abdul Wahid
Al-Nur to join the peace process as soon as possible in order to give comprehensive
and inclusive peace a chance in the Sudan.
On the socioeconomic and humanitarian front, the A3+1 welcomes the
economic and financial reforms undertaken, despite the difficulties related to the
coronavirus disease pandemic. We call on the Government and partners of the Sudan
to build on the conclusions of the national economic conference held in Khartoum
from 26 to 28 September. I am pleased to note that the United States decision to
remove the Sudan from the list of State sponsors of terrorism will, as we have always
24/31

20-17604

S/2020/1183

emphasized, promote the Sudan’s economic and social development through access
to international development financial institutions.
The humanitarian situation in the Sudan is further exacerbated by the economic
crisis; food insecurity; the adverse effects of climate change, as illustrated by the
worst floods the country has experienced since 1988; epidemics; intercommunal
violence; the prolonged displacement of populations; and the influx of refugees
from neighbouring States. The current situation, which affects just over 9.6 million
people, demands that we demonstrate our responsibility and solidarity with the
Sudan with a view to mitigating the impact of the humanitarian situation on its
ongoing peacebuilding process. It also illustrates once again the interdependence
between security and development.
Regarding the coordination between the establishment of UNITAMS and the
drawdown of UNAMID, the A3+1 commends the transitional Government of the
Sudan for its collaboration with, and support for, the UNITAMS planning team in
facilitating a coordinated transition between the two missions.
We believe that the situation on the ground and the arrangements put in place
by the transitional Government to ensure stability and the protection of people and
property in Darfur are such that UNAMID should begin the drawdown process and
hand over to UNITAMS as of 31 December, in accordance with resolution 2525 (2020).
In conclusion, it should be noted that the acknowledgement in the Juba
Agreement for Peace in the Sudan of concerns such as the ratification of international
conventions on the protection and promotion of human rights, transitional justice
and the implementation by the Government of a national plan for the protection of
civilians offer hope for a coordinated transition between the two missions. In that
connection, we call on all of the Sudan’s partners to join the country in a successful
transition through the organization of democratic elections.

20-1760425/31

S/2020/1183

Annex XII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Anna Evstigneeva
[Original: Russian]
At the outset, allow me to welcome the new Permanent Representative of
the United Kingdom to the United Nations, Ambassador Barbara Woodward. We
look forward to fruitful cooperation with her in the Security Council, including
on the issue of the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in
Sudan (UNITAMS).
We thank the Under-Secretaries-General — Ms. DiCarlo, Mr. Lacroix and
Mr. Khare — for their informative briefings.
We agree that the Juba Agreement for Peace in the Sudan, signed on 3 October,
provides a unique opportunity to ensure long-term stabilization in the country and
the transition to progressive development. We are heartened to see that the Sudanese
authorities stand ready to directly address the issues that constitute the root causes of
conflicts, including in Darfur. The significant progress made in the implementation
of the Agreement over the past two months attests to that fact.
We would like to recall that the success of the negotiation process is largely
attributable to South Sudanese mediation efforts, including the personal efforts of
President Salva Kiir Mayardit. Moreover, the progress made towards establishing
friendly, neighbourly relations between the two countries is expected to have a
positive impact on the entire East Africa region, once again proving the effectiveness
of the formula “African solutions to African problems”.
The Sudan is dealing with complex challenges that have only been exacerbated
during the coronavirus pandemic. Decisive measures must be taken in order to
restore the economy and implement peacebuilding initiatives. In that connection,
it is vital that UNITAMS reach its full capacity as swiftly as possible. Khartoum is
expecting the global community to provide all the support and assistance required
in a timely manner.
We have carefully studied the analysis of the situation in Darfur contained in
the recent joint report of the African Union and the United Nations (S/2020/1155).
We agree with the recommendation to terminate the mandate of the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) on 31 December. We believe
that the views of the Sudanese authorities must be prioritized when addressing
the parameters of peacekeepers’ withdrawal and in making arrangements for the
operation of UNITAMS.
The situation in Darfur has not undergone any significant negative shifts.
Intercommunal clashes in certain states have not altered the overall landscape.
The well-coordinated and prompt response of authorities to all such incidents, as
well as the national strategy for the protection of civilians that is currently being
implemented, once again point to Khartoum’s earnest intent to take a comprehensive
approach to stabilization.
UNAMID has successfully met all its mandated tasks. It is high time that we
focused on the economic revival of the region, which is the principal objective of
the support that UNITAMS will provide. We also hope that the modalities for the
transfer of assets and support capacities from UNAMID to UNITAMS will soon
be finalized.
We consider it most pertinent to recall that Abdul Wahid Al-Nur, who is
responsible for antagonizing the Sudan Liberation Army in the Jebel Marra area,
26/31

20-17604

S/2020/1183

remains the major spoiler of the peace process. He has refused to join the Agreement
and to engage in dialogue with Khartoum. We reiterate our call to those with any
influence over that supposedly irreconcilable spoiler to exert due pressure upon him.

20-1760427/31

S/2020/1183

Annex XIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations,
Barbara Woodward
I wish to thank Under-Secretaries-General DiCarlo, Lacroix and Khare for
their briefings.
I would like to start by commending the commitment of the civilian-led
Government of the Sudan to continuing to make welcome progress towards its goal
of becoming a fully democratic State.
Prime Minister Hamdok and his Government have implemented a number
of critical reforms. Of particular note is the removal of fuel subsidies and progress
towards the ratification of key international human rights norms. We urge the
Government of the Sudan to continue on this path by implementing all necessary
economic reforms and ensuring full respect for fundamental human rights.
The United Kingdom also applauds the signing of the Juba Agreement for
Peace in the Sudan on 3 October. This agreement is a clear demonstration of the
priorities of the new Sudan. We urge all stakeholders to support this promise of
peace through the swift and full implementation of the agreement. We take note
of the requests in the agreement for United Nations support and call for further
engagement between the Government and the United Nations in this regard.
Whilst significant steps have been taken to overcome a multitude of challenges,
as we have heard, much more remains to be done. Exacerbated by the coronavirus
disease, the economic situation has continued to deteriorate. Humanitarian needs are
increasing, and violence has spiked in conflict areas.
Regarding the socioeconomic situation, the United Kingdom welcomes the
World Bank and International Monetary Fund support for Government efforts to
alleviate the dire economic situation. The World Bank’s support of the Sudan Family
Support Programme will help mitigate the negative impact of some of the economic
reforms. As the largest bilateral donor to the programme, we are playing our part
with a pledge of $105 million.
Turning to the security situation, the United Kingdom welcomes the
Government’s commitment to fulfilling its protection of civilian responsibilities
and to ensuring unfettered humanitarian access. However, we cannot ignore the
significant security challenges that remain. Persistent intercommunal violence, as
well as intermittent clashes between the Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid and
Government forces, are continuing. We echo the Secretary-General’s call for the
Government of the Sudan to expedite its preparations to protect civilians in line with
its national protection of civilians strategy.
As the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID)
prepares to withdraw, we urge the Government to develop more responsive and
representative rule of law institutions in order to build trust with local populations
and ensure stability in conflict areas.
The United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan
(UNITAMS) was established to support the Sudan’s transition. The delays in
appointing a Special Representative of the Secretary-General to lead UNITAMS
are preventing the provision of such support. We urge the Secretariat to conclude
the appointment process and continue to work with the Government of the Sudan to
expedite the full establishment of UNITAMS throughout the Sudan.

28/31

20-17604

S/2020/1183

I commend the continued support that UNAMID is providing to the Government
of the Sudan, particularly in the areas of peacebuilding and capacity-building.
We call on the United Nations, working with the Government of the Sudan
and the country team, to ensure that the transition from UNAMID to UNITAMS is
responsible, sequenced and sustainable. In this regard, let me reiterate the Council’s
expectation that UNITAMS and its integrated country team be the primary
beneficiaries of UNAMID assets.
I would like to briefly comment on the impact of the conflict in Tigray,
Ethiopia, on the Sudan. We commend the Sudan’s commitment to enabling
humanitarian access to refugees fleeing the violence in Tigray. Funding from the
United Kingdom is already helping new refugees from Ethiopia to receive emergency
assistance. However, more is needed. We encourage Member States to support the
United Nations in assisting the Sudan to respond to these increased needs.
Finally, as this is the last meeting on the Sudan before its Council tenure ends,
let me express our thanks to Germany for its excellent co-penholdership over the
past two years. Germany’s commitment to peace and stability is unwavering, and we
look forward to continuing our close partnership in support of the Sudan.

20-1760429/31

S/2020/1183

Annex XIV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations, Kelly Craft
I welcome Ambassador Barbara Woodward to the Council. I am so excited
that I will be able to spend at least a couple weeks with her and welcome her. We are
very excited to have her here and looking forward to working alongside here. I also
thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and Under-Secretary-General LaCroix so
much for their remarks today.
Three months ago, we met to discuss the latest developments in the Sudan and
the role of the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan
(UNITAMS). At that time, the Sudan’s transitional Government and opposition
groups had just signed the ambitious Juba Agreement for Peace in the Sudan. That
agreement set the groundwork for long-term peace, justice and stability for those
who, for far too long, have endured atrocities and cycles of violence and atrocities.
As we said then, the United States is encouraged by the willingness of the
parties to this agreement to come to the table in a spirit of good faith to address the
long-standing causes of instability and conflict in Sudan.
However, we remain deeply concerned about the situation on the ground. As
the Secretary-General details in his most recent report (S/2020/1155), spikes in civil
unrest, insecurity in Darfur and ongoing ethnic and tribal clashes in Eastern Sudan
signal a difficult path forward. Failure to address the root causes of conflict could
upend the Juba agreement and reverse recent progress.
One step in the right direction is the Sudanese Government’s national plan
for the protection of civilians. The United States is particularly encouraged by the
plan’s outline for developing an early-warning system and devising specific nomadic
routes. However, we recognize the limitations the transitional Government faces
in trying to implement the plan. As they proceed, we encourage the transitional
Government to engage in robust outreach, transparent information-sharing and
consultations with affected communities.
UNITAMS, in particular, can play a valuable role in supporting civilian
protection efforts and helping with the political transition and peace processes. But
the Mission cannot truly deliver on its mandate if it lacks leadership. We encourage
the appointment of a Special Representative to begin leading UNITAMS as soon as
possible. Six months is far too long to have existed without leadership, especially
given the needs on the ground.
With the anticipated departure of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) from the Sudan, it is vital that its drawdown occur
in a responsible manner and that there be a smooth transition to the new special
political mission. There are key UNAMID responsibilities that should continue
under UNITAMS and are within its mandate, including robust training of police,
rule of law support and other issues listed in the Juba agreement.
The United States is committed to supporting the transitional Government.
We anticipate that the Sudan’s State sponsors of terrorism designation will be
rescinded very soon, based on the President’s certification that the Sudan has
met the necessary statutory criteria. We are confident that this development will
herald a new phase in the relationship between the Sudan and the United States
and open new and expanded opportunities in the Sudan’s relationship with the
international community.

30/31

20-17604

S/2020/1183

Lastly, we commend the Sudanese people for their generosity in welcoming
their Ethiopian neighbours. It is heartening and so reassuring to see people who are
already facing significant challenges themselves embracing humanity and sharing
what they have.

20-1760431/31
