General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the status of the International Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Racial Discrimination; 22
2. Expresses its satisfaction with the increase in the
number of States which have ratified the Convention or
acceded thereto;
3. Reaffirms once again its conviction that ratification
of or accession to the Convention on a universal basis and
implementation of its provisions are necessary for the real­
ization of the objectives of the Decade for Action to Com­
bat Racism and Racial Discrimination;
4. Requests States that have not yet become parties to
the Convention to ratify it or accede thereto;
5. Calls upon States parties to the Convention to con­
sider the possibility of making the declaration provided for
in article 14 of the Convention;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to submit
to the General Assembly annual reports concerning the sta­
tus of the Convention, in accordance with Assembly reso­
lution 2106 A (XX) of 21 December 1965.
90th plenary meeting
3 December 1982

37/46.

Report of the Committee on the Elimination of
Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 36/12 of 28 October 1981 on the

report of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Dis­
crimination and 37/45 of 3 December 1982 on the status of
the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Racial Discrimination, 21 as well as its other relevant
resolutions on the implementation of the Programme for
the Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial
Discrimination, 23
Having considered the report of the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination on its twenty-fifth
and twenty-sixth sessions, 24 submitted under article 9, para­
graph 2, of the International Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,
Emphasizing the importance for the success of the strug­
gle against all practices of racial discrimination, including
vestiges and manifestations of racist ideologies wherever
they exist, that all Member States be guided in their internal
and foreign policy by the basic provisions of the Convention,
Mindful of the obligation of all States parties to comply
fully with the provisions of the Convention,
Welcoming the continued co-operation of the Committee
on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination with the com­
petent specialized agencies, especially the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the
International Labour Organisation, and with other United
Nations bodies,
Noting the decisions adopted and recommendations made
by the Committee at its twenty-fifth and twenty-sixth sessions,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination on
its twenty-fifth and twenty-sixth sessions;
2. Commends the Committee for its contribution to the
elimination of all forms of discrimination based on race.
22
23

A/37/148.
Resolution 3057 (XXVIII), annex.

24
Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-seventh Session.
Supplement No. /8 (A/37/18).

colour, descent or national or ethnic origin, wherever it
exists;
3. Strongly condemns the policy of apartheid in South
Africa and Namibia as the most abhorrent form of racial
discrimination and urges all Member States to adopt effec­
tive political, economic and other measures in order to se­
cure the elimination of that policy and to achieve full
implementation of the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly, the Security Council and other United Nations
bodies;
4. Calls upon the United Nations bodies concerned to
ensure that the Committee is supplied with all relevant in­
formation on all the Territories to which General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 applies and
urges the administering Powers to co-operate with these
bodies by providing all necessary information in order to
enable the Committee to discharge fully its responsibilities
under article 15 of the International Convention on the Elim­
ination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination;
5. Commends the Committee for its continuous endeav­
ours towards the elimination of apartheid, racism and racial
discrimination in southern Africa and the implementation
of United Nations resolutions relating to the liberation and
independence of Namibia;
6. Takes note with satisfaction of the efforts of the Com­
mittee aimed at securing the prosperity of national or ethnic
minorities and indigenous populations through the imple­
mentation of the principles and provisions of the Convention;
7. Expresses grave concern at the Israeli policy of de­
fiance of the basic principles and objectives of the Conven­
tion, as reflected in the report of the Committee, and calls
for the respect and preservation of the national and cultural
identity of the Palestinian people;
8. Welcomes the efforts of the Committee aimed at the
elimination of all forms of discrimination against migrant
workers and their families, the promotion of their rights on
a non-discriminatory basis and the achievement of their full
equality and of the possibility to preserve their cultural
characteristics;
9. Commends the States parties to the Convention on
the measures taken to ensure within their jurisdiction the
availability of appropriate recourse procedures for the vic­
tims of racial discrimination;
10. Calls upon all Member States to adopt effective
legislative, socio-economic and other necessary measures
in order to ensure the elimination or prevention of discrim­
ination based on race, colour, descent or national or ethnic
origin;
11. Calls upon the States parties to the Convention to
protect fully, by the adoption of relevant legislative and
other measures, the rights of national or ethnic minorities,
as well as the rights of indigenous populations;
12. Reiterates its invitation to the States parties to the
Convention to furnish the Committee, in accordance with
its general guidelines, with information on the implemen­
tation of the provisions of the Convention, including infor­
mation on the demographic composition of their population
and on their relations with the racist regime of South Africa;
13. Takes note with appreciation of the Committee's
contribution to the work of the Preparatory Sub-Committee
for the Second World Conference to Combat Racism and
Racial Discrimination and to the regional seminars held in
implementation of the Programme for the Decade for Action
to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination;
14. Welcomes the decision of the Committee to con­
tribute to the Second World Conference by preparing a study

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

on the implementation of articles 4 and 7 of the Convention25
and reiterates its request to the Committee to explore the
possibility of also preparing for the Conference a study on
the implementation of subparagraph (e) of article 5;
15. • Takes note of decision 1 (XXVI) of 19 August
1982 of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Dis­
crimination, 26 in which the Committee requested the
Secretary-General, in consultation with the Government of
the Philippines, to explore the possibility of arranging for
the twenty-eighth session of the Committee to be held at
Manila immediately prior to the holding of the Second World
Conference to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination.
90th plenary meeting
3 December I 982
37/47.

Status of the International Convention on the
Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of

Apartheid

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolution 3068 (XXVIII) of 30 November
1973, by which it adopted and opened for signature and
ratification the International Convention on the Suppression
and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid, and its subse­
quent resolutions on the status of the Convention,
Convinced that the Declaration and the Programme of
Action adopted by the World Conference to Combat Racism
and Racial Discrimination, 27 as well as the programme of
activities to be undertaken during the second half of the
Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrim­
ination, adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution
34/24 of 15 November 1979, and their full implementation
will contribute to the final eradication of apartheid and all
other forms of racism and racial discrimination,
Reaffirming its conviction that apartheid constitutes a to­
tal negation of the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and is a gross violation of human
rights and a crime against humanity. seriously threatening
international peace and security,
Strongly condemning South Africa's continued policy of
apartheid, repression and "bantustanization" and its con­
tinued illegal occupation of Namibia, thereby perpetuating
on Namibian territory its odious policy of apartheid, racial
discrimination and fragmentation,
Gravely concerned over the widespread torture and ill­
treatment of political prisoners and trade unionists detained
by the racist regime of South Africa, leading to the death
in detention of many prisoners, including Neil Aggett, Tshi­
fiwa Muofhe and Ernest Moabi Dipale,
Deeply concerned about South Africa's repeated acts of
aggression against sovereign African States, which consti­
tute a manifest breach of international peace and security,
Condemning the continued collaboration of certain States
and transnational corporations with the racist regime of South
Africa in the political, economic, military and other fields
as an encouragement to the intensification of its odious
policy of apartheid,
Underlining that the strengthening of the existing man­
datory arms embargo and the application of comprehensive
mandatory economic sanctions under Chapter VII of the
Ibid.. chap. VI.
Ibid., chap. IX.
,
.
27 Report of the World Conference to Combat Racism and Racial Dis­
crimination, Geneva, 14-25 Au!/USI /978 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.79.XIV.2). chap. ll.
25

26

181

Charter of the United Nations are vital in order to compel
the racist regime of South Africa to abandon its policy of
apartheid,
Recalling its resolutions 36/172 A to P of 17 December
1981, in particular resolution 36/172 B in which it pro­
claimed the year 1982 International Year of Mobilization
for Sanctions against South Africa,
Stressing the need to disseminate on a wider basis more
information on the crimes committed by the racist regime
of South Africa, taking into consideration the recommen­
dation contained in the documents adopted by the Interna­
tional Seminar on Publicity and the Role of Mass Media in
the International Mobilization against Apartheid, held at
Berlin, German Democratic Republic, from 31 August to
2 September 1981, 28
Firmly convinced that the legitimate struggle of the op­
pressed peoples in southern Africa against apartheid, racism
and colonialism and for the effective implementation of their
inalienable right to self-determination and independence de­
mands more than ever all necessary support by the inter­
national community and, in particular, further action by the
Security Council,
Commending the work of the Preparatory Sub-Committee
for the Second World Conference to Combat Racism and
Racial Discrimination and the recommendations contained
in its report to the Economic and Social Council, 29
Underlining that ratification of and accession to the In­
ternational Convention on the Suppression and Punishment
of the Crime of Apartheid on a universal basis and the
implementation of its provisions without any delay are nec­
essary for its effectiveness and would be a useful contri­
bution towards achieving the goals of the Decade for Action
to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination,
I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the status of the International Convention on the Suppression
and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid; 30
2. Commends those States parties to the Convention that
have submitted their reports under article VII thereof, in
particular those that have presented their second reports,
and appeals to those States parties that have not yet done
so to submit their reports as soon as possible;
3. Appeals once again to those States that have not yet
done so to ratify or to accede to the Convention without
further delay;
4. Appreciates the constructive role played by the Group
of Three of the Commission on Human Rights, established
in accordance with article IX of the International Convention
on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apart­
heid, in analysing the periodic reports of States and in pub­
licizing the experience gained in the international struggle
against the crime of apartheid;
5. Requests States parties to the Convention to take fully
into account the guidelines prepared by the Group ofThree;' 1
6. Calls upon all States parties to the Convention to
implement fully article IV thereof by adopting legislative,
judicial and administrative measures to prosecute, bring to
trial and punish. in accordance with their jurisdiction, per­
sons responsible for, or accused of, the acts enumerated in
article II of the Convention;
7. Again calls upon all States parties to the Convention
and the competent United Nations organs to consider the
conclusions and recommendations of the Group of Three
28

A/36/496-S/14686, annexes 1-111.

'° E/1982/26.
10
11

A/371149 and Corr. I
EICN .411286, annex
