S/PRST/2006/52

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 December 2006
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5586th meeting of the Security Council, held on 12 December 2006, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
the Middle East”, the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council recalls all its previous resolutions on Lebanon, in
particular resolutions 1701 (2006), 425 (1978) and 426 (1978), 520 (1982),
1559 (2004) and 1680 (2006), as well as the statements of its president on the
situation in Lebanon, in particular the statements of 30 October 2006
(S/PRST/2006/43) and of 21 November 2006 (S/PRST/2006/46).
“The Security Council reiterates its full support for the legitimate and
democratically-elected Government of Lebanon, calls for full respect for the
democratic institutions of the country, in conformity with the constitution, and
condemns any effort to destabilize Lebanon. The Security Council calls upon
all Lebanese political parties to show responsibility with a view to preventing,
through dialogue, further deterioration of the situation in Lebanon. It reaffirms
its strong support for the sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and political
independence of Lebanon within its internationally recognized borders and
under the sole and exclusive authority of the Government of Lebanon. The
Council reiterates its call upon all parties concerned to cooperate fully and
urgently with the Security Council for the full implementation of all relevant
resolutions concerning the restoration of the territorial integrity, full
sovereignty and political independence of Lebanon.
“The Security Council welcomes the letter of the Secretary-General to
the President of the Council of 1 December 2006 (S/2006/933), as well as his
previous reports of 18 August 2006 (S/2006/670) and of 12 September 2006
(S/2006/730) on the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006).
“The Security Council calls for the full implementation of resolution
1701 (2006) and urges all concerned parties to cooperate fully with the
Security Council and the Secretary-General to achieve this goal.
“The Security Council welcomes the Secretary-General’s indication of
the continuing commitment of the Government of Lebanon and the
Government of Israel to all aspects of the implementation of resolution 1701
(2006). It urges both Governments to strictly abide by their commitment and to

06-65551 (E) 121206

*0665551*

S/PRST/2006/52

pursue their efforts to achieve a permanent ceasefire and a long-term solution
as envisioned in the resolution.
“The Security Council notes that important progress has been made
towards the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006), in particular through
the cessation of hostilities, the imminent withdrawal of all the Israeli forces
from southern Lebanon and the deployment of the Lebanese Armed Forces in
the south of the country for the first time in three decades, together with the
deployment so far of more than 10,000 troops from the reinforced UNIFIL.
“The Security Council welcomes the maintenance of the cessation of
hostilities since 14 August 2006, supports the work done by UNIFIL, together
with the parties, to finalize the Israeli withdrawal from the remaining area
inside Lebanon and set up temporary security arrangements for the part of the
village of Ghajar inside Lebanese territory, positively notes the decision of the
Israeli Cabinet in this regard, and looks forward to its early implementation.
“The Security Council commends the Lebanese Government for
extending its authority throughout its territory, particularly in the south, and
encourages it to continue its efforts in this regard, including through the
reinforcement of its capacities along its borders and the exercise of its
monopoly of the use of force all over its territory in accordance with relevant
Security Council resolutions.
“The Security Council reiterates its full support to UNIFIL and looks
forward to the completion of its deployment early next year as contemplated
by the Secretary-General in his letter. It expresses its strong appreciation to
Member States who have contributed to UNIFIL in the past and since the
adoption of resolution 1701 (2006) and notes the establishment of the Strategic
Military Cell dedicated to UNIFIL at United Nations Headquarters.
“The Security Council, while expressing deep concern at the continuing
Israeli violations of Lebanese airspace, appeals to all parties concerned to
respect the cessation of hostilities and the Blue Line in its entirety, to refrain
from any act of provocation and to abide scrupulously by their obligation to
respect the safety of the UNIFIL and other United Nations personnel,
including by avoiding any course of action which endangers United Nations
personnel and by ensuring UNIFIL is accorded full freedom of movement
throughout its area of operation.
“The Security Council, in this context, reiterates its deep concern at latest
reports, though unverified, of illegal movements of arms into Lebanon. It
welcomes the initial steps taken by the Government of Lebanon, notably the
deployment of 8,000 troops along the border, to prevent movements of arms in
conformity with relevant resolutions, and reiterates its call upon the
Government of Syria to take similar measures to reinforce controls at the
border.
“The Security Council, mindful of the conclusions of the team of border
police experts dispatched by the Secretary-General at the request of the
Government of Lebanon, invites the Secretary-General to pursue further
technical and independent assessment of the situation along the border and to
report back to the Council on further findings and recommendations in this
regard.

2

06-65551

S/PRST/2006/52

“The Council further invites Member States, as recommended by the
Secretary-General, to consider possible bilateral assistance to the Government
of Lebanon to enhance its border security capacities.
“The Council urges all Member States, in particular in the region, to take
all necessary measures to implement in full paragraph 15 of resolution 1701
(2006), including the arms embargo, and expresses its intention to consider
further steps to achieve the goals set out in that paragraph.
“The Security Council welcomes the concrete steps taken by the
Government of Lebanon, with the assistance of UNIFIL, to establish between
the Blue Line and the Litani river an area free of any armed personnel, assets
and weapons other than those of the Government of Lebanon and of UNIFIL
and calls upon the Government of Lebanon to strengthen its efforts to this end.
The Council also reiterates its call for the disbanding and disarmament of all
militias and armed groups in Lebanon.
“The Security Council expresses deepest concern at the presence in very
high numbers of unexploded ordnance in south Lebanon, including cluster
munitions. It deplores the death and injury of dozens of civilians, as well as of
several deminers, caused by those munitions since the cessation of hostilities.
It welcomes the continued contribution of UNIFIL to operational mine
clearance, encourages further assistance in mine action by the United Nations
to the Government of Lebanon in support of both the continued development
of its national mine action capacity and clearance of the remaining
mine/unexploded ordnance threat in the South, commends donor countries for
supporting these efforts through financial and in-kind contributions and
encourages further international contributions and practical cooperation.
“The Security Council reaffirms the urgent need for the unconditional
release of the abducted Israeli soldiers.
“The Security Council further encourages efforts aimed at urgently
settling the issue of the Lebanese prisoners detained in Israel.
“The Security Council commends the efforts of the Secretary-General
and his facilitator to this end and calls upon all parties concerned to support
those efforts.
“Bearing in mind the relevant provisions of resolutions 1559 (2004),
1680 (2006) and 1701 (2006), in particular on the delineation of the SyrianLebanese border, the Security Council takes note with interest of the
appointment by the Secretary-General of a senior cartographer to review
relevant material and develop an accurate territorial definition of the Shaba’a
farms area.
“The Security Council notes with appreciation the process launched by
the Secretary-General to investigate the cartographic, legal and political
implications of the proposal contained in the seven-point plan of the
Government of Lebanon and looks forward to its further recommendations on
this issue early next year.
“The Security Council calls upon the international community urgently to
provide the Government of Lebanon with financial assistance in support of the
national early recovery and reconstruction process. It expresses its

06-65551

3

S/PRST/2006/52

appreciation to the Member States, United Nations bodies and
intergovernmental, regional and non-governmental organizations that have
provided and continue to provide assistance to the Lebanese people and
Government, and looks forward to the success of the international Conference
which will be held in Paris, on 25 January 2007, in support of Lebanon.
“The Security Council reaffirms its full support to the Secretary-General
in his efforts and dedication to facilitate and assist in the fulfilment of all
provisions of resolution 1701 (2006) and requests the Secretary-General to
report on a quarterly basis on the implementation of that resolution, notably on
further progress made towards the achievement of a permanent ceasefire and a
long-term solution.”

4

06-65551
