S/PV.8025

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8025th meeting

Wednesday, 16 August 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Aboulatta . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Egypt)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Alemu
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Kawamura
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Ciss
Ms. Schoulgin-Nyoni
Mr. Mialkovskyi
Mr. Hickey
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and
1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2017/640)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-25880 (E)
*1725880*

S/PV.8025

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

parties that sought a more decisive majority may have
fallen short of their expectations.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199
(1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (S/2017/640)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Serbia to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Zahir Tanin,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, to participate in this meeting.
Mr. Tanin is joining via video-teleconference
from Pristina.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Vlora
Çitaku to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/640, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo.
I now give the floor to Mr. Tanin.
Mr. Tanin: This quarter was dominated by
the holding of an early general election in Kosovo,
and ensuing lengthy negotiations, deal-making and
bargaining to form a new Government. As we meet
today, these discussions are still in progress. At the
outset, allow me to make a few observations about
this process.
First, the decision to call an early election was
a deliberate one. A broken unity of understanding
brought an end to the ruling coalition; however, those
2/28

16/08/2017

Secondly, the transition phase has proved to be very
challenging. The main coalition was unable to achieve
an outright majority. Some parties improved their
share marginally, while the long-standing opposition
gained significantly. As a result, we see a shift in the
configuration of the political landscape of Kosovo, one
of the most significant in many years. One factor that
may have contributed to this shift is a tidal wave of
change in the mind of many voters, particularly the
younger generation, for whom jobs, access to education
and economic opportunities, reducing corruption and
strengthening the rule of law were prominent concerns.
Ethno-nationalist rhetoric appeared less effective to
galvanize the majority of the electorate into action than
in the past. The new political environment after the
election is obviously affecting all parties positioning
themselves for municipal elections, due to take place
in October.
Thirdly, there is no doubt that the election was
generally free, fair and competitive, despite the very
short preparation time and campaign. The official
European Union (EU) observer mission noted this,
while at the same time also mentioning the longstanding
issues of updating the voting lists and ensuring the
enfranchisement of voters outside of Kosovo. We
recognize the important contribution of the EU
observer team and other observers during the election,
and also wish to highlight the role of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in
facilitating the vote in northern municipalities and
providing technical assistance to the Central Election
Commission. Importantly, there was no significant
dispute of the results.
The overall turnout was 41 per cent. While this is
not dramatically different from the 2014 elections, it
was notable that many new voters participated, with
variations across Kosovo, ranging from below 30 per
cent in some districts to above 60 per cent in others.
In Serb areas, the turnout was the highest recorded in
recent times. We should remember that Kosovo Serbs
have evolved from a position of boycotting Kosovo
elections to partial participation to active participation.
The election did not generate a momentum for
change in the participation of women. While political
entities observed the gender quota under the electoral
law, women’s representation in leadership remained
17-25880

16/08/2017

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

limited. There are no female candidates for Prime
Minister and few mentioned as likely in a future
cabinet. Women’s representation in electoral bodies
also remained low, constitutinhg only 9 per cent of
Kosovo’s Central Election Commission members.
Fourthly, perhaps the greatest concern is that
the election process itself consumed the energy of
institutions during these past three months. In fact, a
functional institutional vacuum has hampered progress
on a full panoply of governance priorities. Important
economic and social opportunities were missed
during the period, for example, from the resources
that continue to be available through the European
Stabilisation and Association mechanism. In late July,
the International Monetary Fund cancelled the final
instalment of its two-year funding arrangement in the
absence of a fully-authorized Government to complete
its review. According to Kosovo’s Central Bank, foreign
investments during this past year fell by nearly twothirds. The climate of political uncertainty during the
last quarter is tied inextricably to these facts.
I would like to draw the Council’s attention to another
important development in the region — the initiative
of President Vučić of Serbia to launch an internal
dialogue on Kosovo, a matter I had the opportunity to
discuss with him and with First Deputy Prime Minister
and Foreign Minister Dačić last week in Belgrade. On
24 July, President Vučić expressed publicly that for
Serbia’s progress to be constant and sustainable, the
Serbs should endeavour to resolve the Kosovo issue
and avoid leaving “this greatest of burdens” to the next
generation. He also warned that if the historical conflict
between Serbs and Albanians were not resolved, it
would represent a joint failure of both, and that the
effort required a “long, complicated and often painful
process”. Kosovo Foreign Minister Hoxhaj welcomed
the statement, while Albanian Prime Minister Rama
also expressed his respect for this initiative, reiterating
that a lasting solution for Kosovo would be “in
everyone’s interest”.
As history teaches, pursuing fair, difficult and
often painful compromise demands strong leadership.
It should be clear that such leadership is required on the
part of all if we are to reach lasting peace, in the interest
of all who live in the Western Balkans region. I stress
“the region” because peace and stability in Kosovo are
interwoven with peace and stability in the region and
the normalization of relations between Pristina and

S/PV. 8025

Belgrade. As we all know, the problems are regional in
nature and so, therefore, must be the solutions.
As outlined in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2017/640), progress in the EU-facilitated dialogue
has been slowed not only by political processes, whether
in Belgrade or in Pristina, but also by the partial
implementation of agreements that were achieved
more than four years ago. On 3 July, European Union
High Representative Mogherini hosted a meeting
between the Presidents of Serbia and Kosovo with a
view towards moving this process forward. If serious
negotiations over long-term interests remain the order
of the day, it should be expected that, with political
clarity in Pristina, the dialogue can resume as soon as
possible, not simply to implement the main agreements
reached so far but also to advance negotiations for the
benefit of both sides.
During the reporting period, the 2017 Western
Balkans Summit also took place in Trieste, Italy. It was
the fourth annual summit within the Berlin process,
itself designed to further European integration for all
the Western Balkans States. The process reinforces
the inherently regional nature of the issues most
directly affecting the future of Kosovo. Possibilities for
developing a common market, expanding infrastructure
and dealing better with region-wide problems and
challenges were all on the agenda.
Political reconciliation by itself cannot overcome
all divisions. It must be accompanied by societal
reconciliation and by rebuilding trust and cooperation
at all levels. Working to help foster greater trust
among communities is one of the main priorities of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK). We are continuously exploring
how the Mission can better contribute, within our
existing mandate, towards improving intercommunity
relations. We do this together with governmental,
non-governmental and international partners.
Obviously, rebuilding trust is not an event but a longterm process of transforming mistrust into coexistence
and, ultimately, genuine cooperation. Wherever we are
able, we are focused on promoting new cooperative
activities among municipal and community leaders
and institutions, supporting the work of energetic local
actors. I would like to highlight some of our most recent
initiatives to enhance intercommunity trust-building.
At the end of June, I co-hosted, with High
Commissioner for Human Rights Zeid Ra’ad Al

17-258803/28

S/PV.8025

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

Hussein, an international roundtable in Geneva to bring
attention back to the many unresolved cases of persons
missing from the Kosovo conflict. This continues to
be a significant obstacle to societal reconciliation.
Within this framework, we have managed to strengthen
the involvement and participation of the missing
persons’ family representatives and to advocate for
far-strengthened commitment from the Pristina and
Belgrade delegations, as well as the reinforced support
of the international community, particularly the United
Nations, to determine the fate of the 1,658 persons still
unaccounted for.
Also in June, our mission hosted the first United
Nations Kosovo Youth Assembly, attended by over 140
young leaders — 60 per cent of them women — representing
all of Kosovo’s ethnic communities. The event was the
result of close cooperation with UNICEF, the United
Nations Development Programme, the OSCE, the
EU and the Kosovo Ministry of Culture, Youth and
Sport. It demonstrated the vibrancy of Kosovo’s civil
society and presented a prominent public picture of the
progress that can be made. Based on resolution 2250
(2015), participants developed a road map on youth,
peace and security for Kosovo, which also addressed
young women’s empowerment, to help serve the wider
strategy being developed by the Kosovo authorities.
UNMIK remains active in its engagement with
municipal Governments, among which I can say that
strong efforts are being made to tackle the matters
of importance to their constituencies. At the end of
July, we facilitated a meeting among 10 municipal
leaders in the south-eastern part of Kosovo, led by
the Mayor of that region’s largest municipality. Many
practical issues were debated, including economic
cooperation and the particular exposure of that region
to radicalization and the dangers of extremist ideology.
We will be developing similar initiatives in other areas
of Kosovo during the coming months. Our efforts to
strengthen intercommunity trust-building are aimed
at very practical levels, not only building on existing
frameworks but also working to innovate new ones
based on the particular concerns of local communities.
Kosovo has continued to make steps towards
demonstrating its commitment to justice and the rule
of law in the international sphere. After a series of
final legal steps, including the approval of its rules
of procedure, on 5 July the Specialist Chambers,
a mechanism to tackle some of the most difficult
and painful post-war chapters, became operational
4/28

16/08/2017

in The Hague. It is now ready to receive filings and
indictments, with full cooperation from all the relevant
Kosovo institutions.
After three months of an election campaign and
post-election uncertainty, it is important for Kosovo
to move forward seriously and responsibly, and for the
international community to work together to continue
to provide essential support. In that spirit, we will
continue to engage with all of our partners towards our
common goal of promoting peace and stability.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Tanin
for his important briefing to the Council.
I now give the floor to Mr. Dačić.
Mr. Dačić (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian; interpretation
provided by the delegation): I would like to express my
gratitude to Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his engagement in the
realization of the mandate of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
under resolution 1244 (1999), and to the members of the
Security Council for the attention they accord to this
issue on a continuous basis.
In view of the exceptional importance that Serbia
attaches to the work of UNMIK, I would like to point out
the significance of the recent adoption of the Mission’s
budget as recommended by the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, as well as
the initial proposal of the secretary-General to increase
the budget. That adoption reflects the realistically
assessed need for ensuring adequate staff and financial
capacities to the Mission so that it can meet the needs
associated with the implementation of its mandate. At
the same time, the strengthening of UNMIK sends a
powerful message on the importance of the mandate
and the role of the United Nations as the overarching
international presence in Kosovo and Metohija.
Bearing in mind UNMIK’s substantial and longterm role in building and maintaining stability in the
province, as well as the need for its adaptation and
strengthening following the reconfiguration of other
segments of the international presence, I expect this
trend to continue in the future. I trust and believe that it
will have a positive effect on ensuring a comprehensive
and more deliberate approach on the part of the Mission
with regard to assessing and resolving a whole range
of problems facing the Serbian and other non-Albanian
communities in the realization of their fundamental
17-25880

16/08/2017

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

rights and in promoting the still very fragile security
and rule of law in the province. In view of the sensitive
environment in which it operates, it is evident that the
Mission often refrains from criticizing the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government in Kosovo and
Metohija in stronger terms. Regrettably, the evenhanded approach in its reporting did not contribute to
the Institutions taking more constructive positions.
In the context of the contribution to be made to the
creation of conditions for unimpeded implementation of
UNMIK’s mandate and to support the dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina, facilitated by the European
Union, I would like to underline that the continued
convening of Security Council meetings to discuss
this issue every three months is of key importance.
Regular quarterly reporting and UNMIK’s ever-more
visible presence in the field can have only a positive
impact on the strengthening of trust and the readiness
of the Serbian and other non-Albanian communities
to become involved in the processes initiated by the
Brussels dialogue.
By and large, the reporting period behind us was
marked by electoral activities, and therefore a substantial
part of the Secretary-General’s report (S/2017/640) was
devoted to the electoral process in Kosovo and Metohija.
Noted during the reporting period were pressure and
intimidation brought to bear on the Serbian community.
That went hand in glove with threats to the security
of the members of that community, aimed at breaking
the unity of the Serbian voting bloc. However, such
practices received inadequate coverage in the report
before us. Nonetheless, it is with satisfaction that I
note that the success achieved by the Serbian list in the
elections has confirmed the political unity of the Serbs
in Kosovo and Metohija, which is a guarantee that the
constructive policy with respect to the protection of
their interests will be continued.
The current stalemate in the formation of Pristina
institutions, however, gives us cause for concern,
especially with regard to the continuation of the
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina. In that
connection, the statement of Ramush Haradinaj, one
of the candidates for “Kosovo Prime Minister”, made
upon his return to Kosovo and Metohija from France, in
which he threatened, speaking to “enemy Serbia”, that
“we will do to them far worse than we did back then”
is particularly worrisome. I call on the international
community and the judicial institutions in Kosovo
and Metohija again not to remain silent in the face of

S/PV. 8025

hate speech and the threats to ethnically cleanse the
remaining Serbs. We are reminded in the present report,
just as we were in the previous one (S/2017/387), of the
inflammatory statements made by Albanian political
leaders regarding the creation of the so-called greater
Albania. They pose an added threat to the process of
reconciliation and the normalization of relations.
Alongside the unacceptable unilateral acts of, and
the attachment of conditions and caveats by, Pristina,
such as the resolution on the suspension of the dialogue
and making its continuation contingent upon the fate of
those charged with the commission of the most heinous
crimes against the Serbian population, the threats are
aimed at increasing tension and postponing compliance
with obligations assumed under the agreements already
achieved. Serbia welcomes each and every appeal by
the international community in favour of renewing the
dialogue, including the call by the Secretary-General
addressed to both sides to resume the dialogue and
provide new impetus to the process. Yet I cannot but note
that they cast a pall of relativity over the responsibility
of the Pristina side, which was the one that broke off the
dialogue unilaterally in the first place.
Notwithstanding
numerous
obstacles
and
challenges, Belgrade continues to take part in the
dialogue constructively, responsibly and devotedly, with
the aim of solving the outstanding issues in a statusneutral framework and contributing to the stabilization
of the situation and the creation of conditions for
unimpeded progress by the Western Balkans region
towards European Union (EU) membership. It is
noted in the report that limited progress has been
achieved on the technical aspects of the dialogue,
and in the implementation of the telecommunications
agreement specifically, in which the Serbian side again
demonstrated its readiness to fulfil the obligations it
assumed. However, the other side continues to lag
behind and refuses to implement the agreement on the
community of Serbian municipalities and the judiciary,
even though the agreement on the establishment
of the community forms the central part of the First
Agreement of Principles Governing the Normalization
of Relations and is the key to the survival of the Serbian
people in Kosovo and Metohija.
In fact, I was the one who signed the Brussels
Agreement, along with Hashim Thaçi, four years ago.
In those four years, we have not put into practice what
we agreed to, that is, the formation of the community
of Serbian municipalities. How long are we going to

17-258805/28

S/PV.8025

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

wait for that to occur? I know that 1 million reasons
can always be found to avoid fulfilling the obligations
already undertaken. But four years is too long to argue
about not doing it; it is better to say, “We do not want
to implement the Brussels Agreement”. In that context,
I expect the Council’s objective view of the situation,
and not a case where the situation is defined in relative
terms, whereby it is said that all sides are guilty for
not implementing what has been agreed upon. Serbia
will fulfil everything signed off to in the Brussels
Agreement. I was the one who signed the Agreement.
The unilateral acts that Pristina adopts repeatedly,
like the recent directive banning the use of Serbian
passports issued by the Coordination Directorate of
the Ministry of the Interior of the Republic of Serbia
to enter and exit Kosovo and Metohija, is also noted
in the report. That is yet another piece of evidence,
which has been provided time and time again, that the
constructive and responsible approach by Belgrade
within the dialogue and the implementation of the
agreements reached thus far is continually met by
Pristina’s obstructionism and lack of political will
to work towards achieving genuine progress in the
normalization of relations. That position of the Pristina
institutions is a clear signal to the Security Council,
the European Union and the international community
for them to bring strong pressure to bear on Pristina so
as to make it fulfil the obligations that it has assumed
and finally establish the most important element of the
normalization of relations — the establishment of the
association/community of Serb-majority municipalities.
The prevention of the establishment of a Kosovo army
of Kosovo was a clear indication that Pristina does heed
the suggestions of the international community.
The unilateral suspension of the dialogue by Pristina
concerning the electoral process and the intensification
of the nationalistic rhetoric by Albanian political
leaders accounted for the lack of progress within highlevel dialogue during the previous reporting period, as
well. The hope that the continuation of the dialogue will
be possible was recently raised by the statement made
in the wake of the informal meeting between President
Aleksandar Vučić and President Hashim Thaçi with EU
High Representative Federica Mogherini on 3 July to
the effect that it has been agreed to work on starting
a new phase of the dialogue and that it is important to
implement the agreements reached thus far. Moreover,
I would like to add that Belgrade invested much effort
to ensuring that the dialogue was successful, and
6/28

16/08/2017

Mr. Tanin and the Secretary-General, in his report,
also mentioned that the relation between the Serbs and
Pristina’s institutions changed substantially through
Serbian participation in the elections. They participate
in governance and the exercise of power.
We wonder why the Government has yet to be
formed in Kosovo, since the elections have already been
completed. The Serbs are therefore not the problem
in that regard. The problem originates from the great
political instability in Kosovo and Metohija. Seen from
the point of view of the Serbian side, I do not know how
to judge the various statements made by the candidates
for Prime Minister concerning Serbs and Serbia, but
Serbia will continue to play a constructive role. As the
Government remains to be formed, we face a situation
in which everything that has been agreed to in the
Brussels Agreement is once again deferred. I therefore
reiterate that it has been four years since the signing of
the Brussels Agreement.
I must underline once again that there can be no
genuine reconciliation unless all crimes, without
exception, are tried and responsibility is taken for
war crimes committed by perpetrators in one’s own
ranks. The fact that no legally valid sentence has been
adjudicated yet for the killing of 1,000 Serbs in the
period since the end of the conflict demonstrates that
the judiciary in Kosovo and Metohija is unable to carry
out that task. That justice is hard to come by for the
Serbian victims in Kosovo and Metohija is evidenced
by the recent shocking acquittal of all those indicted
for war crimes in the Klecka case and the decision
of the Constitutional Court of Kosovo to uphold the
appeal and acquit Sami Lushtaku, a former member
of the Drenica Group of the Kosovo Liberation Army
(KLA), a prominent member of the Democratic Party of
Kosovo and the mayor of the mayor of Skenderaj/Srbica
municipality, who was initially sentenced to 12 years of
prison for war crimes in the Drenica I war crimes case.
Furthermore in acquitting Lirim Jakupi, also
known as “Commander Nazi”, the judiciary in Kosovo
and Metohija showed once again that it is a tool in the
hands of politicians. Such instances are just another
indication that there is no intention to stop the practice
of covering up and relativizing crimes committed
by the members of the terrorist KLA in the Serbian
southern province during the conflict in the name of
the aggressive expansionist cause of a Greater Albania.
I also take this opportunity to remind the Council of
the monstrous massacre of Serbian farmers in Staro
17-25880

16/08/2017

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

Gracko, when 14 people — the youngest of whom was
barely 17-years-old — were brutally killed 18 years
ago on 23 July 1999. The perpetrators of that heinous
crime have not been found, and the decision to cease
investigation eliminates the possibility of them ever
being found at all.
Let me also remind members of the Council that
14 years ago on 13 August 2003 Serbian children were
gunned down on the Bistrica river. Ivan Jovović and
13-year-old Pantelija Dakić were killed while four
other children were gravely wounded. The frightening
massacre in which innocent children were killed only
because they were Serbs was committed so as to send a
message to all remaining Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija
that they are not wanted; a message to all those expelled
from Kosovo and Metohija to forget about their return;
and a message that ethnic cleansing will be completed
no matter what. Spilling the blood of Serbian youth on
the Bistrica was intended to symbolize the erasure of
every trace of existence and survival of the Serbs on the
land of their fathers. Moreover, nobody was charged or
tried for that horrendous crime.
Genuine democracy is predicated on a society’s
renunciation of crimes and organized crime in which
an independent judiciary must play a pivotal role.
However, the judiciary in Kosovo and Metohija has
shown time and again that it is an instrument in the
hands of those who should be the first to bear the brunt
of the long sword of justice. Yet as long as paramilitary
clan leaders and the patrons of criminal cartels freely
walk the streets in the towns and villages of Kosovo
and Metohija, democratization and multi-ethnicity of
its society will merely remain a dead letter. A common
European future can only be built on the foundations
of a genuine renunciation of the criminal legacy
irrespective of who the perpetrators and the victims
are. It will be possible only when a killer is called a
killer in Kosovo and Metohija, regardless of whether
the victim’s name is Adem, Ivan, Ramush or Pantelija.
The message conveyed by the decisions to acquit
terrorists and perpetrators of gruesome crimes is that
justice is unattainable for the Serbian and Albanian
victims of the terror of the so-called KLA, and that
Kosovo and Metohija Serbs are dispensable. At the
same time, that is telling evidence that the international
community has failed to establish in Kosovo and
Metohija a society based on the rule of law. In addition
to the aforementioned acquittals, the report of the
Secretary-General accords considerable attention

S/PV. 8025

to numerous systemic shortcomings of the judiciary
in Kosovo and Metohija, as well as to its inability to
take on and win over the political muscle of the former
leadership of the KLA.
Let me recall that, in a memorandum issued
following his most recent mission to Kosovo and
Metohija, the Council of Europe Commissioner for
Human Rights also stressed that, 18 years since the end
of the conflict in Kosovo and Metohija, thousands of
people continue to wait for justice and that it is high time
that conditions be established for effectively trying war
criminals, facilitating the return of internally displaced
persons and for clarifying the fate of missing persons.
Such assertions are a testament to the fact that Kosovo
and Metohija institutions are far from the standards of
an independent judiciary and unable to try war crimes
committed against the non-Albanian population in a
credible and impartial way.
In view of the fact that the Specialist Chambers
established to try war crimes are now fully operational
and that there are no legal obstacles to bringing
indictments, I expect that all those suspected of
committing war crimes against the Serbs and other
non-Albanians in Kosovo and Metohija will be credibly
indicted and that witnesses will be accorded proper court
protection. Serbia stands ready to provide all necessary
documentation and evidence on brutal multiple rapes,
torture and savage killings by the members of the KLA.
Serbia is fully committed to safeguarding peace.
Its primary interest is to save lives and property for the
residents of Kosovo and Metohija and create conditions
for the sustainable return of internally displaced
persons. Regrettably, the ethnically motivated attacks
on Serbs, such as the recent setting on fire of the cars
of Dragiša Milović and Oliver Ivanović, which continue
unabated, obstruct the return of internally displaced
persons in any significant number. These incidents are
a consequence of the unending increase of tensions
through hate speech and a lack of a systematic response
by the Kosovo institutions to numerous security and
initiative problems facing non-Albanian communities.
They reflect the non-existence of a genuine will to
create conditions for security and a sustainable life
together in Kosovo and Metohija.
The data from the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees for the first half of
2017, which has recorded only 218 voluntary individual
returns of the members of minority communities, are

17-258807/28

S/PV.8025

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

self-defeating, to say the least. It is clear that the failure
by the police to classify the ethnically motivated crimes
as such as well as the lack of systematic monitoring of
the situation in this area do not contribute to increasing
the number of returnees, nor does the international
institutional discrimination of the Serbs, which is
manifest in arbitrary arrests, ethnically motivated
restrictive measures and the constant violation of
basic rights.
We therefore appreciate the activities of the
Head of UNMIK aimed at establishing contact with
municipal authorities and community representatives
for the purpose of protecting community rights,
promoting reconciliation, building intercommunity
confidence and ensuring the return of internally
displaced persons going forward. I propose that greater
attention be accorded in the next reports to the question
of widespread and pervasive threats to the human rights
of the non-Albanian communities, in particular of the
most vulnerable, returnees, inter-ethnic and mixed
communities within Kosovo Metohija, which are
exposed to unrelenting intimidation campaigns.
My statement is also a call to intensify
programmatic activities, maximize projects, build
confidence and improve the current situation. Of key
importance is the full implementation of UNMIK’s
mandate, including the application of the rule of law,
human rights, reconciliation among communities
and the return of internally displaced persons. The
challenges are many in these areas, as is evidenced not
only by the quarterly reports of the Secretary-General
on the work of UNMIK, but also by the aforementioned
memorandum of the Council of Europe Human Rights
Commissioner and his visit to Kosovo and Metohija last
February. In his report, the Commissioner expresses,
inter alia, serious concern that 18 years after the end
of the conflict, the ethnic lines of division as well as
numerous obstacles to voluntary returns of internally
displaced persons are still very much in evidence. In
that context, it is necessary that all actors involved
in the solution of the issue of internally displaced
persons recommit themselves to working zealously to
create conditions for their return, which needs to be
unimpeded and sustainable in the long run. Indeed, this
is one of the main elements of UNMIK’s mandate.
Institutional violations of rights are also seen in
the area of the protection of the Serbian cultural and
religious heritage in Kosovo and Metohija. In that
connection, I recall the public condemnation by the
8/28

16/08/2017

Special Representative of the European Union, in
which he called on the Kosovo authorities to respect the
rule of law in terms of enforcing the judgment of the
Constitutional Court of Kosovo that upheld the Visoki
Dečani monastery’s ownership rights to 24 hectares of
land surrounding it. The report of the Secretary-General
recounts multiple breaches of law, disregard for judicial
institutions and their decisions, refusal to cooperate
with representatives of the international community and
violation of the rights of the Serbian Orthodox Church
and its faithful. Civil society organizations expressed
concern about contravention of the law on the special
protective zone for the historic centre of Prizren.
I take this opprorunity to call on the international
community to step up its efforts to provide physical
and legal protection to the monuments of the Serbian
cultural and religious heritage that continue to be
plundered, damaged, set on fire or destroyed, including
the destruction and desecration of numerous Orthodox
Christian cemeteries, reported extensively by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Mission in Kosovo and Metohija. Pristina’s expressed
intention to resubmit its request for admission to
UNESCO is therefore hard to understand, in the least.
I would like to point out that these unilateral acts
violate the Charter of the United Nations and resolution
1244 (1999), while Pristina’s efforts to join various
international organizations have a negative effect on
the continuation of the dialogue between Belgrade
and Pristina, which is currently at a delicate stage.
The most recent example is the request by Kosovo for
admission to INTERPOL, which cannot be interpreted
as an effort to promote its capacity to combat crime
and terrorism and create institutional preconditions
for inclusion in the exchange of information within the
INTERPOL purview, especially since this capacity is
already available through the UNMIK Liaison Office.
Further, there is a special department within UNMIK
for dealing with these issues. The request is just another
push by Pristina to promote its unilaterally declared
independence through the abuse and politicization of
the work of international organizations.
In conclusion, I would like to say that the positive
results achieved in the dialogue demonstrate that there is
no alternative to dialogue. The results also demonstrate
that stronger mediation leadership is needed to ensure
that agreements reached so far are implemented. The
indicated commitment to starting a new phase of the
dialogue at the highest level and to bringing new impetus
17-25880

16/08/2017

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

to the dialogue will require a genuine resolve by both
sides towards working to achieve a compromise; such
resolve has so far been missing on the part of Pristina.
It will also require a different kind of thinking, so as to
avoid agreements being misunderstood as a defeat for
one side or the other.
Serbia is firmly committed to the dialogue
intended to promote regional stability. However, it is
of paramount importance that the dialogue be based
on mutually acceptable solutions to all outstanding
issues, without prejudice to the future status of Kosovo
and Metohija and with full respect for resolution 1244
(1999). We believe that a serious and credible approach
is needed — one that will be courageous and realistic,
as well as forward-looking, as exemplified by President
Vučić’s initiative to launch a country-wide dialogue on
Kosovo and Metohija.
Finally, as I expect that Ms. Çitaku will offer
information to document stories about genocide, ethnic
cleansing and everything else that she talks about, in
order not to have to reply to her later I should like to
ask the Secretary-General and Special Representative
Tanin that in their future reports they not forget the
persecuted and exiled citizens of Kosovo and Metohija.
What does it mean that they do not mention this aspect
anymore? Since 1999, 18 years later, only 1.9 per
cent of internally displaced persons have returned to
Kosovo. What does this mean? They were once exiled,
but nobody mentions that fact any more. They had
not been a colonial Power there; they had lived there
for centuries. As is well known, the first capital of
Serbia, the town of Prizren, is located there. All our
monuments are protected under the United Nations. I
say to Ms. Çitaku that it is not all right to laugh now,
but if she can prove that there is a single monument of
hers there and then I will stop laughing at her. Four
monuments protected under UNESCO there date back
to the twelfth, thirteenth and fourteenth centuries:
Visoki Dečani, the Patriarchate of Peć, Our Lady of
Ljeviš and Gračanica monastery.
The Serbs have lived there for centuries. More
than 200,000 Serbs were exiled and persecuted after
1991. Do Council members believe that we should not
mention this anymore? Do they believe that their exile
has become legitimized simply because it actually
took place? Is anyone ever going to mention the need
of Serbs to return to Kosovo and Metohija? If you do
not believe me, Mr. President, or if you think that I am
lying, I will tell you that statistics are a very terrible

S/PV. 8025

thing. When Ms. Çitaku says that someone committed
ethnic cleansing and genocide, that would mean that
there are fewer Albanians than before because they
werevictims of genocide and ethnic cleansing.
However, according to the data we have, it turns
out that Serbs carried out genocide and ethnic cleansing
against their own people. According to the 1981 census,
during Tito’s leadership and not under Milošević,
43,875 Serbs lived in Pristina. According to the 2011
census, which Ms. Çitaku herself compiled, only 430
are left. Where are the other 43,000 Serbs? In the span
of 30 years, there were 100 times fewer Serbs living
in Pristina. Does that mean that ethnic cleansing and
genocide were carried out against Albanians? Were
ethnic cleansing and genocide carried out against Serbs
or Albanians?
In 1981, there were 18,285 Serbs Uroševac.
According to Ms. Çitaku, as the representative of her
authorities here, there are now only 32, which is 600
times fewer Serbs. In 1981, there was 17,000 Serbs and
Montenegrins in Peć; now, according to Ms. Çitaku’s
census, there are 332. In 1981, there were 1,898 Serbs
in Dajkovce; today, there are only 17. Podujevo is right
next to the administrative line with Serbia, and through
which the famous Pristina-Nis highway passes. It is
where 2,242 Serbs used to live. Only 12 Serbs reside
there now, which accounts for 200 times fewer Serbs.
Prizren — the town in which I was born — was the
capital of Serbia in the fourteenth century. In 1981,
there were 11,651 Serbs living in that town. According
to the 2011 census, there were 231; now, there are only
27, not 27,000. That amounts to 400 times fewer Serbs.
There can be do denying those truths.
Those who committed crimes against Albanians
should be prosecuted but please let it not be said that
they were the primary victims of ethnic cleansing. The
main victims of that atrocity were the Serbs, given
the statistics that I have just quoted. Where are those
Serbs now? Because they were forced out of Kosovo
and Metohija and into exile, are we supposed to forget
them? Should they never be mentioned again by the
Council? For the Council, does the history of Kosovo
and Metohija start on the day of its declaration of
independence? That is why I ask that when the Council
addresses this issue, please bear in mind all of the
facts presented.
I would like to thank the Security Council. Serbia
is not against dialogue with Pristina. It is, however,

17-258809/28

S/PV.8025

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

against unilateral action. Even now, the representatives
of Pristina will mention that the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo should be brought to
an end. Their statement will then be distributed here, as
a statement made by a representative of the Republic of
Kosovo. Has the United Nations recognized Kosovo?
Nonetheless, despite all that I have stated, we would
like to engage in dialogue. They will state, however,
that there is nothing to discuss. If the issue has been
resolved, why do they attend the meetings of the
Security Council?
I would also like to issue a warning to all countries
that call for Kosovo to be recognized and ask them to
bear in mind that this is a question of our territorial
integrity and sovereignty. They should be grateful that
their own sovereignty and territorial integrity are intact.
Those two subjects are too serious to be discussed in
clichés. We would like to reach a lasting solution on
the issue of Kosovo and Metohija, but that will happen
only through respect for the legitimate interests of both
Albanians and Serbs.
If someone were to show up here and proclaim
that, from today onwards, this will be a new State,
without the agreement of the country from which
the territory is seceding, that would be deemed to be
a breach of international law and a violation of that
State’s authority. It is very clear that the circumstances
have changed but a mutually acceptable solution must
take into account the rights and interests of both sides.
With regard to Kosovo, it has nothing to do with the
right of people to self-determination. Ms. Çitaku is not
Kosovar; she is Albanian. As a people, the Kosovars
do not exist. The right to self-determination is a right
granted to people who are stateless. Her people — the
Albanian people — have their own State. This issue
relates to a national minority that used to live in the area
of Serbia and Yugoslavia, who unilaterally declared a
new State. We would like to discuss all of the facts,
but we cannot accept that they have nothing to discuss
with us. If there is nothing to discuss with us, please
do not address any comments to Serbia. A Kosovar
Government can then be formed. No one is preventing
that. As can be seen, Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija play
a constructive role.
I would like to thank the Council for listening
to my statement. I wanted to state this in advance
because I know exactly what Ms. Çitaku will mention
in her briefing because it is all she talks about — a
10/28

16/08/2017

humanitarian disaster, genocide and ethnic cleansing.
I just outlined the outcome of the decades-long
policy towards the Serbian people. Please bear that
in mind because Serbians did not arrive in Kosovo as
representatives of a colonial Power. They have lived in
that territory for centuries.
This situation could occur in any of the member
States represented here, so no one should be hasty in
calling for others to recognize Kosovo. That is an insult
to Serbia. Serbia is a small country and is certainly
not threatening or imposing, but we ask for respect
because Serbia, as part of Yugoslavia, together with
other Member States — the United Kingdom, France
and Russia — established the United Nations after the
Second World War, unlike others that fought on the
side against which the First and Second World Wars
were waged. We remain committed to the principles of
territorial integrity and sovereignty. I am referring not
to force and violence but to peaceful means of resolving
issues. I believe that we have many common interests
and are on the right path to resolving the issues, if there
is mutual respect on both sides.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to Ms. Çitaku.
Ms. Çitaku: I am pleased to be here and seeing
the Council every three months, but I would like to
remind everyone why we are here. On 10 June 1999, the
Council adopted resolution 1244 (1999) with the aim of
resolving the grave humanitarian situation in Kosovo
and providing for the safe and free return of all refugees
and displaced persons to their homes in the aftermath
of a terrible war and a time of ethnic cleansing.
If we try to read resolution 1244 (1999) again for
a moment, confusion awaits, since it talks about a
country that no longer exists — the former Yugoslavia.
The United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) was initially established for
a period of 12 months. However, not only has it
continued to operate for more than 12 months, today,
18 years later, we are still here because of resolution
1244 (1999) — which, by the way, does not include a
requirement that the Secretary-General must report on
the Mission every three months.
Let us therefore get real and bring UNMIK to an end.
Times have changed since 1999. Kosovo today is free,
independent and a sovereign State. There is absolutely
no need for UNMIK to be present, because it has no role
or function except for some self-invented initiatives that
17-25880

16/08/2017

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

have been put in place to justify its existence. In terms
of budgets alone, since 2009 more than $400 million
has been spent to maintain a Mission whose mandate
ended years ago. Let us think of the millions of refugees
currently all over the world — there are 65 million of
them, the largest number since the Second World War.
I am sure UNMIK’s millions and resources can be
put to much better use. It is a shame to use taxpayers’
money for repetitive, ill-considered projects. Instead of
shrinking its budget and returning its funds, UNMIK
has been building and funding permanent solar panels
for a rented building in Kosovo. Member States should
take action on an issue that has been gone over many
times in this Chamber — downsizing the Mission at
every level and bringing it to an end.
Furthermore, at a time when the world is facing
serious challenges and crises across every continent,
we continue to come to New York and take up the
Security Council’s valuable time simply because our
northern neighbour insists on a charade. Just last month,
leaders of the Western Balkans met in Trieste to discuss
economic cooperation between our countries. Today,
Kosovo is an equal member in the forums and meetings
of the Berlin Process. When we meet in Berlin, Vienna
or Paris, Serbia and Kosovo sit at the same table as
equals, as two States. Serbia has no problem when it
sees our flags standing next to each other.
So the question is why Serbia insists on asymmetry
in this forum here. Why is this dichotomy being
tolerated, when it is clearly being misused to project
an image that does not match the reality? In fact, let
us try to guess what would happen tomorrow if today’s
meeting did not take place. The answer is — nothing.
I know that. My colleagues from Belgrade know that.
We all know that. From our point of view, it is not only
unnecessary but irresponsible for us to come here and
bother the Council with useless debates at a time when
its attention is needed to address real challenges and
problems in which the United Nations has an important
role to play.
In the meantime, on 11 June Kosovo held democratic
elections for the third time since its independence. They
were the most successful, competitive and peaceful that
we have held to date. The turnout was especially high
among the Serbian community. International observers
noted that Kosovo’s parliamentary elections met the
highest international standards, except in northern
Kosovo, where local Serbian leaders faced pressure and
threats, often from the Serbian State itself.

S/PV. 8025

Like all democracies, in the wake of the elections
we are now creating a Government. As we speak, the
parliamentary constituent session is meeting in order
to reach the necessary quorums for electing its various
bodies and, later, the Government itself. Despite their
obvious differences and disagreements, all the political
parties in Kosovo share a common objective, that of
Euro-Atlantic integration. On that issue, the Council
can rest assured. While our path towards membership in
the European Union has been settled with the entry into
force of our Stabilization and Association Agreement,
we are now focused more than ever on starting the
NATO Partnership for Peace process.
In that regard, Kosovo’s institutions have been
working hard, alongside our partners, to conclude the
process of transforming our security forces into armed
forces. For far too long we have been consumers of
security. We believe it is time not only to fulfil our
sovereign duty by establishing our own armed forces,
but also to contribute to the regional and international
security infrastructure. The challenges we face
today know no borders, and they demand that we all
work together, side by side. Kosovo cannot afford to
sit and be a silent observer. We want to be an active
participant and to contribute. We were very grateful
for the statement that United States Vice-President
Pence made two weeks ago in Podgorica at the Adriatic
Charter Summit, in which he articulated the support of
the United States for Kosovo’s full membership in the
United Nations loudly and clearly.
For our part, we will do everything we can to
convince our Serbian citizens that Kosovo’s army will
be their army too, and that there is absolutely nothing
to fear. I am pleased to inform the Council that we have
already started to reap the fruits of our efforts. On
7 July, Kosovo’s security forces organized a graduation
ceremony for 61 new cadets — 58 Kosovo Serbs and
three Kosovo Montenegrins. Today they are active
members of the security forces serving in all of its
units. So while we will talk to our Serbian citizens in
order to address their concerns, we will allow no one to
have veto power over that process.
During the past few months, we have had to deal
with a very aggressive and unconstructive attitude on
the part of our neighbour to the North.
Instead of normalizing relations, Serbia has been
creating unnecessary obstacles in different regional
and international forums. That includes the violation of

17-2588011/28

S/PV.8025

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

the implementation of other Brussels agreements, some
of which have been completely blocked — such as the
ones on energy, justice and the recognition of diplomas.
Others have been disrupted in different phases of
implementation, such as the agreement on cadastre,
civil protection dismantlement, the revitalization of the
Mitrovica bridge, the revitalization of the main street in
North Mitrovica and the full dismantlement of Serbia’s
parallel structures in Kosovo. Sabotage continues, and
of greatest concern is Serbia’s duality in pretending to
implement agreements and simultaneously continuing
to support its parallel structures in Kosovo, including
the illegal municipalities in the north and in other parts
of Kosovo. Let me reassure the Council that Kosovo,
for its part, will implement all agreements reached in
Brussels and, in line with recommendations from our
constitutional court, we will establish the association
of the Serbian municipalities.
We always talk about normalization, but
normalization cannot be unilateral. Normalization
and reconciliation cannot be achieved at the expense
of truth and justice. One of the latest shameful actions
from Serbia was banning former Kosovo President
Atifete Jahjaga from entering Serbia to participate at an
event in Belgrade that was meant to boost the dialogue
between the two countries. Madame Jahjaga was
intended to attend the promotion of a book containing
testimony from women that were tortured and raped
during the 1998-99 Kosovo war.
Acknowledging the truth about war crimes in
Kosovo is the only way for both societies to move
forward. Former President Jahjaga was not able to read
her speech in Belgrade, therefore I want to read out a
part of it here.
“The stories presented in the book are not only
stories of torture and abuse. They are stories of the
cruellest form of torture. These are stories of rape
used as a tool of war. These are stories of a truth
that has been attempted to be concealed, hidden
and buried. Over the years, I have met hundreds
of survivors of sexual violence during the war,
in different parts of my country. Carefully and
patiently, I have listened to their stories; I have
cried for those who needed me to cry with them,
and I have stayed strong for those who needed me
to be strong. I have heard the story of a woman
from the Drenica region who was gang-raped
continuously by Serbian paramilitaries for over
six months. I have spoken to a woman in Đakovica
12/28

16/08/2017

whose body was mutilated while she was raped.
Just recently, I met the child of a war rape victim
who died without receiving the justice she hoped
for, for so many years.
“I truly hope that you read this book,
share it with your friends and family, ask your
Government to punish the perpetrators and call
for reconciliation with your neighbours. We shall
not let anybody hold us hostage to the past. The
victims of these crimes will never be able to find
peace unless the perpetrators are brought to justice.
This is a precondition for long-lasting peace, good
neighbourly relations and a stable future for the
next generations. The future of our countries lies
in our hands. Let it be a future of reconciliation
and peace.”
No trial, no allegation, no insinuation and certainly
no statements today can change history. The war in
Kosovo happened as the world watched, as the Chamber
watched. That is why the world decided to take action.
Any attempt to rewrite history will fail. The Kosovo
Liberation Army is not a terrorist organization. It is the
most successful liberation movement in recent history.
Sami Lushtaku and Ramush Haradinaj did not travel
to Belgrade to fight. They fought in their homes, in
their country with the aim of protecting civilians and
liberation a nation. Even as we fuel those kinds of fake
narratives, it is difficult to imagine how one is being
sincere about the past.
Serbia needs to deal with its own past, not only
because of Kosovo, as Kosovo has its own path
now — we are free, we are independent and that will
never change — but for the sake of their children and
their future. Denying Kosovar citizens their right
to exist as a State because I am Albanian is a notion
that I have heard before. There was actually an entire
operation to deport us from Kosovo because we were
Albanians. Does that mean that I have to go live
in Albania?
Kosovo is a State that belongs to all of its
citizens — Albanians, Serbs, Montenegrins, Roma,
Turks, Bosnians. It belongs to all of us and no one will
ever tell me again that just because I am an Albanian
I do not deserve to live there. We have lived there for
centuries. I am sure the Council is not here to listen to
a history lesson, but I invite members to find a book
on the subject if they visit during summer holidays.
There are many such books, written by professionals
17-25880

16/08/2017

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

and academics, that tell the story of Albanians in
the Balkans.
In the last couple of days, a new debate has been
generated in Serbia — one initiated by the Serbian
President, calling for a historic deal between Serbia
and Kosovo, calling for a compromise. Allow me to
state, Kosovo’s independence, as declared in 2008,
is a compromise. President Ahtisaari’s proposal was
a difficult and painful compromise. Now, all of a
sudden, has the compromise become our position?
That will not stand. Renewing the ideas of solutions
along ethnic lines is dangerous for the entire region.
If we reject multiculturalism and ethnic diversity
within our own States, within our own borders, then
how on Earth do we plan to exist and coexist in the
European Union, much less in an ever-interdependent
and -interconnected world?
Allow me to say it loud and clear — Kosovo and its
independence are not a temporary project. Kosovo is
here to stay, forever. Normalization and reconciliation
cannot be achieved through partition and subjugation.
This debate does not do justice to what Kosovo is today.
I would be remiss not to mention that Kosovo has
emerged as a place where young people excel in many
fields on a daily basis. Just last month, six youngsters
from Kosovo — three girls and three boys from Bonevet,
a makerspace — constructed Europe’s first teen-built
electric car in Gjakova. This extraordinary example of
ingenuity not only makes us proud of our youth, but of
these teens themselves, who, through their innovations,
educate all of us, helping us to become aware of our
surroundings and environment.
Dokufest, the biggest cultural event in Kosovo, took
place last week in the beautiful city of Prizren. Even
though Kosovo — because of the circumstances — did
not have a film school for many years, it managed
to develop and host one of the top 10 international
documentary and film festivals in the world. Each year,
Dokufest grows larger and brings people together to
work and collaborate with not only the best producers
and artists from the region, but from across the world,
placing Kosovo where it belongs: on the world stage. As
the slogan of this year’s edition of Dokufest suggests,
the future is not dead for Kosovars. It is very much alive,
and this future is alive for all of its citizens: Albanians,
Serbs and the rest. It is unfortunate that this Chamber
is being misused to promote narratives and to fuel hate
in our own domestic audiences.

S/PV. 8025

It is true that some Serbs left Kosovo after the war.
In the same way, Serbs left Croatia, Bosnia and Serbia
itself. But to wave numbers here that are simply not
true is not correct. The only reason why Serbs did not
participate in large numbers in the census is because the
Serbian Government called on them not to participate
in the census. There was a massive campaign on the
part of the Belgrade Government, calling on Serbs not
to participate in the census. We have the census data,
but we agree that it needs to be revised. We also have
election data. Who is voting on behalf of the Serbs in
Kosovo? The numbers do not add up. In the last election
alone we had around 70,000 Serbs voting inside
Kosovo, and that was just in the north. So, please, let
us be realistic. Come and visit Kosovo, and you will see
that this debate here does no justice to it.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now give
the floor to members of the Security Council who wish
to make statements.
Ms. Schoulgin-Nyoni (Sweden): Let me begin
by the thanking the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Kosovo, Mr. Tanin, for his
comprehensive briefing today. I would also like to
thank the First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, Mr. Dačić, and
Ambassador Çitaku for their statements to the Council.
Clear and undeniable progress has been achieved
in Kosovo since the end of the conflict, now almost
two decades ago. However, building peaceful and
prosperous societies requires constant vigilance and
unwavering commitment from all political leaders, as
well as from the international community that stands
with them. We welcome the fact that the early elections
in June were genuinely competitive and peaceful
in most parts of Kosovo, although we regret the
incidents that took place in certain Serbian-majority
municipalities. We now look forward to the completion
of the constitutive session of the Assembly and the
formation of a Government. A new Government needs
to swiftly start implementing necessary reforms for the
benefit of the people living in Kosovo.
Sweden looks forward to continuing its bilateral
development cooperation with Kosovo, as well as its
provision of political support for Kosovo’s progress in
the areas of democracy, human rights, rule of law and
sustainable and socioeconomic development for both
women and men.

17-2588013/28

S/PV.8025

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

The peoples of Serbia and Kosovo are looking
towards a future, together, within the European Union
(EU). To that end, the normalization of relations is key.
Regional cooperation and good-neighbourly relations
are crucial for a stable, peaceful and prosperous Western
Balkans. Pristina and Belgrade need to re-engage and
revitalize the EU-facilitated dialogue. Both parties
must implement their respective parts of the agreement,
most notably with respect to the dismantling of parallel
structures in Serb-majority areas and the establishment
of the association/community of Serb-majority
municipalities. It is essential that the status issue does
not hinder Kosovo on its European path or prevent its
membership in international organizations.
Within the framework of the normalization process,
women’s participation is key to foster sustainable and
inclusive peace and stability. We note that the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2017/640) describes that
UN-Women, together with the Specialist Prosecutor’s
Office, organized an expert meeting on conflict-related
sexual violence. Sweden would welcome the inclusion,
in the next report of the Secretary-General, of reporting
on these matters, as well as gender-aggregated data.
The United Nations and the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo have made
invaluable contributions to bring us where we are today.
Present challenges, however, must be dealt with within
the framework of the EU integration process, including
together with the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo.
In conclusion, we reiterate our interest in receiving
Mr. Tanin’s view on the possibility of downsizing
further the mission’s structure, size and tasks, as well
as on the possibility of adjusting the reporting and
briefing period from three to six months.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo, Mr. Zahir Tanin,
for his briefing.
I thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia,
Mr. Ivica Dačić, for his statement and take note of the
statement delivered by Ms. Vlora Çitaku.
As we have said on previous occasions, Uruguay
advocates for strict respect for the principle of
territorial integrity and for compliance with resolution
14/28

16/08/2017

1244 (1999) as the legal basis for resovling the situation
in Kosovo.
I should like to begin by recognizing the importance
of the high-level official meeting convened on 3 July by
the European Union High Representative for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, Ms. Federica Mogherini,
and the commitment of both leaders, which constitutes
a first step towards relaunching the dialogue process
between Pristina and Belgrade following the pause
imposed by the holding of elections in Serbia and
Kosovo. We encourage Kosovar leaders to work
constructively and advance in the appointment of
their authorities. We also highlight the importance of
the process of normalizing relations between Pristina
and Belgrade and compliance with the commitments
already assumed at the international level.
In relation to the tensions and incidents that took
place early in the period covered by the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2017/640), we reaffirm once
again the rejection of all belligerent rhetoric, incitement
to hatred, destabilization and ultranationalist
sentiments. On another order, we note with interest the
internal dialogue launched by President Aleksandar
Vučić on Kosovo. The work of regional leaders in
search of beneficial agreements can be helpful to
both communities.
Uruguay considers it critical to advance towards
reconciliation, respect for minorities and their due
integration into society. In that connection, we are
concerned by the limitation of freedom of movement
of Serb-Kosovar citizens due to the non-recognition of
the passports issued by Coordination Directorate of the
Ministry of the Interior of Serbia and the difficulties
they encounter in obtaining documents in Kosovo.
Moreover, we welcome the establishment in Pristina
of a missing persons resource centre — an initiative
that benefits Albanians and Serbians alike — and we
commend the event held under the auspices of UNMIK
and the Office of the High Commissioner to raise
awareness of this urgent question. We urge collaboration
in the return process for internally displaced persons,
the maintenance of policies of reconciliation and
respect for cultural and religious heritage, in particular
holy sites.
UNMIK is doing important work in the area by
promoting safety, stability and respect for human
rights. We commend the efforts to that end of United
Nations personnel, the European Union (EU), the EU
17-25880

16/08/2017

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and the Kosovo
Force, which, inter alia, have been working with
UNMIK for some time. We highlight their work with
young people, in compliance with resolution 2250
(2015), the conduct of the first Kosovo Youth Assembly,
which promoted reconciliation and a vision of the
future, as well as the general projects carried out with
UN-Women and UNICEF, among other entities. We
also appreciate the work of the various organizations
on the ground, working for the progress of Kosovo and
the normalization of relations among the communities
of the region.
Finally, we recognize the statements of the
Secretary-General expressing the deep sorrow of the
United Nations for the suffering of the inhabitants of the
internally displaced camps who have fallen victim lead
poisoning, and we welcome the establishment of a trust
fund that will implement community-based assistance
projects, primarily in North and South Mitrovica and
Leposavić/Leposaviq, which will benefit the Roma,
Ashkali and Egyptian communities.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Tanin for his update on the
activities of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
I also want to recognize the participation of
Minister Dačić and Ambassador Çitaku here today.
We congratulate Kosovo on holding successful
democratic elections in June, which international
observers confirm were free, fair and peaceful,
with only isolated irregularities related to voter
participation. This is a clear demonstration of Kosovo’s
democratic maturation. Of note, there was significant
turnout in predominantly Kosovo Serb municipalities,
highlighting the progress made in integrating Kosovo
Serbs into Kosovo’s democratic process.
The United States appreciates the United Nations
efforts over the past two decades to help Kosovo build
multi-ethnic democratic institutions that uphold the rule
of law and respect human rights. We also appreciate and
support the vital role of the European Union (EU) as
facilitator of the Brussels dialogue. We call on leaders
in both Belgrade and Pristina to continue taking the
needed steps to revitalize these talks, to fully implement
the dialogue agreements and to normalize relations.
Following the elections, Kosovo’s leaders must now
cooperate and form a Government without delay.

S/PV. 8025

The United States is ready to work with Kosovo’s
newly elected representatives on our shared agenda,
including
advancing
Kosovo’s
Euro-Atlantic
integration by normalizing relations with Serbia via
the EU-led dialogue process, resolving Kosovo’s
border with Montenegro to unlock visa-free travel to
the EU, undertaking reforms to strengthen democratic
governance and the rule of law and foster economic
growth, and promoting a multi-ethnic, peaceful and
stable Kosovo. As we partner with the Government
of Kosovo, civil society organizations and relevant
local institutions in this effort, we are pleased that
Kosovo’s citizens in both the public and private
sectors have demonstrated their capacity to work with
partners in the international community to address
remaining challenges.
UNMIK represents a United Nations peacekeeping
success story, but the Mission has long outlived its
reason for existing, as we have said before in the
Chamber. Given Kosovo’s steady and consistent
progress and maturity over the years, the United States
reiterates its ongoing call to the Security Council to
wind down and end the Mission. We are long overdue
in taking this step. As a first step, the reporting period
for should be expanded to every six months or longer.
We also recommend that the Secretary-General provide
in his next report an assessment of where budget and
staff reductions can be made, with a focus on reducing
redundancy, since the Government of Kosovo has long
ago demonstrated its clear competency and capacity
to govern.
In line with our responsibility to ensure that all
United Nations missions are responsive and relevant
to the situation on the ground, the Council must take
an honest look at Kosovo and recognize Kosovo’s
significant progress and development. It is hard to
justify continuing to support the Mission when we see
more urgent and pressing needs for United Nations
peacekeeping in other parts of the world. This much is
very clear. We have achieved our goals in Kosovo and it
is time to wrap UNMIK up.
Lastly, we affirm our support for Kosovo’s efforts
to develop into a prosperous and peaceful, multi-ethnic
democracy, and we continue to strongly support full
international recognition of Kosovo and Kosovo’s
membership in all relevant international organizations,
including the United Nations and INTERPOL. We
encourage United Nations Member States that have not
yet done so to join the more than 110 United Nations

17-2588015/28

S/PV.8025

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

Members that have already recognized Kosovo as an
independent State.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I should like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), Ambassador Zahir Tanin,
his comprehension briefing on the latest development
in Kosovo. Obviously, Ambassador Tanin, and old
colleague, faces a major challenge; but I must say that
it is a very worthy duty that is called upon to discharge.
Let me also take this opportunity to welcome
the presence at today’s meeting of the First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Serbia, His Excellency Mr. Ivica Dačić.
I thank him and Ambassador Vlora Çitaku for the
respective statements, which obviously were laden with
a lot of emotion and passion. We respect both of them.
The issues are not simple, and therefore, in our view,
the need for UNMIK.
Our position on the issue at hand has always been
consistent and clear. We reaffirm our support for a
peaceful and amicable resolution of all outstanding
issues between Belgrade and Pristina in accordance
with the Brussels Agreement. We also welcome the
ongoing efforts made by the European Union (EU) in
facilitating the dialogue between Serbia and Kosovo.
In that regard, we take note of the informal meeting
between the leadership of the two sides in Brussels
under the auspices of the EU High Representative, and
their commitment to work on starting a new phase of
the dialogue.
Nonetheless, we understand from the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2017/640) that there has
been limited progress in the EU-facilitated dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina. It is in particular the
lack of progress on some of the key provisions of the
EU-facilitated agreements, including, among others,
on the establishment of the association/community of
Serb-majority municipalities in Kosovo, that remains a
source of concern. That is why we support the call made
by the Secretary-General on both parties to re-engage
in dialogue and bring new vitality to the process. We
hope that the new leadership in both Belgrade and
Pristina will do so in a positive and consturctive spirit
with a view to addressing outstanding issues and
disagreements through peaceful means.
That requires that both sides refrain for actions
and statements that could cause ethnic discord, and
16/28

16/08/2017

instead exert efforts to create an atmosphere of
trust and confidence conducive to dialogue. Special
Representative Tanin was right when he said that
political reconciliation must be accompanied by social
reconciliation and by rebuilding trust and cooperation
at all levels. That is the basis for genuine cooperation.
Respect for each other’s heritage is of course very vital
in that regard. Failure in that area would very much
be fatal — that is even more the case with regard to
concerns with respect to demographic issues, which the
Deputy Prime Minister expressed with passion. In our
view, that should draw our attention.
Ethiopia fully supports the work that they United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo has
been undertaking in discharging its mandate in line with
resolution 1244 (1999). The Mission’s engagement with
municipal authorities and community representatives in
support of the efforts to protect the rights of communities
and to promote inter-community reconciliation and
trust-building is commendable. Its efforts to promote
reconciliation in Kosovo through greater youthengagement in support of inter-community cooperation
is also encouraging, as is the effort being made by
Kosovo authorities to implement measures aimed at
preventing violent extremism and radicalization, by
constructively engaging youth and women. It is our
hope that UNMIK will continue to promote political
dialogue, strengthen community reconciliation and
ensure security and stability in Kosovo and the region.
We also recognize the significant role of the European
Union on matters concerning Kosovo, and commend the
European Union Rule of Law Mission and the Kosovo
Force for their valuable contribution to Kosovo in the
area of the rule of law and security.
In conclusion, I would like to say that security
and stability in Kosovo and the region will ultimately
be assured when there is political will and resolve on
the part of both sides. In that respect, we once again
encourage both parties to remain committed to dialogue
and negotiation with a view to finding a mutually
acceptable solution.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): I would like to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Tanin, for his briefing, as well as the First
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Republic of Serbia, His Excellency Mr. Ivica
Dačić, and Ambassador Vlora Çitaku.
17-25880

16/08/2017

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

Italy’s investment in the stabilization of the
Western Balkans has been renewed. Our commitment
to supporting those countries along the path they have
chosen towards the European Union (EU) remains
unwavering. The outcomes of the summit held in
Trieste on 12 July under the Italian presidency of
the Berlin process attest to the priority we attach to
keeping the European perspective in focus and to
encourage Western Balkan countries to consistently
deliver on their own reform agendas in order to bolster
regional cooperation as a conclusive, complimentary
step towards their European integration.
We firmly believe that the normalization of
relations between Belgrade and Pristina is an essential
element of that picture and a landmark building block
of durable stability and prosperity for the entire
region. Against that backdropt, we welcome the
meeting between President Vučić and President Thaçi
held on 3 July under the auspices of the EU High
Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy,
Ms. Federica Mogherini, who has our full support. We
also take note of the internal dialogue underaken by the
President of Serbia on the matter and look forward to
its development. We urge both Belgrade and Pristina
to do their utmost to revitalize the dialgoue, starting
with the implementation of the agreements already
concluded. I recall in particular the issues pertaining
to the establishment of the association/community of
Serb-majority municipalities, which we will continue
to follow closely.
We welcome the conduct of the June election in
Kosovo, which took place without major incidents
and in line with international standards, as assessed
by the European Union election observation mission.
We regret the incidents that occurred in certain Serbmajority municipalities during the election campaign.
A solid Government must now be urgently formed
in order to achieve meaningful progress in the EUfacilitated dialogue and to adopt the policy priorities
that are vital for Kosovo, including on financial
stability, economic development and the rule of law. We
call on all political actors to do their parts to achieve
that goal, swiftly complete the constitutive session of
the Assembly, appoint a new executive and contribute
to establishing a constructive dynamic between it and
the new opposition.
I would like underscore the importance of
consolidating the rule of law, justice and the fight against
corruption — a sector on which Italy is ready to share

S/PV. 8025

its experience. The attainment of operational capacity
by the Specialist Chamber is a welcome development.
It is now important that it receive full cooperation
from all parties and accomplished its task. Likewise,
protecting vulnerable groups and minorities and respect
for human rights are crucial for reconciliation and for
preventing radicalization. We appreciate the endeavour
of the authorities to uphold them and encourage them to
redouble their efforts. In that regard, we also welcome
the initiative of the Secretary-General to assist the
communities that suffered from lead poisoning as
a result of their relocation to camps for internally
displaced persons in northern Kosovo.
In addition to the bilateral ties of friendship and
solidarity that link us to the region, Italy maintains
long-standing support for the work of UNMIK and
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo,
which we strongly commend, as well as being a major
contributor to the Kosovo Force, whose leadership
recently passed to an Italian commander.
With that in mind, allow me to highlight that the
Secretary-General has documented all the strides made
in Pristina over the years. At the same time, we are
also aware of the road ahead and the efforts required
to overcome challenges that continue to evolve. We
therefore believe that, in coordination with other
international actors, in line with the broader review
of peacekeeping operations, it is time to make an
assessment of the United Nations presence in Kosovo
with the aim of adjusting accordingly to the present needs
of the country, We look forward to recommendations in
that regard. Furthermore, we are open to an extension
of the reporting period by the Secretary-General, one
that is more adapted to the development of the situation
on the ground.
In conclusion, I reiterate our commitment to
assist Kosovo and the Western Balkan countries in
consolidating their institutions, accelerating their
development and intensifying regional cooperation,
thereby advancing towards the European Union,
which is the real key to their long-term stability.
From that perspective, it is paramount to refrain from
inflammatory rhetoric, which belongs to the past. It is
time to look towards the future and building it.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): First of all,
the Senegalese delegation would like to commend the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration

17-2588017/28

S/PV.8025

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), Mr. Zahir Tanin, for the
clarity of his presentation of the report (S/2017/640)
of the Secretary-General. We once again would like
to assure him of our full support. Our thanks also go
to the First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, Mr. Ivica
Dačić, and Ambassador Çitaku, whose statements we
have just heard.
Senegal would like to commend the smooth holding
of legislative elections on 11 June, which were held
without major incident or irregularities. We would also
like to take this opportunity to congratulate all the local
and international stakeholders who made that success
possible. Nevertheless, on the heels of those elections,
we cannot but regret the low representation of women,
as was indicated the report that was just presented to us.
We also hope that the current difficulties concerning
the formation of a new governing majority will be dealt
with swiftly.
The limited progress with regard to the dialogue
between Pristina and Belgrade facilitated by the
European Union is a source of concern for my
delegation. We therefore encourage the parties to
redouble their efforts accordingly and welcome the
ongoing efforts of the European Union in that regard,
in particular the high-level meeting held on 3 July in
Brussels and organized by Ms. Federica Mogherini,
High Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy.
We agree with the Secretary-General that another
important issue deserves our full attention. In that
regard, I wish to address the question of missing
persons, which must be an urgent priority and which
demands of the leaders of both parties to demonstrate
political will so as to give answers to the families who
have been waiting for a very long time. My delegation
would also like to commend the work carried out in the
country to counter threats involving violent extremism.
Moreover, in our view, the activities carried out within
the framework of the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), the mandate of which has
been extended to 14 June 2018, have been commendable
in terms of bolstering achievements in defending and
promoting the rule of law and human rights, as well as
combating terrorism and organized crime. Furthermore,
we welcome the activities of UNMIK in the area
of capacity-building with regard to young people,
promoting reconciliation, transitional justice, human
18/28

16/08/2017

rights and providing support for the normalization of
relations between Belgrade and Pristina.
In addition to encouraging dialogue, Senegal urges
all stakeholders to take further steps towards peace
and development, in particular by focusing on the full
implementation of agreements that have already been
reached. In that regard, we reiterate our unreserved
support for the joint European Union-United Nations
programme aimed at strengthening trust at the
community level by protecting cultural heritage, and
we recommend strengthening cooperation with regard
to sharing information.
In conclusion, my delegation reiterates its
congratulations to, and its full support for, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of UNMIK. We would also like to commend the
constructive work of the Kosovo Force, the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and, of course,
the European Union itself, as they are all committed
stakeholders constructively involved in promoting
peace and progress in Kosovo.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Representative Tanin for his briefing.
I welcome Mr. Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic
of Serbia, to the Chamber to deliver his statement. I
have also listened very carefully to the statement by
Ms. Çitaku.
Resolution 1244 (1995) provides the important
legal foundation for resolving the question of Kosovo.
All parties should adhere to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
reach a settlement acceptable to all through dialogue
and negotiation within the framework of the relevant
Security Council resolutions.
China respects the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Serbia, understands the country’s legitimate
concerns on the question of Kosovo and appreciates its
efforts to achieve a political settlement of the question
of Kosovo. Currently, the security situation in the
Kosovo region remains relatively stable, although many
underlying complex issues remain. China welcomes the
continued contact between Belgrade and Pristina and
efforts to push the dialogue into a new phase. We hope
that the two sides will remain committed to the general
direction of a political settlement, resume high-level
17-25880

16/08/2017

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

political dialogue as soon as possible, continuously
implement the agreements already reached and
gradually increase mutual trust so as to establish
favourable conditions, thereby ultimately resolving
differences peacefully.
For the ethnic communities in Kosovo,
reconciliation and peaceful coexistence serve the
common interests of all and meet the needs of the
development and prosperity of Kosovo and other
countries in the region. China hopes that all parties
will always put the well-being of their people first,
take effective measures to protect the legitimate rights
and interests of all communities in Kosovo, avoid any
rhetoric that might escalate tensions, and safeguard the
peace, stability and development of the Balkans. The
Security Council should keep its attention focused
on the question of Kosovo, and remain committed to
promoting its proper settlement.
China supports the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) under the
leadership of Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Tanin in discharging its duties in accordance
with its mandate and in constructively cooperating with
all sides. We hope that UNMIK, the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo and the Kosovo Force
will work in close collaboration, make steady headway
in improving the situation on the ground and play a
positive and constructive role for the early settlement
of the question of Kosovo.

S/PV. 8025

term challenges, including economic development,
addressing the energy situation, strengthening the rule
of law, relations with Serbia and so forth.
Ukraine also hopes that new authorities will give
priority to the implementation of the agreements
concluded in the framework of the European Union-led
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina, including on
the establishment of the association/community of Serbmajority municipalities. We encourage the leadership
in Belgrade and Pristina to show responsibility and to
re-engage in a constructive dialogue to achieve progress
in the normalization of their bilateral relations, which is
essential for both, but first and foremost for the residents
of Kosovo. No nationalistic or divisive discourse will
do any good for the region.
Ukraine welcomes the resumption of the high-level
European Union-facilitated dialogue and the meeting
of Serbian President Vučić with Mr. Thaçi, hosted by
the European Union High Representative for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy in July. We hope that the
agreement reached to start a new phase of dialogue for
the normalization of relations and reconciliation will be
implemented in the short term. In that regard, we took
note of President Vučić’s initiative to launch an internal
dialogue on Kosovo. We hope that it will soon translate
into tangible measures.

Mr. Mialkovskyi (Ukraine): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Tanin, for
his briefing. It clearly outlines the political challenges
in Kosovo following the early legislative elections, as
well as the number of issues relevant to the stability
and well-being of Kosovo residents. I am also grateful
to His Excellency Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of Serbia, and to Ms. Vlora Çitaku, for
their statements.

We share the concern of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General at the incidents of violence
and desecration in various parts of Kosovo. Those
crimes point to the importance of intensified efforts
aimed at improving the rule of law and the execution of
justice. We appreciate the valuable work carried out by
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and other international partners in
Kosovo in strengthening security and stability. We also
commend UNMIK for engaging with local authorities,
civil society, youth and other stakeholders in Kosovo to
promote intercommunity cooperation, and for building
trust and fostering societal reconciliation.

Ukraine regrets that the political situation in Kosovo
remains a matter of concern due to the inability of
political groups to reach an agreement on the distribution
of posts, which is a necessary precondition for setting
up an effective Administration. This stalemate creates
unnecessary tensions and could undermine efforts
aimed at preserving peace and stability in the region.
We call on the leaders of Kosovo to show unity and to
prove their readiness to meet the immediate and long-

The Mission’s support in terms of addressing the
issues of protection of human rights, vulnerable groups
and cultural heritage, as well as the problems related to
missing persons and violent extremism, is both needed
and appreciated. Ukraine is convinced that those
and other important tasks should remain among the
priorities of the reconfigured UNMIK. In that regard,
we unreservedly join the calls for starting focused
discussion on the reduction of the Mission and for

17-2588019/28

S/PV.8025

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

reconsidering the regularity of the Council’s briefings
on Kosovo.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): Bolivia wishes to thank Mr. Zahir
Tanin, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), for his briefing. I would
also like to welcome and thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, Ambassador Ivica Dačić. Bolivia
also listened with interest to the statement made by
Ms. Vlora Çitaku.
Bolivia reiterates its call for the implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999), including full respect for the
territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of
the Republic of Serbia. Based on that understanding
and pursuant to the resolution, Bolivia considers it
important to focus its participation in today’s meeting
on the following points upon which I will comment
in my statement: first of all, the duty of the parties to
comply with the commitments they have undertaken
in the framework of the European Union-facilitated
dialogue; secondly, the importance of UNMIK’s
work on easing tensions between the parties; thirdly,
enabling the return of internally displaced persons to
their homes; and, fourthly, combating impunity.
With regard to the first point, we call on the
parties to fulfil the commitments they have made in
the European Union-facilitated negotiations. In that
context, we are already working towards a peaceful
resolution through dialogue, while respecting the need
to negotiate in accordance with international law in
order to achieve solutions that promote progress and
stability in the region. Accordingly, Bolivia urges the
parties to comply with what was agreed to four years
in the Brussels Agreement on the establishment of an
association/community of Serb-majority municipalities,
which aims to ensure the security and human rights of
Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija. We believe that progress
in fulfilling that agreement is essential to achieve a
peaceful settlement between Pristina and Belgrade.
Bolivia values the efforts of the European Union
(EU) and supports the initiative of the EU High
Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy with regard to the informal meeting held in
Brussels on 3 July, which resulted in the agreement
between the parties to start a new phase of the dialogue
between Pristina and Belgrade and acknowledging the
importance of implementing the agreements already
20/28

16/08/2017

reached. We believe that these efforts need to be made
in order to achieve a lasting peace, keeping in mind
that the Serbs and Kosovars could go a long way in
resolving their differences by refraining from making
statements using bellicose or inflammatory rhetoric.
By the same token, we believe that the dialogue
facilitated by the European Union is an opportunity
to build trust between the parties and find mutually
acceptable solutions. This process requires a firm
commitment focused on confidence-building measures
without excluding the participation of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the United
Nations and other international organizations.
Secondly, we commend the work of UNMIK and its
joint efforts with local authorities and representatives
of the Kosovo community to protect the rights of
communities, promote inter-community reconciliation,
establish confidence-building measures and facilitate
the return of internally displaced persons, including
the organization of the first United Nations Kosovo
Youth Assembly, pursuant to resolution 2250 (2015),
on youth, peace and security. Bolivia values UNMIK’s
​​
work undertaken in compliance with its mandate under
resolution 1244 (1999). We encourage the parties
to continue to work together to build trust, maintain
good offices, ease tensions and use peaceful measures
to promote consensus-based solutions to safeguard
peace in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations and support political dialogue and respect for
human rights.
With regard to internally displaced persons, we
take note of the statement issued by the Spokesman
for the Secretary-General announcing his decision to
establish a community-based trust fund for the benefit
of the Roma, Egyptian and Ashkali communities that
have suffered from lead poisoning as a result of their
relocation to internally displaced persons camps in
northern Kosovo. We regret that the return of internally
displaced persons to certain areas of the province of
Kosovo has continued to be postponed. We call on the
parties to cooperate and pool their efforts to assist in
this process and ensure the safe return of the displaced
to their homes.
Finally, with regard to the special court for
Kosovo — the Kosovo Specialist Chambers — we
believe that this is a positive step in favour of justice
and reconciliation, which represents a key part of
Kosovo’s challenges. The persons responsible for war
crimes should be brought to justice regardless of their
17-25880

16/08/2017

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

status. It is a moral imperative that all victims should
obtain satisfaction when it comes to their right to the
truth, justice and redress.
Mr. Kawamura (Japan): I would like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Tanin
for his informative briefing and continued service. I also
wish to express appreciation for the statements by First
Deputy Prime Minister Dačić and Ambassador Çitaku.
Japan commends the largely peaceful legislative
assembly elections held on 11 June in Kosovo. At the
same time, we are paying close attention to the ongoing
difficulty in forming a new Government, two months
after the election. Numerous issues lie ahead for Kosovo,
such as the need for economic policies to promote job
creation and attract foreign investment, as well as
foreign policy issues, including the normalization of
relations with Serbia and the demarcation of the border
with Montenegro. We strongly hope that the major
parties will soon form a Government in compliance
with the necessary due process.
However, those issues do not warrant being taken
up by the Security Council every three months. The
Council has spoken at length about the need to adapt
mandates to the situation on the ground, and the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) is a prime example. The most recent report
of the Secretary-General (S/2017/640) demonstrates
that the risk of violence in Kosovo is far less than in
other regions on our agenda, such as Middle East and
Africa. A review of UNMIK is required to assess which
functions and mandates UNMIK alone can provide.
We must address the possible duplication of UNMIK
rule-of law-activities with those of the European Union
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, and consider a feasible reduction in UNMIK
personnel. In addition, it is well past time to adjust the
briefing cycle, which has remained in place since 1999
despite the substantially different circumstances. A
half-year cycle or longer is more than sufficient.
Going forward, reconciliation between Albanian
and Serbian communities in Kosovo, as well as the
normalization of relations between Kosovo and Serbia,
ais key. Japan took due note of the recent remarks by
President Vučić of Serbia on a final resolution of the
conflict, the importance of compromise and the need
for an internal dialogue on Kosovo.
Japan strongly hopes that the normalization of
relations will be achieved in the near future through

S/PV. 8025

sustained and serious dialogue between the two sides.
We call on all parties to refrain from provocative ethnic
rhetoric, and urge the new Government of Kosovo to
promote reconciliation and tolerance, including via
the establishment of the association/community of
Serb-majority municipalities. Japan also calls on all
stakeholders to fully cooperate with the activities of the
Kosovo Specialist Chambers.
In conclusion, we are confident that Kosovo will
achieve sustained economic development. Kosovo
should make further use of its abundant natural resources
by facilitating a predictable business environment in
order to attract more foreign investment, while also
fighting corruption. Japan fully supports Kosovo’s
efforts and strongly hopes that it will make steady
progress towards European integration.
Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Tanin,
for his detailed briefing on the recent developments in
Kosovo. We also thank the First Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, Mr. Dačić,
and Ms. Çitaku for their statements.
The reporting period under consideration was
a very active one in the light of the elections held
in both Serbia and Kosovo. The recent events have
changed the political landscape and configuration of
both sides. We therefore encourage the strengthening
of confidence-building measures, which are needed
now more than ever. We welcome the efforts of the
European Union and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) to provide assistance for
the holding of peaceful, free and democratic elections.
We hope that a similar procedure will be adopted during
Kosovo’s local elections in October.
My delegation commends the European Union
and the High Representative for Foreign Affairs
and Security Policy of the European Commission,
Ms. Federica Mogherini, for successfully hosting a
high-level meeting between the two parties on 3 July
in Brussels. We view the outcome of that event as
advantageous since the leaders agreed to start a new
phase of dialogue, which could turn out to be very
promising. In that regard, we highly recommend that
both sides discuss any new initiatives in order to find a
mutually beneficial solution.
Kazakhstan calls on the parties to follow
agreements and avoid any nationalist and provocative
rhetoric, while focusing on promoting intercommunity

17-2588021/28

S/PV.8025

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

reconciliation and trust, the rule of law and human
rights. It is equally vital to implement laws on the use
of languages, the protection of vulnerable groups and
cultural heritage. Special attention must be paid to
the strengthening of the Office of the Ombudsperson,
supported by UNICEF.
We see the importance of implementing resolution
1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, with
the support of UN-Women, and addressing the issue
of conflict-related sexual violence. We also need to
implement resolution 2250 (2015), on youth and peace
and security, and provide full support to the laudable
engagement of young people of all ethnicities in
promoting reconciliation. Furthermore, we believe
that social stability will be achieved only through the
full engagement of the United Nations country team,
regional and subregional organizations and civil
society groups, as well as youth working to achieve
sustainable peace.
We therefore underscore the pressing need
for further peacebuilding, conflict prevention and
mediation in Kosovo. Peace is achieved if the weakest
links in society have their rightful place. We therefore
call for improving the conditions for internally
displaced persons and members of non-majority
communities, through better health services and
economic development.
Finally, we encourage the leaders of both parties,
as well as the new Administration, to overcome narrow
political interests and ethnic divisions and to make
meaningful progress towards honouring commitments
on economic and political reforms. To that end, it is
essential to ensure close cooperation on the ground
among Kosovo authorities, the Kosovo Force, the
European Union, the OSCE, the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo, the Council of Europe and
the United Nations system for the full realization of
resolution 1244 (1999).
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr
Tanin, for his briefing. I would also like to welcome
Ambassador Çitaku and Foreign Minister Dačić back
to the Security Council.
Today, like others, I will be adhering to the guidance
in presidential note 507 (S/2010/507), which encourages
Security Council members and non-members to deliver
their statements in five minutes or less.
22/28

16/08/2017

It has been three months since the Council last met to
discuss the situation in Kosovo (see S/PV.7940). As the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2017/640) makes clear, it
has been a comparatively quiet period in Kosovo. In
June, we saw the successful holding of free and fair
elections in the country. While the European Union’s
election observers noted some voter intimidation and
violence in Kosovo and Serb parts of the country, we
are pleased that the vast majority of Kosovans were
able to carry out their democratic duty peacefully.
We now look to all parties in Kosovo to take the next
vital steps and form a Government swiftly. The people
have spoken. They now expect a Government to get on
with the business of governing, getting institutions up
and running and returning the country to the path to
European integration.
Crucially, that means getting back to implementing
the European Union’s facilitative dialogue. Progress
in the dialogue is absolutely vital for both Kosovo
and Serbia. It is the only path to the normalization of
relations between those two independent countries.
The lines on the map are set; they are fixed. They
will not be changed. We should not be distracted by
the quarterly angry and excessively lengthy exchanges
between Serbia and Kosovo in the Chamber. All that
matters are the constructive exchanges in Brussels,
such as those between President Vučić and President
Thaçi only last month.
Progress on dialogue commitments will also be
vital if Kosovo is to continue to improve its standing
with international organizations. We will support
Kosovo in its efforts to do so. While we welcome our
mixed facilitating role between the Kosovo authorities
and INTERPOL, we look forward to Kosovo’s own
independent membership of INTERPOL, so that
Pristina can respond directly to requests from partners
and so that, together, we can tackle the challenges posed
by international crime.
The other notable development since we last
met has been the agreement on the United Nations
peacekeeping budget. At a time when $600 million was
found in savings from the peacekeeping budget, it seems
extraordinary that the budget of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
should find itself increasing rather decreasing. What
message does that send to the world about the Council’s
priorities? What is the message it sends when Kosovo
gets additional money for solar panels at a time when
the Council was able to find savings in our missions in
17-25880

16/08/2017

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

S/PV. 8025

Darfur, South Sudan and so many other places? That
increase in funding is particularly hard to fathom given
how peaceful and stable Kosovo has become. As the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2017/640) makes clear,
there have been comparatively few challenges to security
in Kosovo in the past few months. That is something that
the recent Kosovo Force report also makes clear, noting
that the trend in Kosovo is incrementally positive. We
all recognize the important work that UNMIK has done
over many years to Kosovo’s benefit. But it is time for
the Mission to shrink, not grow. In view of that, we
are disappointed that its budget has increased this year,
particularly in the wake of the numerous calls in the
Security Council’s previous three meetings for the
Mission to be downscaled.

the ground. Unfortunately, that is not the case in
Kosovo today.

I would like to conclude by echoing the comments
made by the representative of Japan, and by reiterating
the United Kingdom’s long-standing position that it is
past time for the Council to meet less frequently on
this issue. The number of issues on our agenda only
continues to grow. As a Council, we should focus our
time and attention on genuine threats to international
peace and security. All of us in this Chamber should
be thankful that the situation in Kosovo no longer falls
into that category.

Once the new Government is in place, it
should immediately resume the implementation
of the reforms that are vital to Kosovo’s future:
strengthening the rule of law — a sine qua non for
European integration — economic development and
full implementation of the European reform agenda.
It is equally crucial to ensure that the political parties
that are not part of the new Government engage
in constructive opposition and embrace a spirit of
compromise. After the episodes of tension that erupted
between Belgrade and Pristina in the past few months,
we expect all stakeholders to work harder than ever
to show responsibility and restraint. The resurgence
of nationalist discourse, sometimes coloured by
community references, is a danger to the stability in the
region that the peoples of both Kosovo and Serbia desire.

Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Tanin, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, for his briefing and for his work as Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). I would also like to thank Mr. Dačić,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and Ambassador
Çitaku of Kosovo for their statements.
Like others, I would like to begin by once again
recalling our wish to see the timetable for the Security
Council’s consideration of the situation in Kosovo
reviewed. At a time when the Security Council is
dealing with a constantly increasing workload, there
can no longer be any justification for maintaining
quarterly briefings on Kosovo, whose situation does
not compare to the crises where the Council’s intensive
engagement is essential. We also believe that the
positive developments in institution-building in the
past few years in Kosovo are grounds for refocusing
UNMIK’s work and coordinating it with that of other
international stakeholders in Kosovo. The current stasis
is unsatisfactory given that it is our responsibility, as
members of the Security Council, to ensure that United
Nations efforts are fully adapted to the situation on

France welcomed Kosovo’s recent peaceful
holding of parliamentary elections in the presence of
many international observers. It is another successful
element in the country’s efforts to build a peaceful
parliamentary and democratic culture and another
illustration of the considerable progress that has been
made since independence. While the elections were
transparent and peaceful in most of the country, they
were marred by irregularities in places, showing
that the electoral system needs further improvement.
We also deplore the atmosphere of intimidation and
violence directed at some candidates and voters in the
Serbian municipalities of Kosovo.

France firmly believes that Kosovo’s future should
no longer be a priority for the Council but that it belongs
in the framework of a political dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina conducted under the auspices of
the European Union. The European Union is very clear
on this point. European integration for both countries
is conditional on the normalization of their relations
with each other. In that regard, it is important that they
demonstrate goodwill and proactive commitment at the
highest levels. Beyond simple declarations of intent, we
expect all the agreements concluded in 2013 and 2015
to be put into effect as soon as possible, including that
on the establishment of an association/community of
Serb-majority municipalities, which is a key element in
their dialogue.
We welcome the mediation efforts that the European
Union and its High Representative for Foreign Affairs

17-2588023/28

S/PV.8025

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

and Security Policy, Ms. Federica Mogherini, have
been making since the beginning of the year, and we
hope that the meeting on 3 July of Presidents Thaçi and
Vučić will genuinely revitalize the dialogue. We urge
the Kosovo and Serbian authorities to intensify their
efforts to achieve more concrete results in this area in
the next few months. All sides must do their part by
adopting a constructive attitude and refraining from
any unnecessary provocations that could endanger the
stability of the region.
Lastly, a continued effort to consolidate the rule
of law in Kosovo must remain a priority. It is a very
firm European requirement, one that we support, and
there is still a great deal to be done where strengthening
administrative capacity and justice and combating
corruption and organized crime are concerned. It also
involves fighting radicalization in all its forms, and we
welcome Kosovo’s unconditional commitment in that
regard, both locally and as part of the international
coalition against Da’esh.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the participation in today’s
meeting of Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and share
his serious concerns about the situation in Kosovo. We
thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and his team for their work and for
their objective briefing on the activities of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). The assessments we have heard show that
the area continues to have serious, major problems
that require urgent solutions as well as the attention of
the international community. Needless to say, we also
listened attentively to Ms. Çitaku’s statement.
Today a number of delegations painted a delightful
picture of events that does not jibe with our appraisal,
which I will share with the Council, if I may. The Kosovo
project continues to reveal its flimsy foundations. There
was new proof of the dysfunctionality of Kosovo’s
artificially created institutions in the eruption of an
internal political crisis there, as a result of which the
winners of the extraordinary parliamentary elections
of 11 June have been unable to get any work done for
more than two months. It appears that the politicians in
Pristina, with no fear of accountability, are defaulting
on the commitments they made in the framework of
the Brussels dialogue. There has been no movement
whatever to settle the fundamental question of the
creation of a Serb-majority community of municipalities
24/28

16/08/2017

in Kosovo, which was agreed on as long ago as April
2013. We urge the European Union mediators to
intensify their efforts to resolve this issue so that the
crucial guarantees of the rights of Kosovo Serbs and the
area’s other minorities can finally be assured.
The problems related to the protection of Serbian
religious and cultural heritage are as critical as ever.
We are concerned about the fact that physical attacks
against Serbs continue, arson is committed against
their property and there are attempts to prevent
refugees and internally displaced persons (IDPs) from
returning. There are serious concerns as well about the
ongoing attempts by the Kosovo Albanian authorities
to appropriate property belonging to the Serbian
Orthodox Church, as well as problems in ensuring
the rights of believers. In that regard, we would like
to draw members’ attention to yet more specific cases
of illegal actions by the Kosovo authorities regarding
Church property.
For example, the Kosovo Anti-Corruption Agency,
which is leasing a building on a plot of land belonging
to the only functioning Orthodox Cathedral in Pristina,
Saint Nicholas, has not paid rent since November
2013. Arrears now amount to € 400,000 — a sum
that the debtors, the Anti-corruption Agency, are not
planning to pay. The numerous attempts by the Serbian
Orthodox Church to see justice prevail in the municipal
administration have led to naught. Neither have appeals
to the United States or the European Union. The Serbian
Orthodox Church is planning to take the case to court,
but even a positive verdict would not necessarily
be carried out, in the light of the pitiful state of the
judicial system.
Let me give another example. There was a decision
ya Kosovo court, where international judges work,
which confirmed the property rights of the Visoki
Dečani Monastery, which, incidentally, is a UNESCO
World Heritage site. However, the municipality
leadership is not upholding the ruling, as it apparently
runs counter to the interests of the Albanian people.
The Kosovo authorities are ignoring the request of
the Serbian Orthodox Church to renovate a number of
religious buildings, including the Church of Christ the
Saviour in Pristina. The Kosovo Albanians are trying
to erect an economic blockade against the Serbian
Orthodox Church and deprive it of its property and
means of existence. Such steps prove that Pristina’s
policy to build a multi-ethnic society in the province
has failed
17-25880

16/08/2017

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

The Kosovo Albanian Administration is creating
obstacles to Serbian pilgrims and IDPs visiting the
province. The situation should not go unheeded.
Inter alia, in the context of Pristina’s considerations
of a repeat request to join UNESCO, there is also a
regrettable situation with the judiciary in Kosovo.
Kosovo Albanians judges are constantly replacing
foreign servants of lady justice, and they are subject to
political pressure. Often their verdicts are overturned
by higher bodies or are returned for further work. The
process is drawn out unjustifiably.
There are also serious concerns in the province with
upholding the rule of law and combating corruption.
The Kosovo Albanian authorities are not respecting
agreements on the freedom of movement of Serbian
document holders. Pristina considers such documents
as void, in particular those issued by the Serbian
municipalities in northern Kosovo, and ban their use
for moving around Kosovo by forcing people to obtain
Republic of Kosovo identification cards.
There has been slow progress in carrying out a fullscale investigation of abuses by the so-called Kosovo
Liberation Army and in bringing to justice all of those
perpetrators, irrespective of their current status. All the
legal obstacles to the start of the work of the Specialist
Chambers in The Hague have been eliminated. We trust
that soon the Security Council will receive information
on initial specific results of its work.
Curbing the spread of radicalism and terrorism
in Kosovo is still of relevance. The territory of the
province is being used for recruiting fighters to fight
in the Middle East alongside extremists and to prepare
them for terrorist acts in other countries. We note
the confrontational stance of our Western partners in
Kosovo towards Russia. How else can we qualify the
provocative statements made by representatives of
NATO urging the Kosovo authorities to be ready to
counter “the hybrid war”, which apparently Russia
is conducting in order to expand its influence in the
Western Balkans. The pronouncements that Russia is
apparently seeking to redraw the borders in the Western
Balkans are absurd blatant lies and glaring attempts to
pit us against the people who are living in the region.
Let me remind the Council that in 1999 the United
States and its NATO allies conducted a genuine hot war
for which nobody has borne responsibility.
The Kosovo Force (KFOR) Commander, Major
General Fungo, speaking in the European Parliament,

S/PV. 8025

mentioned Russia as a main threat and challenge that
Kosovo is encountering, along with inter-ethnic tension,
religious extremism and problems with refugees and
migrants. Once again, no one has managed to submit
any concrete evidence in that connection. Today it
seems to have become trendy in some places to accuse
Russia without any evidence whatsoever. That is called
defamation. For a long time, the KFOR command in
Kosovo refused contact with representatives from
Russia. We know that recently that was resolved, as
Russian representatives were asked to go to the NATO
headquarters in Brussels for a meeting with the KFOR
command. That is certainly an effective format for
discussion that is not trivial
Avoiding contact with the people from a country
that is a permanent member of the Security Council
runs counter to the KFOR mandate, as stipulated in
resolution 1244 (1999). That practice is absolutely
unacceptable. We urgently call for an end to the
defamation of Russia and its foreign policy line,
including in the Western Balkans. Our policy in the
region is still based on respect for partners and their
interests. We note with regret that the gross imposition
of the NATO logic in the region is clearly leading to
the destabilization of an already fragile situation in
the Balkans. For example, Montenegro has joined the
Alliance, despite the opinion of people in the country,
who they did not even deign to ask. It took more than
two years to overcome the drawn out political crisis in
Macedonia that was caused by foreign interference, but
this was not Russia, but rather an attempt to overcome
the desire of the electorate.
Once again, even though Russia was accused,
Russia did not interfere. We see these as attempts to
undermine the traditional friendship links between
Russia and its Western Balkan countries. We are linked
by many centuries of friendship and ties to those people.
Imposing NATO policies and trying to draw those
countries into the alliance leads to an exacerbation of
the manifold political, ethnic, religious and inter-ethnic
issues in the Balkans, which are likely to lead to an
increase in the potential for conflict in the region.
I turn back to Kosovo. In the current situation,
we see no basis for raising the issue of revising the
quarterly review and the format for considering the
Kosovo issue in the Security Council. There is no
room for decreasing the level of the United Nations
presence in the province through UNMIK. The United
Nations is playing a key, irreplaceable role in Kosovo’s

17-2588025/28

S/PV.8025

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

affairs, and UNMIK remains a central instrument for
international monitoring and for dealing with issues
on normalizing the situation — in line with resolution
1244 (1999), which is still fully in force. As for the idea
of closing UNMIK, we would like to underscore that
we are categorically against it. It is unacceptable for
the Security Council to be guided purely by financial
considerations in making decisions on the United
Nations presence in Kosovo. Indeed, it seems to
betray a desire to get rid of a structure that is able to
provide an objective picture of what is happening in the
province. We must not create a virtual reality and try to
put a positive spin on a situation that, de facto, since the
province separated from Serbia, has only deteriorated.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.
Allow me to express my sincere gratitude to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Zahir Tanin, for his very comprehensive briefing to
the Council on the report of the Secretary-General on the
activities of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) (S/2017/640). Egypt
reiterates its full support to him in fulfilling his
mandate, and we welcome the key role of the United
Nations during the reporting period in helping Kosovo
to build its institutions.
We also welcome Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia, and Ambassador Vlora Çitaku, and I thank
them for their statements.
Political, economic and security developments in
Kosovo have a direct impact on peace and stability
in the region. Egypt, bearing this in mind, welcomes
the fact that success of Kosovo institutions in holding
the planned legislative elections and calls on political
actors to overcome without delay their differences
and to form a new Government, so that they can take
on the challenges facing them, push forward with the
reform agenda and build on the advances made in the
economic and security fields and in the establishment
of the rule of law, as reflected in the reporting period.
These include accelerating economic growth, reducing
unemployment and improving the investment climate
in Kosovo.
We express our concern regarding the references
in the report to the various serious challenges facing
the Pristina-Belgrade dialogue. Egypt believes that the
high-level dialogue between the two parties, facilitated
26/28

16/08/2017

by the European Union, is the most appropriate forum
for the peaceful resolution of all pending matters, and
we urge Pristina and Belgrade to resume this dialogue.
Here we welcome the informal meeting held between
Presidents Vučić and Thaçi in July in Brussels and
the statement by both Presidents on the importance of
the implementation of the agreements already reached
without further delay.
We also express our concern with regard to the
increase in the level of hatred and nationalist and
ethnic sentiments, and we urge both sides to refrain
from inflammatory rhetoric, which only fuels internal
tensions and divisions. We call on both sides to show
the greatest possible restraint and to avoid taking any
unilateral measures or steps that could fuel tensions.
We call on the various parties in Kosovo to follow
the path of dialogue and understanding and to strive
to deal with all issues in the framework of existing
State institutions.
In conclusion, and given the importance that we
attach to consolidating peace and stability in the region,
we wish to once again reaffirm the importance of the
efforts of the international community aimed at helping
Pristina and Belgrade to overcome the differences
between them and reaching compromise solutions that
are just and lasting, that are accepted by both sides and
that could lay the groundwork for peace and stability
in the region. We also encourage them to speed up
regional integration into European institutions, which
would improve the situation in the region as a whole.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The representative of Serbia has asked for the floor
to make a further statement. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Dačić (interpretation from Serbian provided
by the delegation): As I said earlier, Ms. Çitaku devoted
her time to speaking about the same things she spoke
of previously and levelling accusations related to the
alleged ethnic cleansing of Albanians. She said she did
not speak about false narratives but simply provided
specific precise data. I think that she insulted the
Security Council, member States and representatives,
because she said that this was a charade. I do not know
if the Council is ready to accept this statement; I do not
have anything against that. I am much more worried
about other things: the fact that the United States, the
United Kingdom and France have obviously aligned
17-25880

16/08/2017

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

their position with that of Kosovo concerning the
need for the finalization of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo.
So how is this to be interpreted? You say that you
want to be Serbia’s partner. Do you believe that it is
enough to carry out the secession process and now say,
we do not need to speak about this anymore? I posed a
question; is someone going to reply to this question?
Is anyone ever going to mention here the more than
200,000 Serbs who were persecuted of whose number
only 1.9 per cent returned? Do you believe that we
should never mention this again?
I was presenting data to the Council from 1981, the
year when the protests started in Kosovo and it started
to ask for independence and for the status of a republic.
Milošević was not in power at the time; it was the time
of Communist Yugoslavia. At that time, 43,000 Serbs
lived in Pristina. So where are those Serbs today? I
mentioned other towns as well. Are you going to say,
all right, they are not there anymore, and we will not
gather here anymore and talk about it?
All of the large Powers I mentioned have deeply
hurt the Serbian people by their conduct, because
Serbian victims want justice, just as Albanian and all
other victims do. If 1,000 people died between 1999 and
today, and no one was accused in that connection, then
Serbian victims also seek justice. After all, the United
States denies 41 per cent of visa applications from
Kosovo. That is official information. If the situation
in Kosovo is so good, as Ms. Çitaku says it is, then
why are Albanians fleeing Kosovo en masse and going
to Europe?
Turning to the Government, the President speaks
of peace and his various initiatives. Mr. Mustafa also
speaks about various initiatives in three municipalities
of central Serbia and says that he has been receiving
representatives from eastern Kosovo. So whom are you
lying to? You are representing only yourself here today,
but in fact you are the people who persecuted hundreds
of thousands of Serbs in Kosovo. Of course, I do not
mean Ms. Çitaku personally, but there is no need to
pretend that this never happened at all.
Ms. Çitaku spoke of the Kosovo Liberation Army
as the most successful liberation movement, but it is on
the United States list of terrorist organizations. I simply
want to ask Ms. Çitaku, when she speaks about this
issue, to bear in mind that Serbia is repaying Kosovo’s
debts from the time of Yugoslavia. Why does she not

S/PV. 8025

speak about that? Why not say that she does not want us
to repay their loans? A few million dollars have already
been paid. In one instance Kosovo is Serbia, and in
another it is not.
Anyone who believes that the situation in Kosovo
has been resolved is living in a state of deep confusion.
One Prime Minister has been accused of war crimes
while another is in favour of the unification of Kosovo
and Albania. Without going any deeper, anyone
who believes that it is enough to declare a unilateral
secession to resolve the issue, or that simply recognizing
a country is enough to settle the issue, has forgotten
history and all that happened in the Balkans over the
past century. France and Serbia are strategic partners.
We have a signed agreement. How logical is it to make
such statements here when we have not spoken about
it before?
I do not wish the fate of Serbia on any country. I
hope that what has happened to Serbia happens to no
country represented here. We will certainly not be the
cause of wars. The majority of Albanians from Kosovo
participate in the wars of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant. There are no participants from Serbia there.
If anyone is unaware of that, it would be difficult for
someone from the outside to explain it.
If someone believes that meetings like today’s
should no longer take place, I urge them to make that
decision. Let them propose it. Let them propose that
resolution 1244 (1999) be revoked and reversed. Who
is asking Serbia about it? We know the international
situation. We are well aware that such a decision cannot
be adopted in the Security Council; that being the
case, I would ask certain members not to insult Serbia.
Serbia is a proud country that contributed greatly to
the establishment and formation of the United Nations,
unlike other countries that used to welcome Hitler with
flowers. We ended our pact with him on 27 March 1941,
and I would urge no one to forget that.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor to
Ms. Çitaku for a second statement.
Ms. Çitaku: Again, I sincerely apologize for
taking the Council’s time, but some things should not
be left unsaid.
First we are very proud that in our political
landscape we do not have descendants of Milošević. We
have people, young leaders, who fought Milošević and
Šešelj, who were the worst criminals in Europe after

17-2588027/28

S/PV.8025

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

the Second World War. We are proud of the background
of our leadership, unlike some others.
Second, this is not the venue to discuss ethnic and
national civic identities and how they intertwine. This
is not the venue to discuss who was in the Balkans
first, who came in the seventh century, where they
came from or whom they found there. We can have
those discussions if we decide to organize a seminar.
Historians can come together. They can fight, agree or
disagree. I am ethnic Albanian and a proud citizen of
Kosovo, and these identities coexist very well within
me; one does not exclude the other.
Third, Kosovo had borders long before it had
statehood. We were a federal unit in former Yugoslavia
until Milošević came to power, and our borders were
set long before we declared our independence.
Fourth, our independence is not a product of
a secessionist movement. Our independence is the
product of the consensual dissolution of Yugoslavia.
It is not only Kosovo; there are also Slovenia, Croatia,
Bosnia, Serbia, Montenegro and Macedonia. So there is
no secessionist movement.
Fifth, as to the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo, there was a long
process of negotiations under the auspices of the United
Nations, and there was a proposal by former President
Martti Ahtisaari for Kosovo to declare independence.
Sixth, there was a ruling from the International
Court of Justice, upon Serbia’s request, to verify the
legality of Kosovo’s declaration of independence, and
the ruling was unambiguous and crystal-clear. Kosovo

28/28

16/08/2017

was within its rights when it declared independence.
That is according to the International Court of Justice,
not me, and I suggest that Mr. Dačić go back and read it
because apparently he has forgotten it.
Seventh, Kosovo is not a perfect place. I am not
trying to say that Kosovo is a perfect place. We have
lots of problems. We have much more to do in terms of
the rule of law, fighting organized crime and corruption
and in creating better opportunities for all of our
citizens, but these are not challenges unique to Kosovo.
One finds these challenges in most of the countries of
the Western Balkans. Frankly speaking, Kosovo is no
longer even in the top 30 countries in terms of asylumseekers in Europe. Serbia is way ahead of us. Does that
mean that Serbia is a failed country? No.
Again, in terms of Serbians living in Kosovo,
I would ask the Council to bear with me for just one
minute. These are the Central Election Commission’s
numbers from this year’s elections. In the municipality
of Novobërdë, there were 9,617 Serb votes; in Shtërpcë,
13,902; in Ranillug, 5,689; in Partesh, 4,664; in
Kllokot, 5,689; and in Gracanicë, 21,411. In the four
northern municipalities, there were 58,138 such votes.
All together, there were 123,774 votes, and we all know
that people over 18 vote. So if we have this number of
voters, what is the number of citizens? Again, I am not
saying that all Serbs were bad, but the numbers that
were cited here are simply not real.
Finally, to conclude, I urge everyone to come and
visit Kosovo, and they will see with their own eyes
what Kosovo is.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

17-25880
