United Nations

S/PV.6747

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6747th meeting
Tuesday, 10 April 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Rice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .

Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Briz Gutiérrez
Mr. Raguttahalli
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Zhukov
Mr. Sangqu
Mr. Menan
Sir Mark Lyall Grant

Agenda
The situation concerning Iraq
Second report of the Secretary-General pursuant to resolution 2001 (2011)
(S/2012/185)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-28745 (E)

*1228745*

S/PV.6747

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Iraq
Second report of the Secretary-General
pursuant to resolution 2001 (2011) (S/2012/185)
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Iraq to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Martin Kobler, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. I wish to draw
the attention of Council members to document
S/2012/185, which contains the second report of the
Secretary-General pursuant to resolution 2001 (2011).
I now give the floor to Mr. Kobler.
Mr. Kobler: It is a great pleasure to introduce the
second report (S/2012/185) of the Secretary-General
pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution 2001 (2011) on
the activities of the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI), as well as the situation in the
country.
Since my last briefing of the Security Council
(see S/PV.6675), there have been several important
developments in Iraq. The United States completed the
withdrawal of its armed forces from the country on
31 December. The withdrawal has provided the
democratically elected Government of Iraq with the
opportunity to turn a new page in its history and assert
its country’s full sovereignty. On 29 March, Iraq hosted
the League of Arab States summit. That historic event
marked Iraq’s re-emergence as a major actor in the
region.
It is true that domestic political issues and the
potential fallout from regional crises, such as the one
ongoing in Syria, continue to pose obstacles for Iraq as
it marches on the road to full recovery. The continued
delays in convening the national conference underscore
the urgent need for Iraqi leaders to summon the
political will and courage to work together to solve the

2

country’s problems through an inclusive dialogue. In
that regard, UNAMI will continue to remain steadfast
in its commitment to assisting the Government and
people of Iraq with addressing the major challenges
facing their nation.
In many ways, the holding of the twenty-third
League of Arab States summit in Baghdad on 29 March
was a measure of how far Iraq has come after decades
of war, dictatorship and economic hardship. The
historic presence at the summit of the Emir of Kuwait,
His Highness Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber
Al-Sabah, also highlighted the significant improvement
in relations between Iraq and Kuwait. Iraq now stands
to play a positive role in the region as it assumes the
chairmanship of the Arab League as a fully
independent and sovereign State. This represents an
important opportunity to play a leading role in
addressing some of the pressing issues of concern to
Arab States and improving cooperation among them.
The recent steps taken by Iraq and Kuwait to
normalize their relations and resolve all the issues
remaining between them is encouraging. I am hopeful
that this willingness to work together, and the practical
steps already taken by the Government of Iraq to fulfil
its outstanding obligations under Chapter VII of the
Charter, will help bring closure to this long-standing
problem.
On 14 March, the Iraqi Prime Minister
Mr. Al-Maliki undertook an important two-day visit to
Kuwait. As a result, Iraq agreed to proceed with the
pending Iraq-Kuwait boundary maintenance project,
pursuant to resolution 833 (1993), and to transfer its
share of funds allocated for the project’s completion to
the United Nations immediately after Prime Minister
Al-Maliki’s visit. Most significantly, during the visit the
two Governments agreed to resume their high-level
bilateral talks and to hold the second Iraq-Kuwait highlevel cooperation committee meeting this month. The
meeting should provide both sides with an invaluable
opportunity to review all pending bilateral issues, as
well as Iraq’s outstanding obligations under Chapter VII.
I commend the Kuwaiti and Iraqi Governments
for their efforts to improve bilateral relations. Officials
in both countries relayed their positions to the
Secretary-General during his visit to Kuwait and Iraq
at the end of March. In their meetings with the
Secretary-General,
both
countries
welcomed
Mr. Al-Maliki’s visit to Kuwait as a historic and

12-28745

S/PV.6747

important step towards normalizing relations between
them. During his visit, the Secretary-General urged the
Iraqi Government to continue to work to fulfil all its
obligations pursuant to all relevant outstanding United
Nations resolutions under Chapter VII. I will continue
to assist in expediting the normalization of relations
between the two countries, including by further visits
to Kuwait.
The continuing violence in Syria is fraught with
risks that could have dangerous spillover effects on
Iraq, affecting its fragile balance of power and
increasing communal tensions. In addition, it has
already begun to have an impact on Iraqi refugees in
Syria. The United Nations country team has therefore
undertaken extensive contingency planning to mitigate
possible problems.
I took up my functions as Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Iraq some six months ago.
Since then, I have expanded my consultations with
political leaders of all elements of Iraqi society and
with representatives of the political parties, including
several visits to the Kurdistan region and other
governorates.
Such political facilitation and outreach have
become all the more important in the light of the
tensions that have arisen between the main
parliamentary blocs in Iraq, and which have developed
into a political impasse. I have therefore encouraged
Iraqi political parties and leaders to work together in a
spirit of partnership towards finding the common
ground that will help them resolve their differences. In
that regard, Al-Iraqiya’s decision to end its boycott of
the Council of Ministers and the Council of
Representatives was the right step.
It was President Talabani’s suggestion to hold a
national conference as a way to help put an end to the
stalemate. So far, unfortunately, there has been no
agreement on an agenda. An inclusive forum, however,
is needed as a first step towards ending the political
impasse. I call on all Iraqi leaders to sit down together
to address all their differences in a meaningful way.
UNAMI stands ready to continue to support such
efforts.
Arab-Kurdish relations in general, and issues
pertaining to the disputed internal boundaries in
particular, remain at the heart of UNAMI’s mandate. In
that regard, the Standing Consultation Mechanism
launched by UNAMI was an important forum for

12-28745

addressing the issue of disputed internal boundaries.
Regrettably, the series of political crises has made it
difficult for the Mechanism to convene. Redoubling
our efforts to facilitate progress on the issue of Kirkuk,
my Deputy and I have made it a priority to pay regular
visits to the area to promote political dialogue between
the parties. During my most recent visit to Kirkuk, all
the interlocutors, including the Governor, the Deputy
Governor and the Provincial Council Chairman,
emphasized the importance of holding provincial
elections in Kirkuk as soon as possible and of the need
for the United Nations to play a facilitation role in
those and other outstanding issues.
It goes without saying that there can be no true
democracy without free, fair and competitive elections.
This makes UNAMI’s work of providing electoral
support all the more important for consolidating
democracy in Iraq. At the request of the Council of
Representatives, UNAMI has been serving as adviser
and observer in the selection process of the Board of
Commissioners of the Independent High Electoral
Commission before the expiration this month of the
current Board’s term. The participation of UNAMI and
non-governmental organizations in the selection
process is a clear signal that the process’s transparency
can be assured.
The final vote and selection of the nine new
Commissioners, which was expected by the end of this
month, is now unlikely to take place. In order,
however, to avoid delays in the upcoming elections in
the Kurdistan region in September and in the
provincial elections in early 2013, the Council of
Representatives has been encouraged to extend the
mandate of the current Board of Commissioners so as
to enable it to initiate preparations for holding those
contests.
I would like to highlight specific concerns I have
about the human rights situation in Iraq, particularly in
terms of, first, civilian casualties; secondly, genderbased violence and women; thirdly, the situation
minorities; and fourthly, internally displaced persons
(IDPs).
I am concerned that Iraq’s political situation is
heightening communal tensions in the country and
leading to an increase in the numbers of attacks on
civilians. Since my most recent briefing to the Council,
terrorist attacks have continued to target pilgrims and
resulted in the killing and wounding of scores of

3

S/PV.6747

defenceless people practicing their religion. Other
attacks across the country have indiscriminately
targeted civilians, resulting in large numbers of deaths
and injuries, including of children. In the first three
months of 2012, a total of 613 civilians were killed and
1,800 injured. This is slightly less than civilians
casualties last year; however every man, woman and
child dying in terrorist attacks in the streets, markets or
mosques of Iraq is one casualty too many. Such
horrendous crimes against the Iraqi people need to stop
and the violence must end if Iraq is to achieve the
prosperous and secure future its people deserve.
Women’s History Month was celebrated last
month, but statistics indicate that Iraqi women continue
to face widespread instances of gender-based violence,
including domestic violence and so-called honour
killings. Many of the issues related to the violation of
the rights of women and girls arise from entrenched
cultural traditions and social practices. It is the duty of
Iraqi leaders to act responsibly and in unity to end the
ongoing violence against women and girls.
In recent months, I have expanded my regular
consultations with representatives of all minority
communities around the country, including Christians,
Shabaks, Sabean Mandeans and Yazidis. I would like to
emphasize that violence against minorities is
unacceptable and should have no place in Iraq as it
moves forward on the path of consolidating democratic
governance. UNAMI is able to provide support to the
Iraqi authorities in protecting Iraq’s ethnic and
religious communities, and in promoting their rights in
accordance with the Constitution, including fair
representation in the political system in Iraq.
Despite the return of some 1 million internally
displaced Iraqis since 2003, large numbers of
individuals continue to be unable or unwilling to return
to their places of origin. According to Government
figures, there are still more than 1.3 million post-2006
displaced persons, representing more than 220,000
families. Baghdad hosts the largest number, with over
300,000 persons in almost 60,000 families. We can best
help restore the rights of those who fled violence in
recent years by ensuring their safe return to their
homes. All Iraqis, including those displaced, are
entitled to live in dignity. The United Nations is
working to ensure that the displaced are adequately
cared for as long as they are displaced, followed by
their voluntary return, resettlement and local
integration.

4

On the positive side, I am pleased to report that
yesterday, 9 April, the Council of Representatives
voted to endorse the commissioners to serve on Iraq’s
first independent High Commission for Human Rights.
The importance of this institution cannot be
underestimated, as it will serve as the first Iraqi-owned
and led human rights institution and will form the
cornerstone for promoting and protecting human rights
in Iraq. The Government has taken steps to address
human rights challenges by appointing a committee to
oversee implementation of the National Action Plan on
Human Rights, which was adopted by the Government
in December 2011. The Government must build on
these positive steps to do all that it can to ensure that
its human rights obligations are met.
As I mentioned to the Council during my
previous briefing, in moving forward with our
integrated approach the United Nations country team
will focus on three priority issues during the coming
year. These are youth, water resource management and
the environment. Making progress on these issues has
the potential to improve the political, security and
governance situations. We have embarked on efforts
aimed at sensitizing the Government and people of Iraq
to the role of youth in the socio-economic recovery of
Iraq. Water and environment remain critical issues for
the development in Iraq. I call on Iraq and its
neighbouring countries to work together on finding a
durable solution to managing their shared water
resources.
A year ago, on 8 April 2011, the tragic incidents
in Camp Ashraf led to the deaths of dozens of the
camp’s residents and to hundreds being injured. In an
effort to reach a peaceful and durable solution, UNAMI
and the Government of Iraq signed a memorandum of
understanding on 25 December 2011. The Government
of Iraq agreed to extend the deadline for the closure of
the camp. From mid-February until now, almost 1,200
residents of Camp New Iraq have been safely relocated
to the temporary transit location in Camp Hurriya, near
Baghdad. United Nations monitors are deployed to
monitor both the relocation and the situation in Camp
Hurriya around the clock. The Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
has a team at Camp Hurriya to carry out the
verification and adjudication of claims for refugee
status.
I wish to make it clear that the memorandum of
understanding concerns voluntary relocation, and that

12-28745

S/PV.6747

its implementation is based firmly on all sides acting
peacefully and in good faith. It should be noted that, on
8 April, an incident took place at Camp New Iraq
during the preparation for the fourth transfer of
residents. A confrontation developed; United Nations
monitors now report that the situation has returned to
calm. Both sides have now resumed cooperation in
preparation for the next transfer.
I would have loved to have reported that another
group of 400 residents had moved to Camp Hurriya.
This incident, however, momentarily disrupted the
relocation. But, as we speak, United Nations monitors
are at Camp Hurriya and Camp New Iraq, and I am
pleased to report that the next 400 residents will move
immediately once the loading of the person’s
belongings is completed. This is a sign of the good will
of the residents. I will continue to be actively engaged
in ensuring that an understanding is reached on the
remaining issues. With this move, half of the residents
of Camp New Iraq will have been relocated to Camp
Hurriya.
I would like to take this opportunity to make the
following four further remarks. First, I would like to
commend the Iraqi authorities, in particular Prime
Minister Al-Maliki and his advisors, as well as the
commanding General, the many Iraqi policemen and
the Iraqi army, for their patience and cooperation in
ensuring the safe and secure relocation of the first three
groups of residents. I encourage them to pursue the
relocation of the remaining residents in a manner that
guarantees the residents’ human rights, safety and
security, and to avoid anything that could be seen as a
provocation. We will do everything possible to assist
the Government of Iraq in relocating the remaining
residents. There are, however, still major obstacles
ahead that might require flexibility on the deadline.
Secondly, I would like also to highlight that the
camp residents, despite initial difficulties, have
recently shown good will and cooperation in the
relocation process. The residents have indeed come a
long way. It is difficult to abandon a place where one
has lived for more than two decades. I encourage the
residents to continue to show good will and to work in
a cooperative spirit.
Thirdly and most importantly, I reiterate my call
on Member States to accept the residents of the camp
in their countries. Now that UNHCR has begun its
work, it is high time for the international community to

12-28745

accept eligible candidates and fund the relocation
process. The support of the international community is
urgently
needed.
I
welcomed
the
joint
UNHCR/UNAMI resettlement conference, which took
place in Geneva on 23 March. More than 30 Member
States participated. However, no country has
committed to accepting residents. A donors appeal
meeting also took place the same day, seeking to raise
$39 million for the Ashraf project. Only one Member
State made a concrete pledge. That falls far below what
we had hoped. Without international support, the
process cannot succeed.
Last but not least, I would like to thank my
colleagues in UNAMI, UNHCR and the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights for their hard
work and support. The Ashraf file placed a heavy
burden on the Mission. I could count on the support of
most of my colleagues. My admiration goes to the
monitoring staff in Camp Hurriya and the UNHCR
staff, in particular those who accompanied the convoys
under truly dangerous conditions. As stated by the
Secretary-General in his report, the process is still
fragile and instances of violence cannot be excluded.
We must therefore remain vigilant.
Coming to the end, I should like to highlight that,
following the withdrawal of United States troops, there
are now greater expectations for UNAMI to assist the
Government and people of Iraq in addressing the major
challenges facing their nation. Unfortunately, this
comes at a time when resources made available to
UNAMI have been shrinking.
I wish to take this opportunity to stress my
personal commitment and that of my team in Baghdad
to continuing to do our utmost to implement our
comprehensive mandate from the Security Council in
the areas of political facilitation, electoral support,
human rights, reconstruction and development. I firmly
believe that United Nations assistance at this critical
juncture in Iraq’s history remains essential.
I should like to conclude by thanking the
members of the Council for their continued support, as
well as the Government of Iraq and the wider
membership of the United Nations. I should also like to
express my gratitude and appreciation to my colleagues
at UNAMI and in the United Nations family for their
efforts, dedication and perseverance under very
difficult working conditions in Iraq.

5

S/PV.6747

The President: I thank Mr. Kobler for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Al Bayati (Iraq): Allow me at the outset to
congratulate you, Madame, and your country on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. I am sure that your leadership skills and
talents will help to achieve the objectives of the
Security Council this month. I would like to also
extend my thanks to the previous Security Council
President, the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom, for his efforts during the month of March. I
would also like to thank Mr. Martin Kobler, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq, and
his team in Baghdad and New York for their sincere
efforts in helping the people and Government of Iraq.
Having reviewed the report of the SecretaryGeneral on UNAMI’s work in Iraq (S/2012/185), I
would like to present the following comments.
On the political level, the convening of the
twenty-third regular session of the Arab summit in
Baghdad on 29 March 2012 was a milestone for Iraq’s
return to its positive regional role and its integration
into the Arab world after long years of isolation
imposed on it following Saddam’s invasion of Kuwait
in 1990. The summit was attended by presidents and
leaders of Arab countries and Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon. Iraq asked the Arab States to agree on a new
vision for the relationships among Arab States in light
of the great transformations in the region on the
political, social, cultural and security levels. The
absence of such a vision shall put us in complex
situations that no country would be able to deal with
alone. The summit adopted the Baghdad Declaration,
which includes the positions of the Arab leaders
regarding important regional and international issues.
The completion of the withdrawal of United
States forces from all Iraqi territory, in accordance with
the schedules agreed upon between Iraq and the United
States in the status-of-forces agreement, is a historic
victory for the option of negotiations, adopted by Iraq
during a difficult and sensitive period of its modern
history as it dealt with the issue of the presence of
foreign troops. The withdrawal helped to establish a
new era in the relationship between Iraq and the United
States, where the Strategic Framework Agreement is
the cornerstone of bilateral relations between the two
countries. That agreement deals with political,

6

economic, commercial, cultural, scientific and other
fields in order to drive bilateral relations to greater
cooperation and understanding in the next phase, which
we firmly believe will be balanced between two
sovereign nations on the basis of common interests.
The withdrawal of United States forces helped
Iraq to host the Arab summit in Baghdad as some Arab
countries that severed diplomatic relations with Iraq
after Saddam’s invasion of Kuwait in 1990 refused to
restore diplomatic relations with Iraq after 2003 or to
open their embassies in Baghdad so long as there were
foreign forces in the country. Following the withdrawal
of foreign troops, Iraq is moving now to a new stage in
the democratic political process, based on the
Constitution and the rule of law in resolving all
problems, and focusing on building and developing the
economy and on strengthening efforts to establish
better relationships with other countries based on
mutual respect, common interests and non-interference
in internal affairs. Iraqis today have a new Iraq that
enjoys complete sovereignty, independence and free
will, which have been achieved by the awareness and
determination of the Iraqi people.
Under the auspices of Mr. Jalal Talabani,
President of the Republic of Iraq, the Iraqi political
groups agreed on 6 February 2012 to achieve a national
consensus to fulfil the aspirations of all the Iraqi
people. They agreed on four guiding principles to
continue the political process under the framework of
the Iraqi Constitution, which are, first, standing as one
bloc against terrorism and armed groups; secondly, the
Constitution is the basis for the settlement of disputes
and that all shall abide by it; thirdly, all components of
the Iraqi people should be fully represented in the
political process; fourthly and finally, the Iraqi
judiciary is an independent authority and it is on an
equal level with other authorities and must remain free
from political interference.
The Vice-President of the Republic of Iraq,
Mr. Khodair Al-Khozaei, met with the members of
preparatory committee of the national conference on
12 February 2012. Yhey agreed on the general
framework of the agenda of the conference and the
formation of subcommittees to study all the issues
discussed in preparation for the national conference. I
can assure the States members of the Security Council
that Iraqis never fail to settle their disputes through
peaceful means and negotiations. They learn in the new
democracy to shout at each other instead of shooting at

12-28745

S/PV.6747

each other and to resort to ballot boxes rather than
bullet boxes.

projects and for the advancement of the agricultural
sector in Iraq.

In the framework of the tireless efforts made by
the Iraqi Government to grant more powers to
provincial councils, the Council of Ministers headed by
Mr. Nuri Kamel Al-Maliki, Prime Minister of Iraq,
held a session in the province of Basra for the first time
in the history of that province. During that session, a
series of decisions were made to strengthen the powers
of the provinces. In the conference on decentralization
in Iraq, which was held on 27 February 2012, the
Prime Minister stressed the need to give local
Governments more power in the reconstruction field,
which is the demand of many provinces in Iraq.

On 1 March, the Prime Minister of Iraq visited
the Ministry of Electricity to follow up on the
Ministry’s efforts to provide electric power to citizens.
During his meeting with officials in the Ministry, he
called for more cooperation and coordination between
the Ministries of Oil and Electricity in order to provide
fuel to power stations and facilitate the entry into Iraq
of materials for the electricity sector. It should be noted
that electricity production has seen a noticeable
increase from 3,500 megawatts in 2003 to around
7,500 megawatts in 2012. However, the sharp rise in
living standards and the salaries of Iraqi citizens has
caused a huge increase of electricity consumption and
demand, and the Government is trying to solve the
problem.

The achievement of security and stability was and
remains a central priority in the work programme of
the national partnership Government. That was clearly
embodied in the Iraqi security forces’ ability to take
full responsibility for the security of the country before
and after the withdrawal of foreign forces, which is
reflected clearly in the lower level of violence across
the country. The Prime Minister, during his meeting
with senior security chiefs on 1 February, stressed the
need to work to ensure measures to control the security
situation and fill all possible gaps that terrorists are
trying to use to destabilize the country. He also called
for more coordination and cooperation between local
governments, the military and security forces.
On the social and economic levels, on 8 March
the Council of Representatives ratified the federal
budget for 2012, with a total value of about
$100 billion, which reflects an increase of
approximately 20 per cent from the federal budget for
2011. At the same time, the Iraqi economy has been
witnessing notable improvement in its basic indicators
since 2003, such as the unemployment rate, which fell
from 51 per cent to 15 per cent; the poverty rate, which
fell from 54 per cent to 23 per cent; and the inflation
rate, which fell from 65 per cent to 6 per cent.
With the backing of Prime Minister Al-Maliki,
the Supreme National Committee for the agricultural
initiative in Iraq held a meeting on 4 January 2012 in
which the ways to achieve further development in the
agricultural sector in Iraq were discussed in the light of
the phenomena of drought and climate change. In that
context, the federal budget for 2012 allocated
approximately $500 million to support for agricultural

12-28745

Under the auspices of Prime Minister Al-Maliki,
the first floating port in the province of Basra has been
inaugurated, with an export capacity amounting to
850,000 barrels per day. The port represents one of the
five ports to be constructed with a capacity of 850,000
barrels a day each. In a related matter, the rate of Iraqi
oil production has continued to increase and amounted
to 2.358 million barrels per day in 2010 and
2.653 million barrels per day in 2011. The Iraqi
Government is planning to further increase production
in 2012.
The Iraqi Government has allocated $85 million
from the federal budget for 2012 to fund programmes
in partnership with the international community,
including the specialized agencies of the United
Nations, in order to implement a range of projects
related to the United Nations development framework
for Iraq.
On the human rights level, the Council of
Representatives ratified the creation of the Independent
High Commission for Human Rights in Iraq on 9 April.
That step is a milestone in improving human rights
situation in the new Iraq and was designed to improve
Iraq’s human rights record and its ongoing programmes
to promote respect for and the protection and
advancement of human rights, to ensure people’s
enjoyment of those rights, to establish democratic life
and to support human development.
In the framework of the efforts made by the Iraqi
Government to determine the fate of missing persons
who were victims of Saddam’s brutal regime, the

7

S/PV.6747

Ministry of Human Rights signed on 12 March a
memorandum of understanding with the International
Commission on Missing Persons. The agreement was
signed in order to enable Iraqis to carry out DNA tests
on the remains of victims buried in mass graves,
identify those remains and return them to their families
after years of suffering from not knowing the fate of
their loved ones.
On 5 March, the presidency of the Republic of
Iraq ratified Law No. 16 of 2012 concerning the formal
accession of Iraq to the Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities, adopted by the General
Assembly in 2006. The Convention was ratified to
ensure and promote the right of persons with
disabilities to enjoy fundamental rights in a way that
preserves their human dignity.
In the framework of the efforts made by the Iraqi
Government in the empowerment of Iraqi women, Iraq
has withdrawn its reservation on article 9 of the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, in accordance with the
provisions of article 8, part II of the Iraqi Constitution.
The latter article grants a child born to an Iraqi woman
the same right to obtain Iraqi citizenship as a child
born to an Iraqi man. In the era of the Saddam regime,
only children born to Iraqi men could obtain Iraqi
citizenship.
Within the framework of the efforts made by Iraqi
Government to develop the education sector in Iraq,
the Prime Minister announced the near launch of a
national strategy for education aimed at creating the
right foundation for a road map for the improvement of
education in the country and at strengthening
cooperation with international institutions and
organizations concerned with education.
On the regional and international levels, Saudi
Arabia and Oman have appointed non-resident
ambassadors to Iraq, while Palestine has appointed a
resident ambassador, each of whose credential letters
were received by President Jalal Talabani on 27 March.
Iraq welcomes those appointments and emphasizes the
Iraqi Government’s intention to strengthen relations
with Arab countries and fortify joint Arab cooperation
and solidarity.
On 11 March, Mr. Hoshyar Zebari, Minister for
Foreign Affairs, and Egyptian Foreign Minister
Mohamed Amr signed an agreement at the Egyptian
Foreign Ministry to immediately pay the money owed

8

to Egyptians who had worked in Iraq in the past but
had not been paid by the former regime.
On 16 February, the Council of Representatives
ratified the Iraqi National Monitoring Directorate to
prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. That step fulfilled Iraq’s obligation arising
from resolution 1957 (2010).
Iraq, which endured and suffered from Al-Qaida
and its affiliated terrorist groups before other countries,
warns the entire international community to remain
vigilant that the wave of Arab revolutions not be
hijacked by Al-Qaida or other terrorist groups.
Otherwise, people who are struggling for freedom,
pluralism and justice will discover that extremist
groups have stolen their spring, dreams and aspirations,
distorted the great principles for which they fought,
and tarnished the image of Islam and the values and
principles of patriotism.
A great deal of blood has been shed under the
banner of resisting the occupation in Iraq, and
thousands of civilians have been killed, although those
civilian were not part of any occupying force. Car
bombs and suicide attacks continued even after the
withdrawal of all foreign forces from Iraq, which
proves that fighting the occupation was simply a
pretext used by terrorists to shed the blood of Iraqi
citizens.
Since the outbreak of the crisis in Syria, Iraq has
upheld its rejection of the military option in dealing
with the Syrian people’s demands for freedom,
democracy and political pluralism. We have called on
the Syrian Government and the opposition to shun the
military option in order to avoid seeing convoys of
Syrian victims, civilian and military alike, because it
will ultimately exacerbate the conflict and throw the
country into civil war. History and a sense of moral
responsibility urge all of us to work to contain the
violence and the fire raging in Syria. We must exert
pressure on both sides of the conflict to engage in a
national dialogue, which we believe is the best option
for resolving the crisis in Syria. Iraq strongly supports
the efforts made by the Joint Special Envoy of the
United Nations and the League of Arab States,
Mr. Kofi Annan, to contain the crisis and resolve it
peacefully within a national framework.
With the help of UNAMI, and in particular the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Martin Kobler, 1,200 members of the People’s

12-28745

S/PV.6747

Mujahedin Organization of Iran have been transferred
from Camp Ashraf to Camp Liberty. The Iraqi
Government urges the Security Council to help relocate
those persons to other countries as the Iraqi
Government cannot allow them to stay in Iraq, in
accordance with the Iraqi Constitution.
On the situation between Iraq and Kuwait, Prime
Minister Nuri Al-Maliki visited the State of Kuwait on
14 February and met His Highness Sheikh Sabah
Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, the Emir of Kuwait. I
am pleased to inform the estimated members of the
Security Council that that visit brought about the final
and comprehensive settlement of many issues,
including the claims against Iraqi Airways by the
Government of Kuwait. The visit also emphasized
Iraq’s fulfilment of its obligations under relevant
Security Council resolutions, including the payment of
Iraq’s share of $600,000 to the United Nations to cover
the expenses of the border pillar maintenance project
and find a just solution to the problems of Iraqi
farmers. The visit also witnessed an agreement to
secure free navigation in Khawr Abdallah, through
cooperation and coordination between the two
countries. I am also pleased to inform Council
members that Iraq and Kuwait have agreed to hold the
second session of the Joint Ministerial Committee on

12-28745

29 April of this year in Baghdad to consider all
outstanding issues, particularly the issues of
compensation, missing persons and Kuwaiti properties.
My Government believes that that historic
visit — which was described by the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, during his visit to Kuwait on
28 March 2012, as an important step — and the results
achieved mark the beginning of a new stage of bilateral
relations between Iraq and Kuwait based on mutual
trust and will contribute to strengthening cooperation
between the two countries.
In conclusion, I would like to stress my
Government’s gratitude to the members of the Security
Council and for the role of UNAMI in Iraq, as well as
for the efforts made by Mr. Martin Kobler and the
UNAMI team in Iraq and the United Nations to provide
the support requested by the Iraqi Government, in
accordance with the mechanisms agreed upon between
the two sides.
The President: There are no more speakers
inscribed on my list.
I now invite members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on this subject.
The meeting rose at 10.50 a.m.

9
