United Nations

S/PV.4171

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-fifth year

4171

st meeting
Thursday, 13 July 2000, 12 noon.
New York

President:

Miss Durrant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Jamaica)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bangladesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Canada . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Namibia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Netherlands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ukraine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Listre
Mr. Ahmed
Mr. Angell
Mr. Shen Guofang
Mr. Levitte
Mr. Hasmy
Mr. Ag Oumar
Mr. Andjaba
Mr. van Walsum
Mr. Lavrov
Mr. Jerandi
Mr. Kuchynski
Mr. Eldon
Mr. Cunningham

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999)
and 1244 (1999).

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

00-53068 (E)
`````````

S/PV.4171

The meeting was called to order at 12 noon.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998),
1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Council agrees to extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Hédi Annabi, Assistant Secretary-General for
Peace-keeping Operations.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Annabi to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Hédi Annabi, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Peace-keeping Operations. I am pleased to
give him the floor.
Mr. Annabi: Since the last briefing provided to
the Security Council by Mr. Bernard Kouchner, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, on 9
June, last month, the activities of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
have focused on several key areas. At the forefront of
the Mission’s agenda has been the ongoing effort to
improve security throughout Kosovo. Special measures
have been taken to enhance and improve security
throughout Kosovo. Special measures have been taken
to enhance security for minority communities, and
UNMIK considers that the situation is showing some
signs of stabilization.
UNMIK also continues to concentrate on the
advancement of the Joint Interim Administrative
Structures process and on ensuring maximum
involvement in that process by all political groups.
Significant progress was achieved here with the return
of the Kosovo Serbs in the Interim Administrative
Council, the IAC, at the end of June. However, this
success has been tempered by the current suspension of

2

participation of the Democratic Party of Kosovo, the
PDK, in the same body.
Finally, preparations for elections have continued.
In general, registration results have been encouraging,
but the Kosovo Serb community and much of the
Kosovo Turkish population are not participating.
I will now touch on the various aspects of the
situation. I apologize in advance for what will be a
somewhat lengthy briefing, but there have been a
number of significant developments over the last
month.
I will first touch on the political situation.
In the face of escalating violence in late May and
early June, the Serb National Council of Gracanica
(SNC-G) temporarily suspended its participation in the
IAC and the Kosovo Transitional Council (KTC). The
suspension was lifted on 25 June when the SNC-G
voted to resume participation in the Joint Interim
Administration structures institutions for an additional
three months. The decision came in the wake of a
number of concerted steps on the part of the
international community to encourage the SNC-G to
resume its participation.
As part of the agreement concluded with the
SNC-G to resume its participation, on 29 June Bishop
Artemije and Special Representative Kouchner signed
a joint understanding that outlined steps to be taken in
order to further improve the security and living
conditions of the Kosovo Serb population. In reaction,
the Kosovo Albanian community expressed fears that
the implementation of that joint understanding might
lead to a delegation of security powers by UNMIK to
the Kosovo Serb population. Citing similar concerns,
Mr. Thaci decided to freeze his participation in the
IAC, and that of his party, PDK, in the KTC.
The meetings of the IAC and of the KTC at the
end of May and at the beginning of June focused
heavily on the upsurge of violence against Kosovo
Serbs. But both the IAC and the KTC issued statements
condemning in the strongest possible terms what in
many cases appears to be systematic violence against
members of minority communities. The three Kosovo
Albanian members of the IAC — Mr. Thaci,
Mr. Rugova and Mr. Qosja — also issued separate
statements supporting ethnic tolerance. In addition, the
Special Representative, together with the Kosovo
Albanian political leaders, visited the sites of two

S/PV.4171

egregious attacks against Kosovo Serbs in order to
publicly condemn all ethnically motivated violence.
The day after, the discussions of the IAC and the KTC
focused on the debate over the design of the electoral
system to be used in the proposed municipal elections.
On 8 July, the Special Representative signed the
regulation on the conduct of the municipal elections,
which accepted the central election commission’s
recommendations for a proportional system of voting
with open lists of candidates. This was opposed by Mr.
Thaci’s PDK party.
On 11 July, the IAC endorsed a draft regulation
on the structure and functions of municipal
administrations throughout Kosovo. The draft
regulation establishes provincial institutions for
democratic and autonomous self-government at the
municipal level and is, in UNMIK’s view, an important
step in the progressive transfer of administrative
responsibilities from UNMIK to the local authorities.
The endorsement by the IAC of this draft regulation
came in the absence of Mr. Thaci, who has indicated
that he does not support it. In addition, Mr. Qosja
opposed the draft provision establishing local
community offices.
Despite the recent violence and the general
refusal on the part of the Kosovo Serb community to
engage in the civil registration process, Kosovo Serb
representatives in some municipalities have begun to
participate in recent municipal board meetings. For
example, board meetings in Vitina and Novo Brdo, in
the region of Gnjilane, have been attended by Kosovo
Serb representatives since the end of last month.
However, in the mixed municipalities of the Pristina
region Serb representatives continue to refuse to
participate in the deliberations of the municipal
councils.
Turning to the security situation, the first two
weeks of June witnessed an increase in the frequency
of ethnically motivated attacks, primarily targeting
Kosovo Serbs. Between 31 May and 15 June, a total of
6 Kosovo Serbs were murdered and 10 injured in a
series of attacks. During the second week of this
month, there were also four grenade attacks against
members of the Kosovo Roma community. These
attacks, which took place at Stimlje, in the region of
Prizren, and in Mitrovica, left four Roma injured,
including, regrettably, two children.

UNMIK reports that the number of threats against
non-Serb families residing in northern Mitrovica is on
the rise. UNMIK continues to conduct home visits to
isolated Kosovo Albanian and Slav Muslim families to
identify needs for humanitarian aid, medical services
and security. Minority communities in urban Pristina
and north of the city also continue to report lack of
freedom of movement and access to essential services.
Beginning in the third week of June, Kosovo saw
several incidents of violence and unrest within Kosovo
Serb communities. One such incident took place in
northern Mitrovica on 21 June following the arrest by
UNMIK police of a Kosovo Serb suspected of stoning
a garbage collection truck driven by a Kosovo
Albanian. A crowd quickly formed and became violent
following the arrest, and 11 Kosovo Serbs and 8
UNMIK police officers were injured in the ensuing
fray. Seven vehicles belonging to UNMIK and four
belonging to non-governmental organizations were
damaged or destroyed. In the wake of the incident, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) temporarily suspended most of its
humanitarian activities in northern Mitrovica.
On 23 June, another violent incident took place in
Strpce, in the region of Gnjilane, following the
disappearance of a Kosovo Serb. A well-organized
group of Kosovo Serbs ransacked and vandalized the
UNMIK municipal building in Strpce, targeting the
offices of international employees. The body of the
missing local Serb was later discovered, revealing that
he had been murdered.
In response to this incident and other violent
protests in which the lives of Kosovo Force (KFOR)
soldiers were endangered, KFOR’s Multinational East
Brigade suspended protection for convoys entering and
leaving the town on 3 July. However, the suspension
was lifted three days later following the arrest of a
local Kosovo Serb charged with leading the crowd in
the 23 June incident, as well as the issuance of an
announcement by the local community leaders
declaring their readiness to cooperate with KFOR and
UNMIK in accordance with resolution 1244 (1999).
On 5 July explosions were reported in the Kosovo
Serb village of Velica Hoca, again in the region of
Prizren. Following those explosions, violent protests
erupted in which two United Nations vehicles were
destroyed. Members of the Serb community barricaded
the main road leading into the village. When UNMIK

3

S/PV.4171

police and KFOR arrived to investigate, local Kosovo
Serbs put their children on top of the barricades to
prevent KFOR and UNMIK police from proceeding.
The blockade was eventually dismantled and the crowd
dispersed.
A KFOR weapons search, which began on 15
June, resulted in the discovery of two concrete bunkers
filled with a large number of weapons, as well as a
training site close by, near Klecka village in the central
Drenica valley. Another cache of weapons was
discovered on 18 June. One of the bunkers showed
signs of having been recently accessed. The weapons
discovered included a large number of grenades,
mortars, small arms, ammunition and other explosives.
According to documents found at the site of the cache,
the weapons belonged to the former Kosovo Liberation
Army (KLA). Mr. Ceku, the Commander of the Kosovo
Protection Corps (KPC), has denied all knowledge of
the weapons caches and stated that it was “good for
Kosovo” that the caches had been discovered. An
investigation into the incident is under way.
In the early morning of 7 July, a violent
altercation occurred in the town of Streoc, in the Pec
region, involving Ramush Haradinaj, a former KLA
commander and founder of the new political party
known as the Alliance for the Future of Kosovo,
several members of the Kosovo Protection Corps,
Sedik Musaj, formerly associated with the Armed
Forces of Kosovo (FARC) and now aligned with the
Democratic League of Kosovo, and possibly other
individuals. Having been wounded in the incident, Mr.
Haradinaj sought medical assistance some hours later
from KFOR and was subsequently transported to the
United States hospital at Camp Bondsteel. It was
determined that his injuries could not be treated in
theatre, and he was evacuated to Landstuhl Regional
Medical Centre in Germany. UNMIK police is
conducting a full investigation with the support of
KFOR. Owing to his medical condition, Mr. Haradinaj
has yet to be interviewed by police investigators, and
UNMIK investigators will travel to Germany to
conduct the interview as soon as it is feasible.
The incident has received extensive coverage in
the local and international press, with widely varying
speculation being put forth regarding the possible
circumstances of this incident. UNMIK has cautioned
all concerned not to prejudge the ongoing extensive
police investigation. An international prosecutor and an

4

international investigating judge will be assigned to
handle the case.
I should like now to touch on the measures that
have been put in place by UNMIK to improve security.
In response to last month’s violence, UNMIK and
KFOR have continued to explore all possible avenues
for improving the security of minorities and increasing
their access to municipal services.
In Gnjilane, UNMIK has been working with
KFOR to assist Kosovo Serbs during the harvesting
period by enhancing security and enabling farmers to
purchase fuel, to which they have had limited access.
In that same region, speed-deterrent obstacles, which
are designed to prevent drive-by shootings, have been
introduced in Kosovo Serb villages and in mixed
villages. In northern Mitrovica, where low-level
harassment of Kosovo Albanians and Bosniacs
continues, the design and implementation of UNMIK
police and KFOR joint security operations has
continued to be refined. A total of 13 local community
officers, whose role is to facilitate the access of
Kosovo minority groups to a full range of municipal
services, have been deployed to this region.
In line with the joint understanding signed
between the Special Representative and Bishop
Artemije, UNMIK police has concentrated in recent
weeks on developing a special security task force
which is designing additional measures to combat
ethnically targeted violence. Its first priority is to
address the threat facing the Kosovo Serb community.
This task force is working in close cooperation with
KFOR to plan measures to enhance the application of
joint security operations.
Emphasis is being placed on building what is
called a partnership for security at the local community
and neighbourhood level. UNMIK police will assist in
educating the local population about crime prevention
and general security practices and will strengthen
information-sharing and cooperation at the local level.
This task force will also develop recommendations for
preventive
investigation
and
law-enforcement
measures, taking into account available UNMIK police
and KFOR resources.
Measures were also enacted by the Special
Representative to curb the threat posed by irresponsible
behaviour on the part of the local media, such as the
publication of inflammatory articles that might
endanger the lives of individuals. Two regulations

S/PV.4171

designed to govern the licensing and regulation of both
broadcast and print media have been promulgated by
Mr. Kouchner. The regulations include a code of
conduct and provide for sanctions for violations of the
regulations or of the code as well as an appeal process.
The regulation governing print media has already been
used against Dita, following that daily newspaper’s
publication of the names of Kosovo Serbs whom it
accused of war crimes.
As regards relations with the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, UNMIK has proposed the establishment of
a Joint Consultative Committee (JCC) in order to
facilitate dialogue on practical problems of mutual
concern with the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. The
terms of reference of this Joint Consultative Committee
are now under intensive discussions between UNMIK
and the Committee for Cooperation of the Government
of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in Pristina.
UNMIK believes that the putting in place of the Joint
Consultative Committee will be of considerable
importance, and it plans to focus its consultations
initially within that Committee on concrete issues of
immediate relevance to both sides, such as transport,
communications, postal services, trade, finance,
education and travel. UNMIK is hopeful that this Joint
Consultative Committee will be able to commence
activities shortly.
As regards the situation in southern Serbia, there
have been reports in the last few weeks of an increased
Serbian police presence throughout the ground security
zone, and on 21 June 13 families totalling 103 people
left Ternovci Vogel and crossed into Kosovo. These
newly displaced persons indicated that their flight was
prompted by a fear of reprisals after two elderly Serb
residents in their village were killed by unknown
assailants. Although this displacement was less
dramatic than the internally displaced flows
experienced in February and early March, it does
indicate that the situation in southern Serbia remains
fluid.
I should now like to turn to the election
preparations and to the registration process. The civil
registration process is now coming to a close, and
UNMIK reports that significant progress has been
made in the effort to register the population. As of the
end of last week, as of 7 July, 893,281 applications had
been received. Of these, 100,912 have been reviewed,
and UNMIK has been able to substantiate close to one

third of these cases. The total number of names placed
on the civil registry now stands at 812,644.
The campaign to register “habitual residents” of
Kosovo who are currently living abroad has also met
with marked success. The total number of approved
applications submitted outside Kosovo now stands at
55,352, with an additional 44,824 cases still under
review.
Despite the active participation of the Kosovo
Albanian population in the registration process, the
Kosovo Serb community and much of the Kosovo
Turkish community are continuing to boycott the
process. In the latest of many efforts made by UNMIK,
the Institution Building Pillar of UNMIK organized a
major meeting on 7 July in Leposavic with 42 Kosovo
Serb leaders from all over the province to discuss the
civil registration process and the upcoming elections.
All of the Kosovo Serb representatives present at that
meeting, including those of the SNC-Gracanica, the
SNC-Mitrovica and the Serb National Assembly,
agreed that Kosovo Serbs should not register until such
time as significant progress has been made with respect
to security and the return of Kosovo Serbs to their
homes in Kosovo.
For their part, most Kosovo Turk leaders have
preconditioned their support for the registration process
on a guarantee by UNMIK to reinstate the rights of
their community as set forth in the 1974 federal
constitution. Intensive efforts have been made by
UNMIK to find a compromise solution to this
particular issue, but with little success so far. UNMIK
has proposed a series of measures, many of which go
beyond the guarantees found in international
instruments such as the European Framework
Convention for the Protection of National Minorities
and the Declaration on the Rights of Persons Belonging
to National or Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic
Minorities adopted by the United nations General
Assembly. These measures included the use of the
Turkish language on future identification cards and the
translation of all UMNIK regulations into Turkish.
UNMIK is making a special effort in areas where
Kosovo Turks live to keep registration centres open for
longer hours until the end of the registration process.
On 8 July the Special Representative signed into
force Regulation 2000/39 on the municipal elections in
Kosovo. This Regulation establishes the basic
provisions governing the conduct of the upcoming

5

S/PV.4171

municipal elections. Under the Regulation, the Special
Representative is given the authority to determine the
date for Kosovo’s municipal elections, after
consultation with the Secretary-General. The first
municipal officers elected through these municipal
elections will serve two-year terms. Another important
element aimed at ensuring at even representation of all
segments of Kosovo society is a provision that at least
every third candidate be a woman.

working group on prisoners and missing persons met
with a delegation of ministers from the European
Parliament. The Kosovo Albanian representatives of
the working group expressed their concern regarding
the situation of Kosovo Albanians who are currently
held in prisons in Serbia proper. Representatives of the
Kosovo Serb community explained that they supported
the release or transfer of Kosovo Albanian detainees
held in Serbia proper.

I now turn briefly to humanitarian issues. Since
the beginning of June more than 11,460 persons have
returned to Kosovo voluntarily from various countries
in Western and Central Europe. To date — that is, since
the establishment of UNMIK last year — a total of
some 860,740 individuals have voluntarily returned to
Kosovo, that is, since June 1999.

At its meeting held during the first week of July,
the working group expressed its concern regarding the
treatment of Kosovo Albanians held in the Nis
detention facility, and it officially transmitted this
concern to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC).

Forced returns to Kosovo continue on a daily
basis, with more than 1,425 persons sent back during
the month of June and more than 350 returned during
the past week. These returns, mainly from Germany
and Switzerland, have included 50 persons with
criminal records. The high rate of forced returns has
stretched the capacity of the airport and reception
facilities as well as the absorption capacity of the local
public services and the host communities.

Turning to civil administration, work is
continuing on re-equipping the judicial system.
Bilateral support has played a key role in this effort. In
June, last month, the United States Government
donated a number of quick-start packages consisting of
essential office supplies and equipment. These
packages are being distributed to courts in four
municipalities, and further deliveries are planned for
the near future. The Swiss Government has also
confirmed the provision of 1 million deutsche marks
for Dubrava prison, and the Government of the
Netherlands has agreed to provide and pay for four
correctional officers for Ljlipjan prison.

Following the creation of the Joint Committee on
Returns in May, a steering committee was established
under the chairmanship of UNHCR. The role of this
steering committee is to conduct joint assessments of
potential return locations, through small teams of
representatives from UNMIK, KFOR and SNCGracanica. Joint assessments have so far been
undertaken for three locations proposed by the SNCGracanica. Progress, particularly in regard to what are
called “go and see visits”, has been set back by an
increase in violent attacks against Kosovo Serb
communities. However, the steering committee was
tasked on 29 June with coordinating the first go and see
visits of Kosovo Serbs to the province. The destination
of the visit is to be Slivovo.

A further 62 new local recruits have joined the
Kosovo Correctional Service since June. Appointments
to fill the vacant positions of local professional judges
and local lay judges in Kosovo will be approved by the
Special Representative by the end of this month. In the
meantime, to date the Special Representative has
appointed a total of five international judges and three
international prosecutors, who are now serving in the
district courts of Mitrovica, Pristina and Gnjilane.

A letter to Oliver Ivanovic of the SNC-Mitrovica
was also signed by the members of the Joint
Committee on Returns. It asked him to join the
Committee. However, so far he has not accepted that
offer.

Since the beginning of March, the Kosovo
Protection Corps has completed some 28 field projects
in which 1,450 of its members have participated. These
projects included refurbishing schools, infrastructure
repair and general cleaning up activities. Thirteen
additional field projects are currently ongoing and
planning for a further 50 projects is under way.

The issue of prisoners and missing persons
remains, of course, a pressing concern for all
communities. On 2 June representatives from the KTC

As regards the police component of UNMIK, as
of 8 July it had reached a total strength of 3,895 out of
an authorized strength of 4,718. This number includes

6

S/PV.4171

over 700 specialized police officers from six different
specialized police units and two additional specialized
police units are scheduled for deployment within the
next two months.
I would like to say a word about economic
reconstruction. Discussions within the Working Level
Steering Group, including major donors, the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World
Bank, were held on the Kosovo Consolidated Budget.
The Central Fiscal Authority estimates that there will
be a further requirement of up to DM50 million in
undesignated budgetary support and up to DM7.9
million in designated grants for the Kosovo Protection
Corps activities. No firm commitment on the level of
additional funds was given by the Working Level
Steering Group, but this issue will be considered
further at another review meeting in September.
On revenue collection, last week’s revenue
collection from customs, sales taxes and excise duties
stood at DM4.5 million. This was a very good week for
UNMIK, as this total exceeds the weekly target of
DM3 million.
The white paper on enterprise development
strategy has been presented to and received strong
support from representatives of major donors, the
World Bank and the IMF. The first steps in
implementing the strategy in this regard will be to
establish a basic commercial legal framework and an
ownership adjudication tribunal. An agreement for the
lease the Sharra cement factory was signed with
Holderbank, a Swiss investor, on 13 June. The tender
for the lease was the first of its kind in Kosovo.
Turning to utilities, on 20 June, the supervisory
board of the Kosovo Power Company approved the
action plan presented by the electricity company. The
action plan aims at improving the general financial
situation and management of the company. The power
situation in Kosovo has been severe over the past week
due to serious problems with generation capacity at
both power stations. These problems were exacerbated
by low coal production and the temporary absence of
power imports from other countries in the region.
To conclude, I would like to say that UNMIK will
continue in the coming weeks to concentrate on two
pressing issues: first, the security situation and,
secondly, the preparation for the municipal elections.
Members of the Security Council are encouraged to
provide both personnel and political support for the

UNMIK police component. As is clear from the
numbers I have given, international police officers
continue to be needed. Statements of support for ethnic
tolerance and denunciations of violence would also
help to underscore the international community’s
abhorrence of continued and targeted attacks on
minorities and the international community.
As regards the municipal elections, Kosovo Serbs
and Kosovo Turks should be encouraged to register, to
participate and to understand that UNMIK is
determined to continue the process of building
democracy and the best possible institutions in Kosovo,
in accordance with the mandate entrusted to it by this
Council.
Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Annabi for his useful and
comprehensive briefing. The hour is late and I will not
attempt to emulate him, either in length or in detail, but
I do want to make a few points which my delegation
feels are relevant to our consideration of the situation
in Kosovo as it now stands.
First, I would like to stress the importance that
the United Kingdom attaches to the decision of the
Kosovo Serbs, embodied by the Serb National Council
of Gracanica, to rejoin the joint administration
structures. That decision is right and brave and
deserves our full recognition.
At the same time, we regret the decision of
Hashim Thaci not to participate in the meetings of the
Joint Interim Administrative Structure (JIAS). As we
said last month to the Kosovo Serb delegation that was
in this Chamber during the briefing given by Special
Representative Kouchner, working with and within
those structures is the best way towards lasting
stability. We very much hope that Mr. Thaci will
reconsider his position soon.
Assistant Secretary-General Annabi rightly
concentrated on the security situation in Kosovo. We
remain concerned about continuing violence against
Serbs and other minorities. Mr. Annabi indicated the
usefulness of statements deploring ethnic violence and
asking for tolerance. He can take it that the United
Kingdom is fully behind those sentiments. Those on
the ground in Kosovo will be aware of the United
Kingdom-led programme of the Kosovo Force
(KFOR), Operation Trojan, although it may be less
familiar to some of us in this Chamber. That
programme is doing pioneering work in central Kosovo

7

S/PV.4171

to improve the security and quality of life of the Serb
community. We hope others will replicate this example
to help Serb communities elsewhere in Kosovo.
I would like also to draw attention to the vital
importance of expeditiously putting in place
procedures for the holding of municipal elections on
time and on schedule. The Special Representative has
yet to set a date for the elections, but I want to repeat
now, as I said during our last briefing on Kosovo, a
remark about the importance of registration and of
participation in those elections by all the communities
in Kosovo. It is of concern that the registration effort
among the Kosovo Serbs and Kosovo Turks has not
yielded the results we had hoped for. I would urge
everyone with an influence to redouble their efforts to
ensure that the registration process is as full and as
complete as possible.
My other comments will refer specifically to the
United Nations Interim Administration in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and, in particular, to staffing issues. We
welcome the decision taken by the Secretary-General
to devolve responsibility for staff recruitment to
UNMIK. We hope this will speed up the recruitment
process and help to alleviate staffing shortages within
UNMIK. It is very important that the Secretariat should
get this right. Adequate staffing is a key and vital
element of making the system work better.
As we have said before, reinforcing the justice
system remains of key importance. I am pleased to be
able to say that UNMIK has accepted two United
Kingdom candidates as prosecutors. In response to
UNMIK’s request, we have sent in more than 60
applications for court clerks. We are now gathering
applications for international judges and have received
over 250 expressions of interest. We hope these
applications can be processed quickly and turned into
people on the ground, so that the work that so urgently
needs to be done can be done.
Finally, the United Kingdom is playing its part in
stamping out organized crime, which has had such a
destabilizing effect throughout the Balkan region. We
are on course to deploy 20 police officers and other
specialists to form the core of the UNMIK criminal
intelligence unit in late August. We hope that the final
organizational arrangements, for us and other
contributors to that unit, can be completed quickly.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the Assistant Secretary-

8

General, Mr. Annabi, for his briefing. The development
of the situation in Kosovo during the month that has
elapsed since our most recent discussion of the subject
here has unfortunately emphasized that key provisions
of resolution 1244 (1999) remain unfulfilled. The
security situation for the non-Albanian population is
continuing to deteriorate. Neither military nor civilian
international presences have been able to do anything
about that. The problem of returning hundreds of
thousands of refugees and displaced persons to the
region has not been resolved.
We were interested to read an article in The New
York Times on 3 July that referred to a comment by the
former deputy head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
Mr. McNamara, to the effect that from the very outset
the leadership of that United Nations Mission did not
make any effective efforts to put and end to the
violence and that it tolerated intolerant and vengeful
behaviour. All the warnings to the extremist leaders
have remained merely words; they have not been
followed up with any specific actions. Mr. McNamara
correctly pointed out that the scale of the violence
against the minorities shows how systematic it is.
From the outset of UNMIK’s activities, no action
was taken to put an end to what has now turned into a
culture of impunity, so that ethnically based crimes go
unpunished under the auspices of international
presences. Mr. McNamara’s analysis corresponds with
the assessment in the report of Amnesty International
published last month, and notes the passivity of certain
divisions of the Kosovo Force (KFOR) in the face of
ethnic violence. This evaluation concurs to a large
extent with our analysis of the situation in Kosovo, and
given these conditions, Russia has clearly stated that it
cannot support the holding of municipal elections in
Kosovo this year.
We are not opposed to the holding of such
elections in principle, but we cannot close our eyes to
the fact that thus far not even the minimum necessary
conditions have been created to enable them to be truly
free, fair and democratic and thereby to serve as a basis
for further progress in the peace process in accordance
with resolution 1244 (1999). Such conditions can be
created only if security and safety is assured for all the
inhabitants of Kosovo and if there is freedom of
movement for all, an open and free political
environment and the safe return of refugees and
displaced persons, and if guarantees for freedom of

S/PV.4171

assembly, freedom of association and freedom of
speech are provided.
These are obvious facts. A detailed list of the
universal criteria for conditions for the holding of
elections — any elections — is to be found in the
document of the second Meeting of the Conference on
the Human Dimension of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), which was held in
Copenhagen 10 years ago. It is very likely that such
criteria are well known to all those who are preparing
for the elections in Kosovo. Furthermore, paragraphs 7
and 8 of that OSCE document were included as an
annex forming an integral part of the Rambouillet
documents that refer to elections in Kosovo. We note,
therefore, that the pre-electoral situation in that region
is not in conformity with all of these requirements, first
and foremost from the point of view of genuine safety
and security for the non-Albanian population. A similar
conclusion was reached recently by Human Rights
Watch.
There is no machinery to date which can
guarantee that the voices of the non-Albanian
inhabitants of Kosovo will be heard, or ensure that they
will be represented in the local organs of power. Not
only would the non-participation of hundreds of
thousands of such people in the elections distort both
the ethnic and political picture in Kosovo, but this in
turn would have a destabilizing effect on the situation
in the region, including outside Kosovo.
We are convinced that under current conditions
we cannot force through the holding of elections,
because we would thereby block all the efforts being
made to create a generally democratic and multi-ethnic
society in Kosovo. The policy being pursued to hold
elections at all costs may simply lead to the
legalization of the structures of the Kosovo Liberation
Army (KLA), which, under the cover of the Kosovo
Protection Corps, continues to indulge in lawlessness. I
would also like to state that, in view of the possible
consequences, the possible destabilization of the
situation in the region that might result from the
holding of the elections, we believe that the matter
cannot be resolved by the leaders of UNMIK alone.
UNMIK is directly linked to peace and security in the
region and, therefore, the matter should be given
serious consideration by the Security Council.
We are greatly concerned about the new facts that
are being revealed about the violations of resolution

1244 (1999). Mr. Annabi told us that huge stocks of
weapons are still being discovered. We know about
that. It is revealing that, after the discovery of such
weapons — which, as Mr. Annabi said, show every
sign of being KLA weapons — the leaders of the
Albanian separatists organized demonstrations and
meetings to protest their confiscation. At those
meetings they even demanded that the weapons be
returned to the Albanians and that KFOR end its search
for weapons. We would like to know exactly what the
leaders of UNMIK and KFOR said in response to these
demonstrations. In any case, we can confirm that there
has been no real disarmament of the KLA.
Previous speakers have already mentioned that
the actions of Hashim Thaci, who started the boycott of
the Interim Administrative Council when the Kosovo
Serbs were returning to it, did not serve the cause of
reaching a settlement. We know that Hashim Thaci also
gave Mr. Kouchner an ultimatum in the form of a
statement consisting of 10 paragraphs setting out
conditions for his return to the Interim Administrative
Council. Such conditions include revising the
agreements between the Serbs and UNMIK and more
active involvement of KLA ex-combatants in local
police forces, among others. We would be interested to
know how Mr. Kouchner responded to that ultimatum.
We wish to recall that we still have not received any
appropriate replies to the concerns we expressed
previously in connection with violations of resolution
1244 (1999). We know well what the questions were,
but no replies have been received so far. The questions
relate to the identity cards published by UNMIK,
where it said “Kosovo” under “citizenship”; to the fact
that diplomatic offices are being opened in Kosovo and
are being visited by representatives of other countries
without notice being given to the authorities of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia; and to many other
facts.
UNMIK continues to attempt to amend the status
of the Slatin airport in Pristina. The UNMIK leadership
is trying to unilaterally amend the text of the militarytechnical agreement of 3 June 1999, in violation of the
Helsinki Agreement. We have mentioned this
frequently, but the attempts continue. No one has
explained to us yet why the provisions of resolution
1244 (1999) have not been fulfilled, regarding the
return of agreed-upon contingents of Yugoslav
servicemen and policemen, why an agreement has not
been reached with Belgrade on the status of foreign

9

S/PV.4171

missions in Kosovo and why proper cooperation has
not been arranged with the Government of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia. We believe that a rather
belated step to correct this situation might be to start
work in the joint consultative committee, which was
referred to today by Mr. Annabi.
In this room one month ago, our delegation drew
attention to a specific document which confirms that
among the leaders of the Kosovo Protection Corps
there are people with a criminal past, who have been
involved in murder and provocation, of whom UNMIK
and KFOR are aware. However, no response has been
received in connection with these facts. Recently, we
learned through non-governmental organizations that
Kosovo has turned into a major staging point for drug
smuggling into Europe. However, we have seen
nothing in the Secretariat reports on this topic. We
request the Secretariat to inform the Security Council
whether or not it knows anything about drug trafficking
through Kosovo.

major issues raised at that meeting was the question of
restoring dialogue between the communities within the
Joint Administrative Structures. A Kosovo Serb
delegation was present, and their concerns were
brought to the Council’s attention. The Kosovo Serb
representatives have since decided to participate again
in the Joint Administrative Structures set up by the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). We must welcome this decision and
recall that all the Kosovo communities should enjoy
equal security. Cooperation among representatives of
all Kosovars and international organizations can only
serve to promote this and make it possible to set up
democratic institutions in which all acknowledge the
others.
Of course, difficulties remains. Thus, we have
taken note of what Mr. Thaci has said. We know that
UNMIK and Mr. Kouchner are continuing their efforts
to find a solution, and we encourage them in that
direction.

In conclusion, Kosovo is, of course, big politics.
But this should not be big politics for just one person,
but the general policy for all members of the Security
Council and of the United Nations. We have a
consensus resolution, resolution 1244 (1999), which
incorporates this policy on the behalf of the
international community, but it is not being
implemented and is even being violated in many key
aspects. Russia will continue to seek the remedy of this
situation so that the Kosovo settlement plan, which was
unanimously approved by the Security Council, will be
fully and comprehensively implemented.

Secondly, the next important stage will be the
holding of local elections. Those elections may cause a
genuine democratic shock among the Kosovar
population, which will be positive for the development
of this society. It is therefore essential that the elections
be prepared meticulously. It is necessary to continue
encouraging the Kosovar Serbs to participate. By
creating impediments to registration and thus to
participation of Kosovar Serbs in the elections,
Mr. Milosevic is preventing them from deciding their
own destiny and is showing that he is not, as he as
pretends to be, the defender of their interests.

Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): I wish, at
the outset, to thank you, Madam President, because this
meeting devoted to Kosovo is taking place in a setting
that makes it possible for States not members of the
Council to hear firsthand, at an open meeting,
information furnished by the Secretariat. It is our wish
that this type of free and interactive format be retained
to the extent possible at open briefings.

Thirdly, UNMIK’s success does not rest solely
with the establishment of political and administrative
structures allowing future coexistence to prevail in
Kosovo. Success also depends on its action to restore
basic public services, rebuild housing and reopen
schools. That counts above all in the eyes of the
population.

In this spirit and in response to the very
comprehensive briefing given by Mr. Annabi, the
French delegation will confine itself to three brief
comments and one question.
First, on 9 June 2000, Mr. Kouchner came before
the Council and gave us an overall assessment of the
situation in Kosovo, one year after the adoption of
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999). One of the

10

The success of UNMIK has been possible thanks
to contributions provided from the onset of the
operation and, in particular, thanks to the contribution
of the European Union. The European Union is still by
far the major contributor to Kosovo, with a
contribution of more than 3 billion euros in 1999 and
2000 in the civilian domain. Its member States provide
almost two thirds of KFOR’s troops, bringing the

S/PV.4171

European Union’s total contribution to 8 billion euros
for those two years.
Finally, I have one question. UNMIK must
continue to have the necessary resources for its work,
and particularly in the area of personnel. Could the
Secretariat give us its assessment of personnel needs
and steps planned to cope with the difficulties caused
by rotation and departures in summer?
Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): As
in the past, we see positive trends in Kosovo in the
context of mixed and even troubling developments. We
are pleased to note the continued leadership of
Mr. Kouchner, the effective working relationship
between the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the Kosovo Force
(KFOR), and the responsiveness of the Mission to the
many difficult problems on the ground.
The level of violence remains unacceptable. We
regret it; we want it stopped. But we should not be
surprised. As we have all come to understand, there are
no quick and easy fixes, just the continued requirement
to seek progress. The progress that the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) is
making to find qualified international judges, the
cooperation between UNMIK police and the Kosovo
Force (KFOR), and agreements such as the one with
Bishop Artemije on security are all reassuring.
However, as the Council’s own mission to Kosovo
stressed, we must be realistic in how we evaluate the
situation on the ground and how we look at the efforts
of UNMIK and KFOR.
We applaud KFOR’s recent success in identifying
arms caches and the ongoing efforts to strengthen
control of the Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC). We are
heartened by UNMIK’s determined efforts to find the
difficult balance between freedom of the press and
security for individuals.
We continue to believe that in addition to
strengthening the rule of law, the solution to the
violence lies in the political process and the determined
support of the international community.
Elections and a responsible governing structure
are the best way to temper passions. We applaud the
decision of the Kosovo Serbs to rejoin the joint interim
administration. We are also encouraged that UNMIK
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) have registered over 800,000 people

for the upcoming municipal elections in the fall. They
continue to look for ways to encourage Serbs and other
minorities to participate in this process. This is
important, and we should all join them in doing so.
Finally, we note that the United States has
forwarded some 50 résumés of qualified candidates for
staff positions in UNMIK in response to the appeal
from the Secretariat. We will continue to support this
process, and we encourage others to do so as well so
that UNMIK has the staff and resources it needs to
accomplish its difficult mandate.
I would also like to second Mr. Annabi’s call for
personnel and political support for the developing
police force, and for our condemnation of violence no
matter where it originates.
Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation is grateful
to Assistant Secretary-General Hédi Annabi for his
comprehensive and extremely useful briefing. The
situation in Kosovo continues to require the close
attention of the Security Council, hence the importance
of regular briefings given to Council members and the
larger membership of the Organization.
My delegation would like to focus on a limited
number of issues of particular importance to us.
First, the still-unsettled, and indeed precarious,
security situation in Kosovo, as described by Mr.
Annabi, remains a matter of very serious concern to my
delegation. We continue to give our full support to the
ongoing efforts of both the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the
Kosovo Force (KFOR) to address this serious problem.
We have also emphasized on previous occasions the
need for the leaders of all the communities in Kosovo
to play their constructive role to contribute to these
efforts. We note some positive responses and actions
taken in this regard.
We welcome the signing of last month of joint
declarations at both Pristina and Gnjilane, in which the
leaders of the Albanian, Serb and Turkish communities
condemned all acts of violence and terrorism directed
against any inhabitants of the two municipalities. At
the same time, they committed themselves to work
together for common peace and prosperity. This is
indeed a very heartening development that represents a
concrete contribution towards lessening inter-ethnic
tension and that should be emulated by the other

11

S/PV.4171

municipalities
Mitrovica.

throughout

Kosovo,

especially

in

Speaking of Mitrovica, the current de facto
division of the city is unacceptable and must be
reversed as soon as possible. Furthermore, the outbreak
of a series of violence and rioting in the northern part
of the town late last month — where UNMIK
personnel and the staff of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and
other international personnel, as well as their offices
and transport and other facilities were subjected to
attacks by the Serbs — should be strongly condemned.
Those responsible for these acts should be held
accountable. On this point we have read about possible
involvement by outside elements in those attacks and
acts of intimidation. We wonder whether Mr. Annabi is
in a position to confirm those reports and to tell us
what actions have been taken to prevent such
occurrences.
We note the signing on 29 June of the Joint
UNMIK-Serb National Council (SNC) Understanding,
which lays down additional steps to improve the
situation of the Serb community in Kosovo. We
certainly consider the initiative a very important part of
UNMIK’s efforts to improve the level of freedom,
security and fundamental rights of the Serb community.
However, we feel that the agreement by the Serb
National Council of Gracanica to participate in the
Joint Administrative Structures as observers for
another three months, as its response to the
Understanding, fell short of expectations. We, like
others in the Security Council, have called for their
full, active and unqualified participation in the Joint
Administrative Structures.
Secondly, the signing of the Joint UNMIK-SNC
Understanding has drawn a negative reaction from
some quarters of the Kosovo Albanian community. At
least, the leadership of one of Kosovo’s largest political
parties, the Kosovo Democratic Party (PDK), has
decided to withdraw from the Interim Administrative
Council (IAC). This is a serious setback. We would
also appreciate it Assistant Secretary-General Annabi
could enlighten us on any efforts being made to
encourage the PDK to reconsider its position and return
to the IAC. Their return and full participation is
important. In this regard, we wish to underscore the
importance for UNMIK to continue with the ongoing
efforts at close and all-inclusive consultations with
leaders of all Kosovo communities so as to further

12

strengthen the IAC. We believe the efforts to engage
local leaders and populations in the administration of
Kosovo should be even more vigorously pursued at this
critical stage so as to fully prepare the Kosovars to
handle their own affairs.
My third point relates to the civil registration
process and the holding of municipal elections in
Kosovo this fall, for which, as Mr. Annabi has
indicated in his briefing, preparations are well
underway. We welcome Mr. Kouchner’s issuance of
UNMIK Regulation 2000/39 last Saturday, which
outlines the necessary law governing the proposed
municipal elections. We have urged all communities to
participate in the registration process. We look forward
to the successful conduct of the elections, which will
lay a viable foundation for the future of Kosovo. We
would be grateful for additional details as to the status
of the registration and whether UNMIK expects to
attain the target number of 1.3 million people
registered by the closing date, on 15 July.
Finally, my delegation, along with many other
members of the Council, had earlier expressed our
strong support for the appointment of a special envoy
of the Secretary-General to look into the issue of
detainees and missing persons for reasons we had
already explained — not the least of which is the need
to resolve this sensitive and emotive issue in the larger
interest of reconciliation among the Kosovars. We
would be grateful if Mr. Annabi could update us on this
important matter.
In conclusion, my delegation wishes to reiterate
once again its full support and appreciation to UNMIK
and Mr. Kouchner for the efforts they have made in the
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999) in Kosovo.
Important achievements have indeed been made, but
many challenges still lie ahead before self-sustaining
peace and stability can be established in Kosovo.
Hence the need for the sustained and strong support of
the Council and members of the international
community for the efforts currently underway in
Kosovo.
Ms. Moglia (Argentina) (spoke from Spanish):
We would like to thank Mr. Annabi for the information
he provided us this morning.
Since the meeting which the Council held on 9
June to hear a briefing by the Special Representative,
Mr. Bernard Kouchner, institutional advances have
been registered that include the establishment of the

S/PV.4171

office of the Ombudsperson. This institution is
synonymous with democracy and respect for human
rights, and we hope that it will begin its work soon. Its
multi-ethnic and independent character will enable it to
gain the trust of the individuals, groups and
organizations which it is designed to serve.
Another factor we deem important because it
relates to the very essence of the agenda for
coexistence is the decision of the Serb National
Council (SNC) to resume participation in the work of
the joint institutions, even though it will do so as an
observer and for a period of three months, not as a fully
fledged member. We are aware that the SNC’s decision
is the result of the signing of an Understanding with
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) whose goal is the adoption of
concrete measures to guarantee the freedom, security
and fundamental human rights of the Serb community
in Kosovo. We hope that this agreement will be
interpreted by the Serb community as proof positive
that UNMIK and KFOR are committed to achieving a
better future for all of the inhabitants of Kosovo.
We hope also that the Serb community in Kosovo
will, for its part, cooperate decisively in the creation of
a secure environment, not only for its own benefit but
for the benefit of all. We also extend this appeal to the
Kosovar Albanians.
That is why we deem unwise, to say the least, the
decision taken by the leader of the Kosovo Democratic
Party to suspend its participation in the Joint Interim
Administrative Structure in response to the signing of
the aforementioned agreement between the Serb
National Council and UNMIK.
It is imperative that everyone understand that in
Kosovo there must be room for all ethnic groups. As
we have noted on other occasions, we believe that the
next municipal elections will represent a good
opportunity to ensure that everyone in Kosovo
understands that life in democracy is based on
participation, not exclusion. That is why we sincerely
hope that all of the communities will participate in this
process.
A democratic society, in addition to providing the
opportunity to elect legitimate representatives, requires
that justice and the rule of law prevail. That is why we
must continue to work to put an end to acts of
vengeance between ethnic groups and to bring their
perpetrators to justice. These efforts must involve the

media, which, under the pretext of freedom of the
press, incite hatred and fuel the desire for vengeance.
We are concerned by the recent discovery by
KFOR of large caches of arms. Though on many
occasions we have been told that in this region it is
common practice to carry a weapon and that the
borders are porous, we must recall that resolution 1160
(1998), which imposes a weapons embargo and other
prohibitions, remains in force and must be complied
with, in particular by neighbouring countries.
Clearly reconciliation will be difficult to achieve
if the refugees and displaced persons are not afforded
the opportunity to return to a secure environment and if
there is no resolution to the question of missing
persons and persons who are being held in Serbian
prisons.
Finally, we wish to express our gratitude and
support to UNMIK and the Kosovo Force.
Mr. Angell (Canada): I wish to thank Mr. Annabi
for his very comprehensive briefing. We would like to
add only a few brief remarks to what has already been
said by others.
Special Representative Kouchner’s issuance of
the municipal election law for Kosovo, which Mr.
Annabi has spoken of, is an important further step
towards free and fair elections in the fall. Selfgovernment on the local level will give Kosovars a
chance to elect the leaders who conduct the politics
which affect people most directly.
We are particularly pleased that, through
extensive consultations with both local representatives
and international organizations, the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
has decided on a system which will create optimal
conditions for candidates to participate in local politics.
Pluralism will be promoted by the use of a
proportional system with open lists. Representatives of
smaller parties, groups or communities will stand a fair
chance of being elected to office. The requirement that
one third of all candidates on the top of the lists be
women will reinforce the importance of equitable
representation for all segments of society.
UNMIK faces important challenges in organizing
free and fair elections. The support of the international
community is essential if UNMIK is to succeed. Efforts
must be made to prevent violence and intimidation

13

S/PV.4171

from being a factor in the elections. Ongoing intensive
security measures are clearly needed in this regard.
UNMIK’s actions to ensure that the media refrain from
publishing information which can reasonably be
expected to incite hatred, intolerance or violence are
also important. We encourage UNMIK to continue to
monitor closely media operations in the run-up to
elections in order to maintain civil law and order and to
protect human rights.
As the close of the registration process
approaches, we believe that all Kosovars have an
interest in participating in the electoral process. Full
participation is the best guarantee for all communities
to be fairly represented at all levels of public
administration and to contribute to the shaping of the
future of the province.
Lastly, we support the creation of an
ombudsperson institution in Kosovo and welcome the
recent signing of its regulation by Mr. Kouchner. This
institution can contribute in a meaningful way to the
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999). It will
provide Kosovars of all ethnic backgrounds with a
legal recourse against the violation of their human
rights. We hope that Mr. Nowicki will start his
important work as soon as possible.
Mr. Chen Xu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like at the outset to thank Mr. Annabi for his
briefing. We have taken note of the progress achieved
by the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in
Kosovo
(UNMIK)
under
very
difficult
circumstances, especially in the areas of infrastructure
reconstruction, institution-building, the resettlement of
refugees and the recovery of the economy.
We hope that UNMIK will increase its efforts to
facilitate the participation of all parties and all ethnic
groups in the Interim Administrative Council, thereby
continuing to guarantee the multinational character of
Kosovo.
The situation in Kosovo remains very serious.
The Kosovo Serbs and other minority groups have been
the victims of numerous attacks, and their human rights
continue to be violated. We are deeply concerned about
these developments, as these acts are obviously
organized and premeditated. Investigations of these
human rights violations have not yielded any results,
and their perpetrators remain unpunished; indeed, there
is a very serious situation of impunity. Facts have
shown that the acts of violence committed in Kosovo

14

are not ordinary acts of revenge or criminal acts, but
part of an attempt to turn Kosovo into an area inhabited
only by Kosovar Albanians. This trend is becoming
increasingly obvious, which is very dangerous.
We are also very concerned at the fact that
Serbian
refugees
are
encountering
numerous
difficulties in the repatriation process, and that very
few people have returned. On the one hand, the
extremists among the Kosovo Albanians have resorted
to acts of terror to discourage the Serbs from returning
to their homes. At the same time, acts of kidnapping
and murder have been committed against the refugees
who have returned. The homes of the Serbs have been
taken over or burned or looted. On the other hand, the
protection measures of the Kosovo Force (KFOR) are
not effective enough. Although the committee to help
repatriate the Serb refugees has been established, not
enough work has been done to adopt actual measures.
Given the aforementioned circumstances, we are
concerned that the election be conducted under safe,
free and just conditions.
All in all, the situation in Kosovo is very serious.
This shows that resolution 1244 (1999) has not been
carried out in a comprehensive manner. We hope
UNMIK and the Kosovo Force will make greater
efforts to turn the situation around.
Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I too
would like to thank you, Madam President, for having
convened this open meeting and to thank Mr. Annabi
for the exhaustive statement he has just made to us.
Not long ago, on the occasion of the first
anniversary
of
the
United
Nations
Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), the
Council focused in detail on the evolution of the
situation. At that time, in the light of the report of the
Secretary-General and the statement of his Special
Representative, the Council conducted a minute
analysis of the situation. The situation has certainly
improved, but it remains fragile and unstable. Like
other delegations we feel that this was an interim report
and that it behoves the international community to
continue to track the situation steadily and periodically.
The critical emergency phase in Kosovo has
passed without major incident. The number of refugees
and displaced persons returning to Kosovo has reached
900,000, and basic social services have been restored
and are functioning better, promoting a return to
normalcy.

S/PV.4171

These grounds for hope, however, should not hide
the often tragic reality in Kosovo and the tense
relations among the communities. We would like here
to express our concern about the wave of violence
targeting the United Nations Mission and other
international organizations that are coming to the aid of
the inhabitants of this region. This wave of violence is
unacceptable and is jeopardizing the joint efforts of the
international community, as is the ethnic violence
spurred by hatred and intolerance and directed at
minorities. These things are to be condemned, and the
authors of such acts should be prosecuted so as not to
be allowed to act with impunity.
I would also like to address the question of the
organization of the municipal elections. We think this
is a decisive stage that should make it possible for the
minorities to be represented in the municipal councils
and in the decision-making bodies, and thus help
establish the principles of multi-ethnic peaceful
coexistence. We hope that the electoral campaign will
focus on the future of the region and on the protection
of minorities. We will follow with interest the
registration process and the establishment of electoral
lists.
The United Nations Mission should give priority
to the issue of demining. We appreciate the work being
done by those countries that are actively participating
in the demining operation, and we urge the
international community to support the efforts of
UNMIK and of the Kosovo Force (KFOR) in this area,
so that the minefields that remain in Kosovo can be
completely cleared.
We have already spoken on the question of the
detainees and displaced persons. For us this is a
constant source of concern. The inhabitants of Kosovo
cannot become reconciled with one another if this
question is not definitively resolved. An investigation
should be carried out regarding disappeared and
missing persons so as to learn what has happened to
them. So long as this wound is not healed, it will be
difficult to establish a truly multi-ethnic Kosovo. We
reiterate here our support for the nomination of a
special envoy for missing persons.
It is also important to note that the economic
situation in Kosovo continues to improve. Economic
prosperity will promote stability and social well-being.
In this respect we feel that UNMIK must play a leading

role in restoring confidence among investors in the
future of this region.
We cannot overemphasize the need to promote a
culture of peace, tolerance and multi-ethnic peaceful
coexistence as the foundation for any lasting solution,
not only for Kosovo, but for the entire region of the
Balkans.
Lastly, I would like once again to pay tribute to
the United Nations Mission in Kosovo and to the
dedication of its staff, as well as to all those who are
active in the field. I would like to recall the positive
role being played by moderate parties that have
decided to work with UNMIK to achieve a better future
for the entire region.
Mr. Kuchynski (Ukraine): I would like first of
all to thank Mr. Annabi for his very useful and
comprehensive briefing. We took note with satisfaction
of a number of positive developments over the past few
weeks in the area. Still, in view of the general situation
in the province, we are not very optimistic.
Ukraine welcomes the fact that, largely due to the
efforts of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), the Serb National
Council took the decision to rejoin the Interim
Administrative Council and the Kosovo Transitional
Council (KTC) as observers, after having withdrawn
for several weeks. We applaud the signing on 29 June
of the joint UNMIK-Serb National Council
understanding on the participation of Kosovo Serb
representatives in the Joint Interim Administrative
Structure institutions. The document laid out concrete
steps to be taken by UNMIK to enhance security and
access to services for the Kosovo Serb community, in
particular the creation of the UNMIK Police Special
Security Task Force. We consider these measures
extremely important and timely, and in our view they
are aimed at easing the hardships faced by the Serb
community. At the same time, we regret the decision of
the Kosovo Democratic Party (PDK) leader, Mr. Thaci,
to suspend temporarily his participation in interim
structures, in the wake of the above agreement. With
the municipal elections coming, political games of this
sort are counter-productive.
My delegation views positively the UNMIK
efforts to build up the judiciary system in Kosovo
through the further appointment of international judges
and prosecutors to a number of district courts in
Mitrovica, Gnjilane and Pristina. However, we would

15

S/PV.4171

like more clarity about the concept of establishing a
Kosovo war and ethnic crimes court, as proposed by
UNMIK, and about the correlation between its
jurisdiction and that of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia. I would be grateful
to Mr. Annabi for additional information on this
subject.
We welcome yesterday’s nomination by the
Special Representative of the Ombudsperson for
Kosovo, to investigate and mediate complains from
individuals, groups and organizations about possible
abuses of power by international and local authorities.
It is our hope that the creation of this post will
contribute to establishing the rule of law and promote
reconciliation between ethnic groups.
We remain convinced that progress towards
turning Kosovo into a peaceful and tolerant,
democratic and self-governing entity within the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia cannot be achieved until and
unless all ethnic groups’ basic human rights — most of
all the right to life — are protected. Unfortunately, the
general situation regarding the security of the national
minorities has not improved. On the contrary, the
systematic and ongoing violence against non-Albanian
minorities in Kosovo, especially against remaining
Serbs and Gypsies, is on the rise. Therefore, we cannot
be fully satisfied with the activities of UNMIK and the
Kosovo Force (KFOR). While acknowledging their
efforts to promote an atmosphere of safety and security,
we encourage them to take a more assertive approach
to stop all kinds of violence, as well as to eliminate the
illegal possession of weapons. For example, the huge
arms cache discovered by KFOR in Drenica in late
June, allegedly belonging to the former Kosovo
Liberation Army (KLA), proved that the process of
disarmament has not been effective and that there is an
illegal arms flow in Kosovo. In this connection, we feel
that the relevant Security Council Committee could be
more effective.
We are similarly concerned by the increased
number of attacks on UNMIK and KFOR personnel
and their property. Such actions are absolutely
unacceptable. My delegation welcomes the resumption
of operations in northern Mitrovica by the
humanitarian pillar of UNMIK, other United Nations
agencies and non-governmental organizations.
In the context of the preparatory work for the
municipal elections to be held in October, my

16

delegation is profoundly concerned by the fact that
almost no Serbs have so far registered to vote. As we
stated earlier, the abstention from participation of
Kosovo Serbs in the civil registration process and
municipal elections could throw their results into
question and undermine the political credibility of the
United Nations. We learned with interest of the
UNMIK plan to establish quotas for national minorities
in the municipal councils, irrespective of their
participation in the elections. In our view, this
approach, despite its good motives, could contradict
the very notion of democratic elections and does not
solve the problem of the participation of Serbs.
Last but not least, since the problem of the lack of
UNMIK police personnel is still very critical, let me
draw the attention of the Secretariat to the current
situation of Ukraine’s offer to provide UNMIK with a
special unit of 115 policemen. Such a unit has been in
standby readiness for a couple of weeks now, awaiting
the United Nations inspection team to come to Ukraine
at the beginning of July to authorize the unit’s
deployment. However, the United Nations inspection
has been postponed several times for indefinite periods.
We are really disappointed by the inconsistency of the
United Nations Secretariat in tackling this issue, which
is incompatible with the urgent need for additional
police personnel in Kosovo, as was confirmed by Mr.
Annabi today. We call on the Secretariat to re-address
this matter as soon as possible.
Finally, let me also ask Mr. Annabi about the
current state of and prospects for the adoption of the
draft municipal regulation, which is meant to define the
responsibilities and powers of municipalities. Just a
few days ago, we received the UNMIK regulation on
the municipal elections in Kosovo, which, without the
regulation on the municipalities themselves, seems to
be incomplete.
Mr. Ahmed (Bangladesh): You, Madam, have the
appreciation of my delegation for holding this open
meeting of the Council on the situation in Kosovo.
May I also begin by thanking Mr. Hedi Annabi
for updating us on the issue. While many positive
developments have been taking place in Kosovo under
the United Nations administration, we feel that there
should be a speedier return to normalcy of the situation
in Kosovo. In this connection, we would like to make
the following points.

S/PV.4171

First, as to staffing requirements, we are
concerned that the
United
Nations
Interim
Administration in Kosovo (UNMIK) has not been able
to attain the desired level of staffing for civil
administration and civilian police, as requested by the
Secretary-General. There is no doubt that the situation
needs further improvement. However, in addition to the
ongoing efforts, the prerequisites include a full
complement of police personnel, judges and civilian
administration personnel, among others. Unless we can
ensure the smooth operation of the civil administration
with the requisite strength, the restoration of the
desired level of security will doubtless be delayed.
My second point refers to missing persons and
detainees. We have referred to this persistent problem
quite a number of times in the Council. The persons
who remain missing and captive are obviously the
source of constant agonies and anxiety to their
families. The continuation of such an unfortunate
situation
breeds
mistrust
and
is
therefore
counterproductive to attempts at building interethnic
harmony. The sooner the problem of missing persons is
resolved, the better it will be for the outlook for peace.
In this context, we support the appointment of a special
envoy of the Secretary-General for missing persons and
detainees in Kosovo.
My third point refers to elections. We are
encouraged by the steady progress towards the holding
of municipal elections. The recent draft regulation on
the structure and function of municipal administrations
throughout Kosovo, which was endorsed by Kosovo’s
Interim Administrative Council, is indeed a welcome
development. We should believe that defining the
powers and responsibilities of the municipalities is a
prelude to establishing institutions for democratic and
autonomous self-government at the municipal level and
is an appropriate step towards the gradual transfer of
administrative responsibilities from UNMIK to local
authorities.
My fourth point refers to economic activity. The
pace of economic activity in Kosovo has been slowly
picking up. It is, however, still insufficient for the
creation of requisite job opportunities for the people.
The economy needs a significant boost, to which the
international community and organizations can and
should play an important role by providing an infusion
of appropriate help and assistance. This will give the
people of Kosovo the optimism to look forward to the

future, rather than being haunted by their past miseries
and plunging into desperate action and adventures.
In conclusion, I would like to say that the
restoration of peace in the region, which has been a
hotspot of conflict and inter-ethnic violence for a long
time, is a task of immense complexity. Nonetheless, the
notable progress already made shows that this is not
impossible. What we need to do in the Council is to
reiterate our strong support for the process of
reconstruction and reconciliation already under way in
Kosovo.
Mr. Scheffers (Netherlands): In view of the late
hour and therefore the general desire to exhaust the list
of speakers, I will be brief.
Like other delegations, we attach the highest
priority to the preparations for the municipal elections
to be held this fall. We welcome the fact that
Mr. Kouchner has now signed the regulation on the
conduct of these elections. We should therefore
continue convincing the Kosovo Serbs that it is in their
own interest to participate in these elections, meant to
establish local self-government as a major step towards
a truly multi-ethnic Kosovo. We also therefore continue
to be concerned at the ongoing violence committed
against the minority communities, the personnel of the
Kosovo Force (KFOR) and local politicians, including
recent clashes among the Albanian parties themselves.
We have expressed our strong support for
Mr. Kouchner on several occasions, but this time we do
so with added conviction on account of his special
arrangements for Kosovo Serbs. We reject the criticism
voiced by some Albanian quarters that these undermine
the principle of a unified and multi-ethnic Kosovo. In
the present circumstances, additional protection for
minorities is more than justified. We therefore call on
Mr. Hashim Thaci to resume his participation in the
Joint Interim Administrative Structure as soon as
possible.
Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): We, too, would like to
thank Assistant Secretary-General Annabi for his
comprehensive briefing on the situation in Kosovo.
My delegation wishes to express its support for
the men and women of the United Nations Interim
Administration in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the Kosovo
Force (KFOR) for their dedication and good work,
sometimes performed in very difficult circumstances.

17

S/PV.4171

We also note with appreciation the partnership for
security being forged between UNMIK and KFOR on
the one hand and various communities in Kosovo on
the other. As for the election, we note the progress
made with regard to the election registration process,
and we hope that the contacts between the authorities
of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and UNMIK will
facilitate and encourage the participation of all the
communities. In this regard, we wish to stress that all
efforts must be brought to bear to make it clear,
especially to the communities of the Serbs and Turks
who decided not to participate, that it is in their best
interests to participate in free and fair elections for a
multi-democratic Kosovo.
We would also like to acknowledge the institution
of the office of Ombudsperson, which has been
established to see to it that all minorities and other
communities have a say in Kosovo.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Jamaica.
Last month, the Security Council had the
opportunity to be briefed by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and head of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), Mr. Bernard Kouchner, and to hear his
assessment of the progress made by UNMIK since its
establishment by the Security Council in June 1999.
My delegation shared Mr. Kouchner’s assessment
regarding the magnitude of the unique undertaking
entrusted by the international community to UNMIK
and the Mission’s critical role in promoting peace,
reconciliation and stability, in creating viable and
democratic structures and in establishing a framework
for sustainable development in Kosovo.
As many of the issues of concern to my
delegation have been raised by other speakers, I will
limit my statement to a few brief remarks. It is evident
from today’s briefing by Assistant Secretary-General
Annabi that the advances made in the area of the civil
administration of Kosovo are being hampered by
continued ethnic violence. The gains made are not
sustainable in an environment of violence and fear.
Equal importance must therefore continue to be given
to the promotion of reconciliation and tolerance. It is in
this context that the reports of the discovery of caches
of weapons are deeply disturbing to my delegation, and
we look forward to being informed of the results of the
investigations being carried out by UNMIK and the

18

Kosovo Force (KFOR) and to the prosecution of those
responsible.
We have noted the special measures being put in
place to better protect the Serb communities, and we
join other members of the Council in welcoming the
signing of the Joint Understanding between UNMIK
and the Serb National Council of Gracanica on
additional measures to protect the freedom, security
and fundamental rights of the Serb community. We
were therefore very disappointed at the announced
withdrawal of the Kosovo Democratic Party leader
Thaci from the Joint Interim Administrative Structures,
and hope that this decision will be reversed.
We wish to reiterate our concern about the attacks
on humanitarian agencies and personnel, and we hope
that, with the resumption of humanitarian activities,
more focus will be given to the protection of these
personnel. We wish to underline our support for the
efforts being undertaken by UNMIK and KFOR to deal
with the security of international personnel.
With regard to the operation of the media in
Kosovo, my delegation is of the view that there must
be
responsible,
unbiased
reporting,
as
misrepresentation of facts in this volatile environment
can have lethal consequences.
We note that the municipal election law that was
signed on 10 July has been implemented and that the
civil registration period will close on 15 July. We are
disappointed to learn about the limited number of Serbs
who have registered to participate, as we believe that it
is necessary to ensure, as far as possible, the
participation of all ethnic groups in these elections in
order to encourage a sense of ownership of the
democratic process.
On other issues, my delegation shares the views
expressed by the representatives of Bangladesh and
Malaysia on the staffing of UNMIK and the need to
resolve the situation of missing persons and detainees.
In conclusion, I again wish to thank Mr. Annabi
for his briefing and reiterate Jamaica’s support for
UNMIK as it seeks to fulfil the mandate entrusted to it
by the Security Council.
I now resume my function as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to Mr. Annabi to respond to the
questions and comments made.

S/PV.4171

Mr. Annabi: As it is rather late, I will try to be
brief and will be ready to revert at a later stage with
additional replies to some of the questions that I might
not address now.
We have, of course, taken note of the concerns
that have been expressed by Ambassador Lavrov and
the representative of China regarding the holding of the
municipal elections, and we will certainly convey these
concerns to the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). The regulation that has
been adopted to govern the conduct of municipal
elections makes it clear that the announcement of the
date of the municipal elections will be made by the
Special Representative after consultation with the
Secretary-General
and
the
Deputy
Special
Representative in charge of institution-building. In
making that determination and setting the date, they
will, of course, pay careful attention to all aspects,
including security conditions and other aspects that
may disrupt the holding of a credible and fair election.
On the discovery of the weapons caches and the
reports that the Albanians have demanded the return of
these weapons, I mentioned the statement by Mr. Ceku,
the head of the Kosovo Protection Corps, welcoming
the discovery by the Kosovo Force (KFOR) of these
weapons, and therefore I am not aware of any intention
on the part of KFOR to return those weapons to
whomever they may have belonged.
As regards Mr. Thaci’s refusal to participate in
the Joint Interim Administrative Structures, in view of
the conclusion by Mr. Kouchner of a Joint
Understanding with Bishop Artemije regarding security
conditions for the Serb minorities, Ambassador Lavrov
asked
what
Mr.
Kouchner’s
response
was.
Mr. Kouchner has made it clear that this Joint
Understanding is aimed at improving conditions for
minorities, and for the Serb minority in particular, and
he pointed out to Mr. Thaci that the position they have
taken may be seen by the international community as
opposition to ensuring security for the minorities, and
that may, of course, have negative consequences for the
assistance that the international community is
extending to Kosovo. He has therefore urged Mr. Thaci
to reconsider and to cooperate with UNMIK in creating
an environment in which better security conditions can
be put in place for all communities in Kosovo.

are registered, contain UNMIK symbols with
information appearing in both Albanian and Serbian
Cyrillic script. These identity cards are strictly for use
within Kosovo and do not contain any reference to
citizenship. There may have been one or two isolated
mistakes at the very early stage of UNMIK regarding
the issuance of birth certificates, but that has been
corrected, and we are not aware of any identity cards
referring to citizenship. Clearly, they do not contain
reference to citizenship and are not delivered for that
purpose.
On the establishment of liaison offices in Pristina,
the purpose of these liaison offices of certain Member
States in Pristina is essentially to organize and
coordinate the cooperation between UNMIK and the
international donor community. They are not intended
to be diplomatic missions. They are not regarded as
diplomatic missions, and certainly the privileges and
facilities that may be extended to them will be
construed in a way that makes that point clear. Again, it
is essentially to facilitate cooperation between UNMIK
and the donor community.
As regards the question by Ambassador Levitte as
to the outstanding requirements for personnel in
UNMIK and the measures that have been taken to
replace those who may be leaving at the end of their
term and in the course of the summer,
(spoke in French)
I would like to mention, in that respect, that last month,
during Mr. Kouchner’s visit, we distributed an
exhaustive report on the need for additional personnel,
with descriptions of the posts. I therefore think that
Member States have accurate information available on
the needs that continue to exist. With regard to
replacement and rotation, we have, as mentioned here,
delegated the maximum responsibility to UNMIK on
the ground to proceed with these replacements and to
inform us of their needs. In fact, we have just
appointed as Director of UNMIK Administration Mr.
Da Costa, who was the head of recruitment for
peacekeeping operations, to personally ensure that
recruitment takes place as quickly and as
comprehensively as possible. Of course, we will call
Member States’ attention to new or additional needs
which might be pointed out to us by the Mission.

As regards the issuance of identity cards, these
provisional identity cards, issued by UNMIK as people

19

S/PV.4171

(spoke in English)
As regards the efforts being made by UNMIK to
persuade Mr. Thaci and the Kosovo Democratic Party
to return to the Interim Administrative Council, I can
assure Ambassador Hasmy that this is something that
Mr. Kouchner is actively working on. He is in touch
with them to persuade them that it is in their best
interest to participate in these structures, because their
refusal and the motives invoked for their refusal to
participate may be counterproductive and counter to
their own interests. So he will continue his efforts to
persuade them to participate, just as he has worked
actively to persuade the Serbs to also participate.
On the issue of the designation of a special envoy
for missing persons, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights is currently exploring
the conditions under which this can be done. We will
keep the Security Council informed of developments. I
do not have more information on this issue at this
point.
Turning to the question raised by the Ambassador
of the Ukraine and to the issue of the establishment of
the Kosovo war and ethnic crimes court, this court has
not yet been established. We have been consulting with
the Legal Office, with the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) in this
regard. The ICTY has confirmed publicly that there
would be no conflict between this proposed court and
the ICTY. This war and ethnic crimes court would deal
with crimes committed in Kosovo, but the ICTY can
request that any crime committed during the war in
Kosovo be directed and referred to it.
I regret the delays regarding the deployment of
the special police unit from Ukraine. I will, of course,

20

look into it. These deployments involve a complicated
process. The unit needs to be ready, and I welcome
your confirmation that the unit is ready. We need to
send teams to visit these units, to discuss the
arrangements and the equipment they need to have. We
try to coordinate these visits so they can cover several
countries at the same time. That sometimes creates
some delays, but of course it is based also on financial
considerations, to try and avoid unnecessary expenses.
Finally, we have to have in place the necessary
structure to accommodate them when they arrive in
theatre. So we need a combination of these three
different conditions in place to be able to affect the
deployment. We will do what we can to activate this in
cities in UNMIK’s interest.
Finally, on the question regarding regulation on
the municipalities, there is indeed a regulation which
will establish the numbers, names and boundaries of
the municipalities, which is being finalized. I totally
agree with you that one does not go without the other.
In other words, the regulation on the conduct of the
municipal elections cannot be implemented without the
issuance of the regulation on the boundaries of the
municipalities. This regulation, as I said, is being
finalized and will be adopted soon.
That, I think, covers some of the main questions.
The President: Let me thank Mr. Annabi, first of
all, for his very useful briefing and for the answers he
has given to the questions raised.
There are no other speakers inscribed on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council will remain seized of the matter.
The meeting rose at 2 p.m.
