S/PRST/2000/20

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
2 June 2000
English
Original: English and French

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4151st meeting of the Security Council, held on 2 June 2000 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo”, the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council recalls the letter from the Secretary-General of 18
April 2000 (S/2000/334) and the letter from its President of 28 April 2000
(S/2000/350). The Council also recalls the letters from the Permanent
Representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the United Nations
to its President of 26 April 2000 (S/2000/362) and of 1 June 2000
(S/2000/515).
The Security Council welcomes the recommendation made by its mission
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, contained in paragraph 77 of its
report of 11 May 2000 (S/2000/416), to proceed with the early establishment
of an expert panel on the illegal exploitation of natural resources and other
forms of wealth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to establish this
panel, for a period of six months, with the following mandate:
– To follow up on reports and collect information on all activities of illegal
exploitation of natural resources and other forms of wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, including in violation of the
sovereignty of that country;
– To research and analyse the links between the exploitation of the natural
resources and other forms of wealth in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the continuation of the conflict;
– To revert to the Council with recommendations.
The Security Council stresses that in order to implement its mandate, the
expert panel, which will be based at the United Nations Office at Nairobi, may
receive logistical support from the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and make visits to various
countries of the region, making contact during its visits with diplomatic
missions in the capitals concerned, and, if necessary, to other relevant
countries.

00-46111 (E) 020600
`````````

020600

S/PRST/2000/20

The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to appoint the
members of the panel, in consultation with the Council, on the basis of
candidates’ professional expertise, impartiality and knowledge of the
subregion. The Council stresses that the Chairman of the panel should be an
eminent personality with the necessary experience, and decides that the panel
will consist of five members, including its Chairman. The Council underlines
that the panel might call upon the technical expertise of the Secretariat and of
the Funds and Programmes and Specialized Agencies of the United Nations, as
required. Voluntary contributions to support the panel would be welcomed.
The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to report to it on the
steps taken to establish the expert panel. The Council requests also that the
expert panel, once established, submit to the Council, through the SecretaryGeneral, a preliminary report with initial findings after three months and a
final report, with recommendations, at the end of its mandate.”

2
