S/2020/1179

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
9 December 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 8 December 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by
His Excellency the Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres, and His Excellency
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African Union Commission, as well
as the statements delivered by Their Excellencies Mr. Matamela Cyril Ramaphosa,
President of South Africa; Mr. Mahamadou Issoufou, President of the Niger;
Mr. Kaïs Saïed, President of Tunisia; Mr. Ralph E. Gonsalves, Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs, National Security, Legal Affairs and Information of
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines; Mr. Wang Yi, Special Representative of President
Xi Jinping, State Councillor and Minister for Foreign Affairs of China; Ms. Sophie
Wilmès, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, European Affairs
and Foreign Trade of Belgium; Mr. Pham Binh Minh, Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Viet Nam; Mr. Urmas Reinsalu, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Estonia; Mr. Heiko Maas, Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Germany; Mr. James Duddridge, Minister for Africa of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland; Mr. Febrian A. Ruddyard, Deputy Minister of
Foreign Affairs for Multilateral Affairs of Indonesia; and by the representatives of
the Dominican Republic, France, the Russian Federation and the United States of
America, in connection with the video-teleconference on “Cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations: African Union”
convened on Friday, 4 December 2020. A statement was also delivered by His
Excellency Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed Farmajo, President of Somalia.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter from the President of
the Security Council addressed to Permanent Representatives of Security Council
members dated 7 May 2020 (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of the
extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, these
briefings and statements will be issued as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Jerry Matthews Matjila
President of the Security Council

20-16695 (E) 211220 050121

*2016695*

S/2020/1179

Annex I
Statement by the Secretary-General
[Original: English and French]
Let me begin by congratulating South Africa on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of December and on its leadership as Chair of
the African Union (AU). I also welcome my dear friend Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat,
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, who is with us today.
Cooperation between the United Nations, the African Union and the African
regional economic communities and other regional mechanisms has never been
stronger. Our joint work has gained in depth and scope, particularly since we signed
the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for Enhanced Partnership in
Peace and Security in 2017 and the African Union-United Nations Framework for the
Implementation of Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
in 2018. This partnership is deeply rooted in the principles of complementarity,
respect and African ownership, as well as the conviction that no single organization
or State can overcome the challenges of our time on its own.
Since the beginning of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the
African continent has shown exemplary leadership and solidarity. I commend the
African Union and its member States for spearheading a rapid and coordinated
response and for establishing a strong partnership between the World Health
Organization and the Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention. The
African Heads of State and Government presented a compelling vision for peace and
security through the flagship Silencing the Guns in Africa initiative and the Lusaka
Master Roadmap 2016.
The United Nations has sought to support these initiatives in a number of
concrete ways, including through technical assistance to mediation and disarmament
capacities, such as the joint implementation of the African Amnesty Month initiative
in seven countries in 2020; partnering with the African Union to create the African
Women Leaders Network and its 25 national chapters; and investment in youthempowerment activities, including peace education. I am also pleased to see the
expansion of the operational support role of the United Nations, which is becoming
not only a partner but also a service provider for the African Union.
With the support of United Nations special political missions and peacekeeping
operations, our partnership has also yielded significant results at the country
level. In Libya, the parties signed a ceasefire agreement under the auspices of the
United Nations, and political talks have resumed. I am grateful for the continued and
close engagement of the African Union in support of the ongoing dialogue processes,
including as a Chair of the Security Working Group of the International Follow-up
Committee. The Contact Group of the African Union High-Level Committee on
Libya, chaired by the President of the Republic of the Congo, continues to be an
important platform for facilitating the joint engagement of the United Nations and the
AU in Libya. We look forward to continuing our cooperation, especially in supporting
the African Union’s organization of a Libyan national reconciliation conference.
In the Central African Republic, the United Nations has supported the
establishment of the African Union Military Observers Mission, and we have seen
progress in the implementation of the peace agreement brokered by the African
Union with our support. The United Nations has also reinforced its engagement
with the Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS), following
the establishment of the new ECCAS Commission in September. This stronger
collaboration was exemplified by the recent joint visit to the Central African
2/38

20-16695

S/2020/1179

Republic of senior officials from the United Nations, the AU and ECCAS in support
of the country’s efforts to consolidate peace. Our joint work and close collaboration
will be critical in ensuring peace consolidation through the organization of free,
credible and fair elections within the constitutional timelines.
The United Nations and the African Union continue to cooperate in South
Sudan, where the ceasefire has mostly held, and where improved political stability
across the country has generated cautious optimism. We are also working closely
with the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD), including in South
Sudan. Through my Special Envoy for the Horn of Africa, the United Nations has also
supported IGAD in the development of its regional response strategy for addressing
the COVID-19 pandemic.
We are also working hand in hand in the Sudan, where a new peace agreement
between the Government and armed movements is the culmination of a year of
constructive talks and a testament to the commitment of the parties to peace. It
opens a new chapter, particularly for people living in Darfur, South Kordofan and
the Blue Nile.
In Somalia, beyond our support for the African Union Mission in Somalia, we
are supporting the Government on extending State control to additional areas and
preparing for new elections.
Our two organizations also worked with the Economic Community of West
African States in Côte d’Ivoire and Guinea before and after elections and, in
September, joined efforts to facilitate the establishment of the 18-month transition
in Mali.
Together with the Southern African Development Community (SADC) and the
Office of the SADC Facilitator, we are supporting political and institutional efforts
towards the implementation of Lesotho’s comprehensive reform process. We are also
cooperating with SADC to facilitate the reconfiguration of the Force Intervention
Brigade and the joint strategy on the exit of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Despite these positive steps, the challenges loom large. New conflicts
are erupting, the climate emergency is raging and the COVID-19 pandemic is
exacerbating fragilities and disproportionately affecting women and the most
vulnerable. As in other parts of the world, trust is being eroded, underscoring the
importance of good governance and respect for human rights, which are not just
essential to the continent’s development but are also crucial to peace and security.
Dealing with the pandemic must not take attention away from maintaining peace and
security in Africa.
As was highlighted in the high-level dialogue with regional and other
organizations that I convened a few days ago, we see growing restrictions in civic
space and increasing threats to minorities around the world. Furthermore, terrorist
and violent extremist groups are exploiting the uncertainty created by the pandemic,
as we are observing in the Sahel and the Lake Chad basin.
I welcome and support the efforts of United Nations entities aimed at providing
assistance to Member States in countering terrorist and related threats in various
African countries. Enhanced cooperation with the African Union Commission and
its African Centre for Study and Research on Terrorism, along with regional bodies
on the continent, is crucial in that regard. As an example, the United Nations Office
of Counter-Terrorism is working with the African Centre to develop options as part
of a suite of United Nations inter-agency projects to assist Mozambique. But more
must be done. I reiterate my appeal for African-led peace and counter-terrorism
20-166953/38

S/2020/1179

operations to receive Security Council mandates pursuant to Chapter VII of the
Charter, as well as predictable funding guaranteed by assessed contributions.
I want to reaffirm my full support for the African Union’s initiative, led by
South Africa, to resolve grievances through dialogue. More broadly, I repeat my
appeal for a global ceasefire. I also thank Chairperson Moussa Faki Mahamat for his
call to all belligerents to stop fighting, allow access for the delivery of humanitarian
assistance and enable political solutions.
Earlier this year, I commissioned an independent assessment of the
United Nations-African Union partnership and the work of the United Nations
Office to the African Union. It revealed a broad consensus that a strong
United Nations-AU partnership is essential to addressing the range of peace and
security challenges in Africa. Moreover, the United Nations-AU partnership is one
of the most important relationships in the domain of international peace and security
and a cornerstone of multilateralism. The process highlighted significant progress
in our partnership, both in mission and non-mission settings, but also acknowledged
areas for improvement.
Our two organizations and our action in Africa would benefit from a
number of concrete steps: the further institutionalization of our cooperation at
every level, since a sustainable partnership must be grounded in trust between the
two organizations, which will also require a stronger collaboration between the
United Nations Security Council and the African Union Peace and Security Council;
ensuring the predictability of financing African Union peace support operations
through assessed contributions; and doing much more to involve and engage women
and young people in the peace and security agenda.
To foster resilience and prepare for the challenges of the future, we need
to build more networked, inclusive and effective institutions to prevent conflict,
reinforce good governance and boost service delivery. In short, we need a
renewed multilateralism.
As we mark the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, we have
embarked on a deep reflection on how we can best move our common agenda
forward. I count on the African Union to help lead the way. As Nelson Mandela
said, “It always seems impossible until it is done.” May his wisdom, compassion and
example help us all and inspire us all to get it done.

4/38

20-16695

S/2020/1179

Annex II
Statement by the Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
Moussa Faki Mahamat
I would like to thank President Cyril Ramaphosa of the Republic of South
Africa and Chair of the African Union (AU) for inviting me to contribute to this
high-level debate on cooperation between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations, with a specific focus on the relationship between the
United Nations and the African Union. I would also like to congratulate him on his
country’s assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for this month.
I also wish to thank South Africa, as one of the three African non-permanent
members of the Security Council, for its strong leadership and coordination
together with its two fellow African members in advocating African positions at
the Council, in collaboration with the AU Mission in New York, the AU Peace and
Security Council and the AU Commission at large. Bearing in mind that about 70 per
cent of the agenda of the Security Council is devoted to issues of peace and security
related to the African continent, it would seem obvious that Africa should have a
permanent presence in the Security Council. This, however, is still not the case.
Enshrined in Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, the AU
Constitutive Act and, indeed, article 17 of the Protocol Relating to the Establishment
of the Peace and Security Council of the African Union, cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union is not only a necessity for both organizations
but a prerequisite for the implementation of our respective mandates of promoting
and upholding international peace and security. The signing in 2017 of the
United Nations-AU Joint Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace and
Security by myself and Secretary-General António Guterres has further boosted our
strategic partnership and cooperation, with a view to promoting Africa’s ownership
and leadership of peace processes on the continent. The subsequent signing, in
2018, of a similar framework agreement to harmonize the complementarity between
the Agenda 2030 for Sustainable Development and the AU’s Agenda 2063 was in
keeping with the enhanced partnership between our two organizations to accelerate
the development agenda for Africa, in recognition of the nexus between peace,
security and human development.
Since 2007, in practice, the annual consultative meetings between the
Security Council and the AU Peace and Security Council have been key to
strengthening Council-to-Council engagement. Meanwhile, on the ground, the
two organizations have also increased operational cooperation and coordination by
working hand in hand to support peace processes in the Sudan, Mali, the Central
African Republic, Darfur, Somalia and other areas. In that regard, I want to highlight
the strong support and commitment to the strategic United Nations-AU relationship
displayed by Secretary-General Guterres.
For its part, the African Union is deepening its cooperation with the regional
economic communities and regional mechanisms, particularly with respect to
consolidating our activities to maintain regional peace and security. Similarly, we
continue to make joint efforts to ensure that the implementation of the Silencing the
Guns in Africa initiative works in tandem with the objectives that form our vibrant
pan-African economic integration agenda.
But the Africa we want also believes in the principles of international
cooperation in our increasingly multipolar world, with a view to addressing common
challenges as one global community. In this regard, the United Nations-AU strategic
partnership is a blueprint for multilateral cooperation. We have entered into similar
strategic partnerships with the European Union, and we hope to reinforce cooperation
20-166955/38

S/2020/1179

with other key member-driven organizations, including the League of Arab States,
which has a large African membership, in order to strengthen strategic cooperation
and better address shared threats to our common peace and security.
In that regard, I will continue to urge the international community, in
particular the Security Council, to acknowledge the principle of burden-sharing for
the maintenance of global peace and security. This should include the provision
of predictable, sustainable and flexible financing for AU-led or -authorized
peace support operations, based on the principle of the use of United Nations
assessed contributions.
As we seek new ways to reinforce stronger multilateral cooperation, we must
also address the contradictions in the Council that hamper, and sometimes prevent,
the resolution of conflict in Africa. I wish the Council fruitful deliberations.

6/38

20-16695

S/2020/1179

Annex III
Statement by the
Cyril Ramaphosa

President

of

South

Africa,

Matamela

It is an honour for South Africa to preside over this meeting as our term as an
elected member of the Security Council draws to a close. During this year we have
had the privilege not only of serving on the Security Council but also of chairing
our continental body, the African Union (AU). We welcome the opportunity in this
meeting to reflect on the efforts of the Council to resolve conflicts on the African
continent and to further enhance the partnership between the African Union and the
United Nations.
Over the past decade, the United Nations and the AU have deepened their
relationship, with partnership agreements on peace and security, development and
capacity-building. The most advanced cooperation between the two organizations
is on peace and security, as provided for in Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations and reaffirmed in many outcomes of the Security Council on
cooperation between the United Nations and regional arrangements.
We are witnessing in Africa a continent that is taking responsibility for the
complex challenges to its peace, security and development. It is working with the
United Nations and other international partners in supporting African-led solutions
to problems on the continent.
While the United Nations, through the Security Council, has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security, we have
to acknowledge the important role played by regional organizations, such as the
African Union, to address threats to peace and security.
The African Union has recognized the nexus between peace and development.
In that regard, it has aligned the African Peace and Security Architecture with
Agenda 2063, the blueprint for Africa’s development. The approach aims to prevent
and end conflict through dialogue, mediation, peace support operations and a
sustained focus on post-conflict reconstruction and development.
The invaluable role of the United Nations in support of those Africanled initiatives cannot be overstated. We underline once again the need for the
United Nations and the African Union to expedite deliberations to ensure that AU-led
peace support operations authorized by the Security Council are financed through
United Nations assessed contributions.
The African Union is determined to silence the guns on the continent. We
have made significant gains towards the achievement of this necessary goal, as
evidenced by ground-breaking peace agreements in the Central African Republic,
South Sudan, the Sudan and, most recently, Libya.
Cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union must
be flexible and strategic in order to confront the growing threat of terrorism,
transnational organized crime, the illegal exploitation of Africa’s natural resources
and illicit financial flows.
We would like to recognize the important role played by African Union
and regional-led peace operations on the continent, which have paved the way
for United Nations peacekeeping in the most difficult of circumstances. They
include the operations in the Central African Republic and Mali, which have set
a precedent for regionally led peace operations transitioning into United Nations
peacekeeping missions.

20-166957/38

S/2020/1179

The novel African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
epitomizes the effective cooperation between the African Union and the
United Nations in protecting civilians and facilitating the path to peace. The African
Union Mission in Somalia remains important in contributing to stabilization and the
advancement of peace in Somalia, and we call on the United Nations and international
partners to continue supporting its efforts.
We commend the bravery of the African women and men involved in
United Nations peacekeeping efforts to protect civilians and support peace processes
in Africa, as well as the contribution made by peacekeepers from outside the
continent, whose dedication to the African cause is a demonstration of remarkable
and selfless solidarity.
Through our cooperation, we also need to address the root causes and drivers
of conflict in Africa, including development and governance issues. We must look at
all the factors that may impede the realization of a peaceful and prosperous Africa.
Despite the significant gains that we have made, we remain concerned about the
immense humanitarian challenges the continent faces as a result of ongoing conflicts
and the coronavirus disease pandemic. South Africa supported the SecretaryGeneral’s call earlier this year for a global ceasefire to respond to the humanitarian
challenges posed by the pandemic, and we are heartened to note that his call has
resulted in progress on some protracted conflicts on the continent. The pandemic
has shown that solidarity and cooperation through multilateral action are the most
effective means to confront a common threat.
This year is significant for women and girls across the world. This year we
are celebrating the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action and marking 20 years since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). Those
are cardinal policy frameworks that compel the international community to spare
no effort in ensuring that women assume their rightful place in promoting and
preserving international peace and security. We welcome the role played by women
and youth in the prevention and resolution of conflict and peacebuilding. We are
deeply concerned about the targeting of women and children, often through sexual
violence used as a tool of war, terror and intimidation. Addressing that scourge is the
litmus test for how effective we are in protecting our populations from the ravages
of conflict.
Furthermore, we remain concerned about sexual exploitation and abuse by
those who are charged with the protection of civilians. That is utterly unacceptable,
and we must have no tolerance for such acts. We need to further strengthen the
strategic cooperation between the Security Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council. International peace, security and development can be achieved only
if they are built from the collective efforts of all actors, drawing on the respective
strengths of every one of the building blocks of the multilateral system.
I must applaud Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, a country that is part of
the African diaspora, together with the African countries in the Security Council,
namely the Niger, Tunisia and South Africa, for working jointly to promote
cooperation between the United Nations and the AU for the peaceful resolution of
African conflicts.
We will be taking this work forward when the African Union holds its summit
on the Silencing the Guns initiative at the fourteenth extraordinary session of its
Assembly, two days from now. I am certain that our deliberations today in the
Security Council will make a valuable contribution to the success of the summit.

8/38

20-16695

S/2020/1179

Annex IV
Statement by the President of the Niger, Mahamadou Issoufou
[Original: French]
At the outset, I commend this important initiative taken by His
Excellency Mr. Cyril Ramaphosa, President of the Republic of South Africa and
current Chairperson of the African Union Commission. His leadership of the
Security Council during the month of December will, I have no doubt, meet the
expectations of Africa and the international community.
I also congratulate Germany, Belgium, the Dominican Republic and Indonesia
as their successful terms on the Security Council come to an end.
This meeting is of major interest for the Niger, and undoubtedly for the other
countries of the African continent and their partners as well, as it focuses on the
current state of cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations, in particular the African Union (AU). We are certain that our highlevel discussion and exchange today will be highly valuable in terms of effectively
addressing the challenges facing our continent.
As everyone knows, Africa has been a priority item on the Security Council’s
agenda in recent years. Current statistics indicate that more than 50 per cent of the
Council’s agenda and 70 per cent of the peace and security situations addressed
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations concern African countries.
That is a sad reality that calls for special attention and commensurate cooperation,
as well as decisive and coordinated action, on the part of the African Union and the
United Nations in the fulfilment of their mandates with regard to conflict prevention
and resolution, peacebuilding and the development and capacity-building of African
countries in all areas.
We therefore welcomed the outcome of the fourteenth annual joint consultative
meeting between the members of the Security Council and the African Union Peace
and Security Council, presided over by the Niger in September 2020, as well as the
latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/860) on cooperation between the two
bodies through the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security. Those reference instruments have led to a better
understanding of the root causes of conflicts by highlighting the role and importance
of the regional actors that already possess the mechanisms necessary for dealing
with crisis situations.
In that regard, I would like to commend Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson
of the African Union Commission, for his efforts to establish a peace and security
architecture specific to the African Union in accordance with the Lusaka Master
Roadmap 2016. I also want to praise the very positive role played by the Economic
Community of West African States in the area of peace and mediation in the region.
All this is to say that the conditions for applying the principle of subsidiarity in
carrying out and coordinating peace and security operations on African soil exist,
and only in this way will we meaningfully give form to the concept of African
solutions to African problems, which we support.
While the negotiation of various agreements under the auspices of
United Nations, the African Union and other partner organizations and institutions is
laudable, it is clear that such cooperation has not always been effective. As a case in
point, the Libyan crisis has exposed the differences in the roles and responsibilities
of the Security Council and the African Union Peace and Security Council. The
opposition of the Niger and other neighbours of our brother country Libya to any
20-166959/38

S/2020/1179

intervention there has unfortunately gone unheard. Today Libya is facing chaos,
which has led to the spread of arms and mercenaries and to instability in the Sahel and
the Lake Chad basin, as well as an unprecedented humanitarian and migration crisis.
The coronavirus disease pandemic has reminded us of the urgent importance of
reforming the current system of global governance by enabling it to better mirror the
fundamental principles of the Charter. The Niger therefore believes that the African
continent must assume its rightful place within the organs of the United Nations,
particularly the Security Council, in accordance with the Ezulwini Consensus and
unquestionably in line with the aspirations of other regions of the world.
The cooperation between our two organizations should also take into
account all factors that might constitute a threat to international peace and security
or undermine our efforts in achieving them. It is therefore essential to ensure
operational collaboration between regional organizations and the United Nations,
which would lead to the establishment of development agencies focused on the
primary goal of tackling the root causes of security problems in crisis-affected areas.
Our responsibility is not just to resolve such security issues but above all to prevent
them too.
The framework of our joint action should enable us to take into account new
threats to peace and security such as pandemics, terrorism, the impact of climate
change, cybercrime and organized crime, including through a new concept of
United Nations operations. The same architecture should also enable the
United Nations and the African Union to accord special attention to issues
concerning young people, women and children. To that end, I would like to propose
four suggestions.
The first concerns
enforcement operations.

a

new

concept

of

peacekeeping

and

peace

The second is the establishment of a mechanism to ensure the sustainable
financing of peacekeeping operations led by the African Union or subregional
organizations, in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity.
The third concerns the strengthening of cooperation between the two Councils
by emphasizing the coordination of their agendas and goals through an increase in
the number of regularly scheduled meetings.
The fourth, as I mentioned earlier, is to ensure that African countries play a
central role in the discussions and decision-making process of the Security Council,
as African issues constitute the majority of the subjects it deals with.

10/38

20-16695

S/2020/1179

Annex V
Statement by the President of Tunisia, Kaïs Saïed
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, allow me to extend my warmest congratulations to you, Sir, on
the assumption by South Africa of the Security Council presidency for the month
of December. I hope that your presidency will be a successful one and serve as the
culmination of two years of Council membership and valuable efforts in the service
of African and international causes.
We thank you as well for devoting this meeting to the issue of cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union, a sound choice that reflects the
critical importance we attach to strengthening the strategic partnership between the
two organizations in dealing with questions of peace and security in Africa, which
account for about 60 per cent of the work and time of the Security Council.
I must also reiterate to His Excellency Secretary-General António Guterres
that Tunisia appreciates his valuable efforts to promote international peace and
security and strengthen the role of the United Nations and multilateral action.
In addition, I wish to convey to His Excellency Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat,
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, our appreciation for his efforts to
advance African causes and promote peace and security on the continent.
In spite of United Nations and regional efforts, many regions of Africa have
been mired for decades in tensions, violence, conflicts and instability and beset by
fragility. This reality has exacerbated and complicated the situation, in particular
given that the nature of conflict has changed and many developing threats to peace
and security have emerged that not only have consequences at the local and regional
level but can also affect international security and peace.
Accordingly, developing cooperation, promoting integration and strengthening
the partnership between the United Nations and the African Union have become
increasingly important in confronting challenges related to peace and security
throughout the continent, coordinating efforts to manage and resolve crises and
conflicts, advancing political solutions and developing strategies for security,
peacebuilding and sustainable peace in the post-conflict stages through joint
mechanisms and regular consultations between the two organizations.
We are satisfied with the gradual development of cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union, particularly in the past decade. The
Security Council and the African Union Peace and Security Council have been
holding annual consultative meetings since 2007 and conducting joint operations
in African conflict zones. However, in view of the magnitude of the challenges and
the increasingly dire repercussions of instability, we emphasize the need to further
develop ties between the United Nations and the African Union and to promote
and bring about a qualitative shift in cooperation between the organizations, from
conflict management to partnership in areas in which pre-emptive action may be
taken to prevent violence and conflict from recurring by addressing the drivers and
root causes thereof.
In the same vein, we call for greater collaboration between the
Security Council and the Peace and Security Council of the African Union on
joint assessments of conflict situations, formulating early and joint response plans,
strengthening coordination and integration in mediation efforts to ensure that the
parties to the conflict attain the results they seek, further developing the partnership

20-1669511/38

S/2020/1179

in peacekeeping operations and managing the transitions between United Nations
missions and African Union missions.
Greater coordination and cooperation with African subregional organizations
and groups will help address the challenges associated with achieving peace and
security, given the important role those entities play in helping to address crises and
resolve conflicts.
There must be greater coordination when it comes to taking decisions with
regard to African issues being considered by the Security Council. When responding
to crises, intervention by the African Union and subregional groups must be
given priority, because African countries have the capacity to grasp and address
the various pertinent issues and in keeping with the slogan of the African Union,
“African solutions to African problems”. The recent intervention by the Economic
Community of West African States to resolve the crisis in Mali is a perfect example
of the effectiveness of such efforts.
We believe that the Secretary-General, acting in coordination with the African
Union, should appoint more Africans to serve as Special Envoys to conflict zones
in Africa. Doing so would make the post of Special Envoy a more effective tool
in mediating conflicts and settling them peacefully, because Africans envoys have
extensive knowledge of the local cultural terms of reference in which the relations
between the various parties to conflicts are rooted.
In that connection, we once again call for additional support to
be provided to African Union-led peace support operations through
United Nations-assessed contributions.
We believe that it is not possible to address issues of security and peace in
Africa without addressing their root causes, particularly the drivers of fragility. Those
causes are complex and multidimensional, but each of them provides a breeding
ground for tensions, violence and instability; contributes directly or indirectly to
disrupting settlement processes and efforts to restore security and stability; and
prolongs, complicates or reignites conflicts.
Addressing conflict-related challenges and instability in our continent
requires continued cooperation, coordination and integration among the various
United Nations, regional and international organizations as part of a comprehensive
approach to peace that addresses not only the security aspect, but also the
developmental, social and environmental dimensions, in line with the implementation
of the United Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and Agenda 2063
of the African Union: The Africa We Want.

12/38

20-16695

S/2020/1179

Annex VI
Statement by the Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs,
National Security, Legal Affairs and Information of Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Ralph Gonsalves
It is a pleasure to see you, Your Excellency and my brother Mr. Cyril
Ramaphosa, presiding over this virtual meeting.
We thank the Republic of South Africa for convening this important and timely
discussion, and we express our gratitude to Secretary-General António Guterres; the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, His Excellency Mr. Moussa Faki
Mahamat; and the Presidents of the Niger and Tunisia for their insightful remarks.
As a committed member of the A3+1 group — the three African members of the
Security Council and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines — and of the sixth region of
Africa, we place particular emphasis on the theme of today’s debate.
The strategic partnership between the United Nations and the African Union
(AU), as envisaged under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, is a critical
instrument in our global security architecture, and one that significantly bolsters
the international community’s efforts to maintain international peace and security.
Since the signing, in 2017, of the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework
for Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security, the partnership has grown from
strength to strength, not only as a mechanism for sharing the collective burdens of
security, but also as an avenue for the international community to gain access to
and benefit from the immeasurable expertise of local and regional actors, grounded
within the unique historical and contemporary realities of the African continent.
We have seen the tangible benefits of this growing partnership in the positive
developments in the peace processes of the Central African Republic, South
Sudan and the Sudan. And with the adoption of today’s presidential statement
(S/PRST/2020/12) on Burundi, we are pleased that that country can now be removed
from the Security Council’s agenda.
We believe that lasting solutions can never be imposed but must emerge
organically from within. In that regard, we maintain that the positions and priorities
as articulated by the African Union, including in the Agenda 2063: The Africa We
Want and the Silencing the Guns initiatives, present the surest pathway to lasting
peace and security across the continent.
At a time when the world is facing the complex and overlapping effects of
the coronavirus disease pandemic, rampant climate change, growing ecological
destruction, mass human displacement, the proliferation of violent extremism and
other contemporary drivers of human insecurity — many of which are felt most
acutely in African countries — deeper coordination between the Council and the
AU Peace and Security Council would significantly improve our collective security
efforts both in conflict-affected countries and those in post-conflict settings.
The nuanced perspectives and principled advice of the African Union should
be sought out, systematically and as a matter of priority, ahead of all mandate
renewals and mission transitions for peace operations on the African continent. The
Security Council should also consult with the AU regularly on the implementation
of mandated priority tasks for peace missions in those areas, such as security-sector
reform and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, in which the African
Union has a wealth of expertise and can provide operational guidance.
We have also borne witness to the comparative advantages of the African
Union playing a more involved role in peace operations in a number of contexts,
20-1669513/38

S/2020/1179

such as the African Union Mission in Somalia and the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur. To that end, our delegation fully supports the
use of United Nations assessed contributions for AU-led peace operations. We also
encourage both Councils to communicate more regularly in a manner that allows
African perspectives to be fully reflected in Security Council decisions on African
issues, and to pursue in earnest all modalities for information-sharing, including
through joint field visits.
Finally, we echo the calls of the African Union to end all unilateral economic
sanctions imposed on African countries so as to assist in the creation of conditions
conducive to economic recovery, growth and stability.
The immense challenges of today cannot be solved through incrementalism
or an outmoded zero-sum game of militarism. Instead, we need principled and
pragmatic multilateral solutions. Indeed, no country is an island unto itself, and our
contemporary threats to international peace and security can be solved only through
collective action and solidarity. To that end, we encourage a further deepening of the
strategic partnership between the United Nations and the African Union to fashion
comprehensive development and reparative solutions to the main causes of insecurity,
including those grounded in historical wrongs committed against our global African
civilization. As we seek to build back better from the coronavirus disease pandemic,
we must remain ever mindful that a peaceful and prosperous Africa is a central pillar
of a safe and secure world.

14/38

20-16695

S/2020/1179

Annex VII
Statement by the Special Representative of Xi Jinping, President of
the People’s Republic of China, State Councillor and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of China, Wang Yi
[Original: Chinese]
China supports South Africa’s initiative to convene today’s high-level debate.
We welcome President Ramaphosa, who is presiding over today’s meeting, and thank
Secretary-General Guterres and Chairperson Faki Mahamat for their briefings.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has exacerbated global crises,
had a profound impact on the political, economic and social development of African
countries and poses a host of new challenges to peace and security on the continent.
The United Nations is duty-bound to take active measures to help Africa weather the
storm. China proposes that efforts be made in the following four areas.
First, we should demonstrate a united front in the fight against the pandemic
in order to help strengthen Africa’s health and safety defences. We must leverage
the coordinating roles of the United Nations and the World Health Organization
to mobilize global resources in support of the African Joint Continental Strategy
for COVID-19 Outbreak of the African Union (AU) and broaden Africa’s access
to medical supplies, medicines, therapeutic technology and capital. By assisting
Africa, we will shore up global efforts against the virus.
Vaccines should be a global public good and made accessible and affordable
for African countries. United Nations agencies such as the World Food Programme,
UN-Women and UNICEF should all play their respective roles in helping Africa
to break transport bottlenecks and ensure last-mile delivery of supplies, medicines
and vaccines so that people and vulnerable groups in impoverished and remote
areas can receive timely and effective medical treatment. We must take a long-term
view and support Africa’s efforts to strengthen public health prevention and control
systems and improve its ability to respond to major infectious diseases, with a view
to building a global health community for all.
Secondly, we must continue working towards the goal of silencing the guns
in order to restore peace and stability for the African people. Seventy per cent
of Security Council agenda items involve Africa. Without stability in Africa,
international peace will remain elusive. The United Nations and the African Union
should therefore work closely to advance the African Union’s Silencing the Guns in
Africa by 2020 initiative and the Secretary-General’s appeal for a global ceasefire,
encourage warring parties to focus on overcoming the pandemic, turn their swords
into ploughshares and stop the violence.
We must continue to implement the Joint United Nations-African Union
Framework for Enhancing Partnership in Peace and Security and strengthen
cooperation to prevent and mediate conflicts and achieve lasting peace. The
Security Council and the African Union Peace and Security Council must build on
their annual consultative meeting mechanism to enhance their level of cooperation.
The Security Council must assume its responsibility to help Africa improve its
independent capabilities in peacekeeping, stability and counter-terrorism, accelerate
the establishment of the African Standby Force, a rapid response force and an earlywarning mechanism, and to support sustainable and predictable financing for the
AU’s peace and security operations.
Thirdly, we must deliver on the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
to help bring prosperity to the African people. As set out in the AU-United Nations
20-1669515/38

S/2020/1179

Framework for the Implementation of Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, the United Nations and the AU will prioritize poverty
eradication, enhance cooperation in areas such as agriculture, education, health,
and infrastructure, support the African Continental Free Trade Area, mitigate the
economic fallout from COVID-19 and improve people’s well-being. Developed
countries should take more concrete steps in the areas of official development
assistance, debt relief and technology transfer. International financial institutions
should channel more resources into Africa, which is a vibrant and promising
continent, as an investment in the future of humankind.
Fourthly, we must promote fairness and justice to help Africans benefit
from the progress of global governance. The global governance system should be
improved and strengthened to mitigate inequalities in rights, opportunities and
rules. The United Nations must do more to meet Africa’s needs and accommodate
its interests in rule-making, resource allocation and staffing. The representation
and voice of African countries should be increased. Africans must be involved
as equal participants and important contributors to global governance, since
no one understands Africa better or is better placed to offer solutions to African
issues than the African people themselves. When addressing African issues, the
United Nations should respect the wishes of the African people, enlist the aid of the
AU and other regional and subregional organizations and encourage and support
Africa’s own initiatives and solutions.
China has always been a true friend and partner to Africa. Guided by sincerity,
genuine results, a spirit of unity and good faith, China has always put the interests
of African countries above its own. We are ready to play our part as Africans pursue
the great dream of development and the revitalization of their continent.
Under the auspices of President Xi Jinping, the Extraordinary China-Africa
Summit on Solidarity Against COVID-19, attended by President Ramaphosa, was
held earlier this year in support of Africa’s COVID-19 response. The leaders of China
and Africa pledged to strengthen solidarity and work together to defeat the virus.
Together we set a fine example of international cooperation against COVID-19.
China has sent eight teams of medical experts and professionals to 16 African
countries to share information on controlling the spread of COVID-19. We have
established partner schemes with 46 hospitals in 42 African countries and shipped
emergency supplies to almost all countries on the continent. The construction of the
headquarters of the Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention, a project that
we are glad to support, will start this year.
To maintain peace and security in Africa, China will honour its pledge to
provide the AU with free military assistance, worth $100 million, and has extended
military aid to the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel through multilateral
and bilateral channels. As we speak, more than 2,100 Chinese peacekeepers are
serving in six United Nations peacekeeping operations in Africa. The United Nations
Peace and Development Trust Fund, founded on China’s pledge, has always focused
on supporting Africa’s capacity-building for ensuring peace and security, as part of
the joint efforts to silence the guns in Africa.
To promote prosperity and development in Africa, China has worked with
Africa to formulate and implement 10 major cooperation plans and eight major
actions to help Africa build more than 6,000 kilometres of railways and roads and
construct nearly 20 ports and more than 80 large-scale power plants. China has
signed agreements with 12 African countries on debt service suspension and has
cancelled interest-free loans due at the end of 2020 owed by 15 countries. China and
Africa have enhanced cooperation in emerging areas, such as the digital economy,

16/38

20-16695

S/2020/1179

smart cities, clean energy and 5G. The two sides are also pursuing high-quality
cooperation on the Belt and Road Initiative.
China will continue to provide strong support to the African people in their
pursuit of peace. We are glad to extend a helping hand as African countries move
towards modernization and will continue to speak in support of Africa on the
international stage. We are prepared to be Africa’s partner and work with it to build
an even stronger China-Africa community with a shared future.

20-1669517/38

S/2020/1179

Annex VIII
Statement by the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs, European Affairs and Foreign Trade of Belgium,
Sophie Wilmès
[Original: English and French]
At the outset, let me congratulate you, Mr. President, on your country’s
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for this month, which is for
both South Africa and Belgium our last month at this virtual table. I would also like
to thank the Permanent Mission of South Africa for convening today’s debate on the
issue of cooperation between the African Union and the United Nations.
I would like to focus today on four points: first, the long-standing partnership
between the African Union and the United Nations; secondly, the African Union’s
work in the Great Lakes region; thirdly, the importance of solutions that respect
local contexts and, lastly, the sensitive issue of sanctions.
First of all, we welcome the long-standing and productive partnership between
the African Union and the United Nations. Since its establishment in 2008, the
institutional framework has become stronger, while allowing for frequent exchanges
that result in joint efforts in response to common challenges. Nonetheless, we can
and must do better. A solution must be found to ensure adequate and sustainable
funding of African Union peace operations. We wish to reiterate our support for
United Nations funding.
We would like to emphasize Belgium’s willingness to further strengthen the
institutional bonds between the United Nations and the African Union. Above and
beyond key cooperation between the Security Council and the African Union Peace
and Security Council, there are several areas with opportunities for greater synergy,
such as the women and peace and security agenda. In addition, the African Union’s
work and discussions on transitional justice are extremely relevant to the work of the
United Nations.
Secondly, we would like to take this opportunity to acknowledge the African
Union’s commitment to the Great Lakes region. Ahead of the upcoming chairmanship
of the African Union by the Democratic Republic of Congo, we welcome the enhanced
role of the African Union in promoting a positive regional dynamic and supporting
United Nations efforts in that regard. We hope that the African Union will also
be closely involved in the further implementation of the new United Nations Great
Lakes Regional Strategic Framework. Similarly, we welcome the lead taken by the
African Union regarding Burundi. While some challenges remain, we have turned a
page. As a strategic partner, alongside our European friends, we would now like to
begin to write a new chapter in our bilateral relations.
Thirdly, we continue to support African solutions to African problems. A
good example is the African Union’s Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020 initiative.
It accurately identifies several issues and challenges, including terrorism and
climate change, and also points to various long-standing causes of conflict, such
as the illegal exploitation of natural resources, that have yet to be adequately and
comprehensively addressed.
New conflicts on the African continent continue to deserve an initial response
from the African Union or its subregional organizations, and we support the African
Union in that common effort. However, the principle of subsidiarity should never
imply inaction. Greater synergy between the African Union and subregional
organizations, as well as optimum complementarity between the African Union
18/38

20-16695

S/2020/1179

and the Security Council, is essential to accelerating progress towards common
objectives. It is in that spirit that Belgium expresses its support for the recent African
Union initiative for dialogue in Ethiopia.
Lastly, allow me to say a few words on sanctions policies. They are rooted in
the values we share at the United Nations and are a tool for promoting international
peace and security, preventing conflicts and upholding respect for international law,
international human rights law and international humanitarian law. Belgium strongly
supports the restrictive measures of the European Union where they prove necessary.
They target those responsible for unfavourable acts and are designed not to harm
civilian populations. We remain committed to ensuring that the humanitarian space
is protected under all circumstances.

20-1669519/38

S/2020/1179

Annex IX
Statement by the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Viet Nam, Pham Binh Minh
I thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s important meeting. I
also sincerely thank Secretary-General Guterres and Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat,
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, for their insightful briefings.
In the past few decades, Africa has made important strides towards greater
regional integration. Efforts to promote stability and security, inclusive social and
economic development, justice and governance are being implemented. Peace is
now a reality across the continent. Endowed with cultural diversity and abundant
resources, Africa has the true potential to become a global powerhouse of the future.
The contributions of African nations to regional and international peace and security
cannot be overstated. The African Union (AU) and subregional organizations have
become key drivers of progress. The AU’s Agenda 2063: The Africa We Want and
its strategic partnership with the United Nations provide important frameworks for
enabling the African Union to be an integral part of the global governance system.
Yet conflicts continue to overshadow many parts of the region. Sustainable
development in Africa is further hindered by emerging threats, especially terrorism,
transnational organized crime, climate change and food and water insecurity. While
the Ebola outbreak is still fresh in the memories of many, African countries are now
heavily affected by the coronavirus disease pandemic. These collateral challenges
compound the problems of already fragile situations, especially in conflict-affected
areas. In the face of such uncertainties, collective efforts on the African continent,
led by the AU, are more crucial than ever.
The role of regional and subregional organizations in the maintenance of peace
and security is clearly identified in the Charter of the United Nations. Within this
framework, United Nations-AU engagement has grown into a strategic partnership
central to the implementation of peace initiatives across the region. Indeed, such
engagement is exemplary and mutually reinforcing. Enhanced cooperation between
the two organizations has enabled the effective utilization of global efforts and
expertise, as well as regional ownership, in addressing region-specific issues.
With regard to this process, regional mechanisms such as the AU have also been
empowered to play a more robust and active role in the prevention and resolution
of conflicts, through the deployment of peacekeeping and peace missions and the
establishment of regional frameworks for sustaining peace.
The partnership between the United Nations and the AU could be further
strengthened in three key ways. First, it could be strengthened by supporting the
AU’s coordination efforts on regional issues, on a basis of respect for regional visions,
values, culture and history. With effective international support, the members of
the African Union could translate their valuable insights and experience into real
solutions for defusing local conflicts and tensions.
Secondly, it could be bolstered by strengthening strategic cooperation
between the United Nations and the AU at both the institutional and operational
levels, including by supporting the implementation of the AU’s Agenda 2063 and the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Thirdly, it could be strengthened by expanding interregional cooperation to
help Africa, as well as other parts of the world, cope with global problems that affect
all nations alike. It would be of significant benefit to the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) and the AU, for instance, to explore more opportunities

20/38

20-16695

S/2020/1179

for sharing experiences and best practices in addressing common challenges and
realizing regional goals.
Viet Nam holds dear its traditional friendships with African countries.
Throughout history, the national struggle for independence and quest for postconflict reconstruction and development of Viet Nam has occurred in parallel with
those of our African brothers and sisters. Viet Nam’s very first peacekeepers have
been deployed to United Nations peacekeeping operations in South Sudan and the
Central African Republic, and Viet Nam will continue this momentum in extending
its strong support for Africa’s path to peace and development.
During our tenure on the Security Council, cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations will remain one of our consistent priorities,
as exemplified in our initiative to preside over the first ever Council briefing on
United Nations-ASEAN cooperation in January (see S/PV.8711). Building on this
vision, we stand ready to contribute to enhancing cooperation between ASEAN and
the AU in the future, for the common progress of Africa and Asia.

20-1669521/38

S/2020/1179

Annex X
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Estonia,
Urmas Reinsalu
I join others in thanking the Permanent Mission of South Africa for organizing
today’s debate and the briefers for their insightful statements.
The importance of partnerships among the United Nations, the African Union
and subregional organizations in maintaining international peace and security
cannot be overemphasized. The Sudan is an excellent example of how playing on
the strengths of respective organizations can support people’s aspirations as they
transition from decades of dictatorship to democracy and bring peace to their country.
Previous speakers have already highlighted many other examples that show
how close cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union builds and
sustains peace on the continent. Estonia recognizes the close link between security,
prosperity and good governance and therefore remains committed to the holistic
approach of supporting peace and security in Africa. The coronavirus disease
pandemic has further underscored the need for strengthened cooperation, as we are
best positioned to address the pandemic and its effects together. It is obvious that
closer cooperation between these two organizations should be our common goal. In
that regard, I would like to highlight three thematic areas where Estonia would like
to see cooperation further strengthened.
First, we see great potential for cooperation in the area of conflict prevention.
We support the Secretary-General’s call for strengthening early-warning mechanisms
to ensure preventive, timely and effective action. I would also like to express Estonia’s
full support for the Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020 initiative. The concrete
steps outlined in the action plan are crucial to contributing to peace, stability and
security in Africa, while addressing the root causes of conflict. Strengthening respect
for human rights, good governance, the rule of law and democracy is at the heart
of prevention efforts and also contributes to the prevention of violent extremism
and terrorism. Additionally, we see value in maximizing the trilateral cooperation
among the United Nations, the African Union and the European Union in the areas
of conflict prevention and mediation. These complementary resources, strengths and
linkages pave the way for a more effective response.
Secondly, Estonia would also like to see further cooperation in the field of
climate change, whose devastating effects we are already witnessing, from the Sahel
to the Horn of Africa. We need to be proactive about this driver of conflict before the
situation further degrades and disrupts the lives of millions of people.
Thirdly, Estonia supports further cooperation related to the women and peace
and security agenda. We must continue our efforts to ensure that African women
and girls participate in all aspects of social activity, including conflict prevention,
conflict resolution and peacebuilding efforts. We also stress the importance of joint
action between the United Nations and the African Union to end conflict-related
sexual violence, as well as violations and abuses against children affected by
armed conflict.
I would like to conclude by citing a well-known African proverb, which is very
fitting for today’s debate. It says, “If you want to go quickly, go alone. If you want
to go far, go together.” I am convinced that by further strengthening cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union, we can go far quickly in helping
to bring about peace, prosperity and a brighter future for the African people.

22/38

20-16695

S/2020/1179

Annex XI
Statement by the Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany,
Heiko Maas
We will remember 2020 as the year when the virus engulfed our planet.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has caused great harm and added
to geopolitical tensions. But it has also made evident the value of international
cooperation. The virus, climate change, violent conflicts — we can defeat those
challenges only if we join hands across countries and continents and when multilateral
organizations, such as the United Nations and the African Union (AU), are at the
heart of our response. That is why today’s debate is timely, and I thank President
Ramaphosa of South Africa for organizing it. Germany strongly supports closer
cooperation between the United Nations and the AU. We advocate a bigger role for
Africa in the United Nations — particularly through Security Council reform, with
a permanent seat for Africa — and remain one of the largest bilateral supporters of
the African Union.
I see three areas for even closer cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union. First, I see it in the fight against the virus. The AU’s Centres
for Disease Control and Prevention, the World Health Organization (WHO) and
United Nations agencies have done a remarkable job in bolstering Africa’s response
to the pandemic. They will now be crucial to making vaccines true public goods
on the African continent. To that end, the AU can team up with the Access to
COVID-19 Tools Accelerator and its vaccine pillar, COVAX. Germany has been
supporting the WHO and Africa throughout the pandemic. We have just donated
more than 120 million medical masks to the WHO, of which a large part will go to
African countries.
Secondly, we welcome even closer United Nations-AU cooperation in ending
violent conflicts, including at the level of the Security Council and the AU Peace
and Security Council. There is hope for progress and there is work to be done in the
Sudan, where we are committed to supporting the peace process and the transition to
democracy; in Libya, where we have made considerable progress towards a political
solution and in Ethiopia, where the United Nations, as a first step, has been allowed
access to Government-controlled areas in the Tigray region. Mr. President, we highly
appreciate your commitment, as the current AU Chair, to making this possible.
Let me reiterate our support for the Secretary-General’s call for a global
ceasefire. I urge all countries to act on resolution 2532 (2020). The fighting around
the world must stop.
Germany also strongly supports the AU’s Silencing the Guns initiative. We
have partnered with the AU to cut the flow of weapons into conflict areas and to
train arms-control experts.
As a member of the Council, Germany has made it clear that real peace and
reconciliation are impossible without accountability, respect for human rights and
the equal participation of women. That is why we must all stand by the commitments
we made in resolution 2467 (2019) to protect and empower survivors of conflictrelated sexual violence.
Thirdly, the AU and the United Nations are natural partners in the fight
against climate change. The consequences of climate change for peace and security
are real, particularly in Africa. From the Sahel to Somalia, droughts, hunger and
displacement are catalysts for conflict. Germany has therefore firmly placed climate
change on the Council’s agenda, with the support of virtually all its members. We
have established an informal expert group of members of the Security Council on
20-1669523/38

S/2020/1179

climate and security. The Niger and Germany co-chaired the group’s first meeting
last month, in which we looked into the effects of climate change on the security
situation in Somalia.
The pandemic, violent conflicts and climate change are challenges that will
stay with us next year. But by working together, we can make 2021 the turning
point towards building back better in Europe, Africa and around the world. The
United Nations and the African Union will be key in this endeavour, and Germany
stands ready to provide its support.

24/38

20-16695

S/2020/1179

Annex XII
Statement by the Minister for Africa of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, James Duddridge
I wish to thank the President, as well as Secretary-General Guterres and
Chairperson Mahamat, for their informative briefings as part of this important debate.
As the United Kingdom’s Minister for Africa, I am keen to work closely
with the African Union (AU), which is a personal priority for me. In fact, I was the
first United Kingdom Minister to make an overseas trip after the first wave of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic when I visited the AU Commissioners
in July. The United Kingdom is investing up to $27 million in the African Union
COVID-19 Response Fund to tackle the disease and save lives.
In my remarks, I will focus on three key aspects of how the United Nations-AU
partnership can bolster the fundamental purpose of the United Nations, which is the
maintenance of international peace and security. The first is the early identification
of risks to regional peace and security; the second is coordinated efforts to mediate
and encourage peaceful resolutions to conflict and the third is coherent support
in implementing peace agreements, consolidating democratic governance and
building peace.
Both the United Nations and the AU would benefit from more integrated
analysis in order to identify the emergence or re-emergence of conflicts. We should
not shy away from identifying underlying drivers of instability and conflict and
having honest conversations about where we must act. The United Kingdom is proud
to support the AU’s Continental Early Warning System, and I look forward to visiting
the Early Warning Centre on my next trip to Addis Ababa. But accurate and timely
information must be coupled with plans for effective and early action, which needs
to happen at the State, regional or continental level. The African Union’s support to
elections in Madagascar two years ago and its mediation in the Sudan last year were
impressive examples of what it can do. However, in other cases, action by the AU and
the United Nations has either come too late or not at all. The key to greater shared
success is consistency in our approach.
That brings me to my second point. When conflicts do emerge, the
United Nations and the AU bring complementary skills to the table. We are all deeply
concerned by the situation in Tigray, where the immediate priorities are securing
greater humanitarian access and ensuring the protection of civilians and human
rights. The United Kingdom will continue to support AU-led efforts in that regard.
I urge all parties to accept credible offers of support to establish the conditions for a
sustainable political solution.
That brings me to my third point. Once conflict is brought to an end, the real
work of building and sustaining peace begins. Continued partnership between the
United Nations and the AU is vital to seeing the peace agreement through in the
Central African Republic, brokered through their joint efforts. The next milestone is
credible, inclusive and peaceful elections later this month.
Strong cooperation is particularly important during peacekeeping transitions,
as the United Nations or AU presence reconfigures to meet evolving conditions. I
hope that the AU will be able to provide its expertise and political support to the
work of the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan,
helping the Sudan’s transition to democracy.
African Union forces currently play an invaluable role in Somalia. I pay tribute
to the brave men and women of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM),
the African Union-led peace operation. Looking ahead, the Somali security forces
20-1669525/38

S/2020/1179

are now stronger but still need support. I will encourage greater effort in that regard,
from the AU, the United Nations and others, to ensure that the AU-led mission
evolves in response to Somalia’s increasing capabilities.
Predictability and sustainability in financing are an important element of the
AU’s ability to deploy operations like AMISOM. The United Kingdom supports, in
principle, access to United Nations-assessed contributions for future AU-led peace
support operations, on a case-by-case basis and subject to certain key conditions.
It is abundantly clear that a deeper and broader partnership between the
United Nations and the AU is indispensable as we strive towards our shared goal
of a conflict-free Africa. The United Kingdom remains committed to supporting
that partnership.

26/38

20-16695

S/2020/1179

Annex XIII
Statement by the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia,
Febrian Ruddyard
I wish to echo other delegations in welcoming you, Mr. President, to the
Security Council and thanking you for convening this important debate. I would also
like to thank Secretary-General António Guterres and Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat,
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, for their briefings.
We welcome the presidential statement just adopted on cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations, in particular the
African Union (S/PRST/2020/11). This is indeed a timely meeting.
As captured in the saying “neighbours know best”, regional and subregional
organizations have unique capacities and knowledge on the ground, which greatly
contribute to the prevention and resolution of conflict, as well as to sustaining
peace. In that context, we welcome the significant progress made in deepening the
strategic partnership between the United Nations and the African Union (AU), which
is crucial to addressing the complex and evolving peace and security challenges in
Africa. We are also heartened to note that it has contributed to positive developments
in many African countries, including the Central African Republic, South Sudan and
the Sudan.
The gains achieved must be sustained. Enhanced cooperation is key in
such efforts, particularly as the continent is facing multiple challenges, including
terrorism, organized crime and the multidimensional impacts of the coronavirus
disease pandemic. Against that backdrop, allow me to highlight three areas where
partnership between the United Nations and the AU can be further enhanced.
First, we must enhance collaboration between the Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council. We note that the two Councils met in
September and discussed several important issues, including the situations in Mali
and Somalia and the Silencing the Guns initiative. We also appreciate the valuable
role of the three African members of the Security Council in articulating the African
perspective during Council deliberations.
We concur with the Secretary-General’s view on the importance of
strengthening collaboration in conflict prevention. In that connection, we commend
the mediating role undertaken by the AU in several situations this year. It is imperative
to ensure that the Security Council provides the necessary political backing in
situations where the AU leads.
Secondly, we must enhance partnership in peacekeeping and peace support
operations. The Council must continue to support regional and subregional
peacekeeping efforts and peace support operations. That can be achieved through
the exchange of knowledge, expertise and training, among other things.
For its part, Indonesia remains fully committed to supporting sustainable
peace in Africa. As part of Indonesia’s contribution, we currently have more than
1,500 personnel, including 98 women peacekeepers, on the continent, serving in
seven United Nations missions. In that context, the indispensable role of women
in peacekeeping operations must not be overlooked. We therefore wish to advocate
for further cooperation between the United Nations and the AU in advancing the
greater participation and role of women in peacekeeping operations, as envisioned
in resolution 2538 (2020).
We also commend the commitment of the AU and its member States to
addressing terrorism, including through initiatives such as the Joint Force of the
20-1669527/38

S/2020/1179

Group of Five for the Sahel, the Multinational Joint Task Force and the decision to
deploy the African Standby Force to the Sahel region.
Thirdly, more needs to be done to address the root causes of instability. From
various briefings on situations in African countries, we understand that many factors
concerning peace and security in Africa are interrelated. The partnership between
the United Nations and the AU should therefore be guided by that interconnectedness.
It must be able to provide effective responses to the evolving realities and challenges
on the ground.
We welcome the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security, which acknowledges the importance of
building national capacity to address the root causes of conflict. Such a partnership
needs to be nurtured on a basis of good faith, honesty and sincerity. It must also
take national priorities into account in order to ensure strong ownership and
successful implementation.
Finally, ever since we hosted the inaugural Asian-African Conference in 1955,
Indonesia has remained faithful in its unwavering support for and solidarity with
the African nations. In that spirit, we wish to reaffirm our strong support for the
noble pursuit of silencing the guns in Africa and promoting the African Union’s
Agenda 2063 in order to realize a conflict-free and prosperous Africa. The Council
should rest assured that Indonesia’s commitment to being a true partner to Africa
will endure far beyond its tenure on the Security Council.

28/38

20-16695

S/2020/1179

Annex XIV
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Dominican Republic to
the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
We would like to begin by thanking His Excellency President Ramaphosa
for presiding over this important meeting, and his country for its stewardship of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of December. We also thank the
Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African Union Commission for their
briefings today.
The Dominican Republic recognizes the strong collaboration between the
United Nations and regional and subregional organizations, in particular with
the African Union (AU), during a difficult time for all countries owing to the
devastating social and economic effects of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic. Cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union is more
pertinent than ever, with its primary objective of effectively addressing conflicts
on the continent and seeking systematic and coherent solutions. In that regard, we
welcome the joint meeting held between the Security Council and the African Union
Peace and Security Council in September, aimed at enhancing collaboration between
the two Councils in the pursuit of peace and security in Africa. Both Councils should
redouble their efforts to adopt standardized procedures, especially in the area of
conflict prevention, including joint field visits where appropriate.
In that context, we reiterate that conflict prevention requires greater
investment. Focusing on the root causes is essential in order to prevent conflicts
from occurring in the first place and defuse crisis situations before they escalate.
The United Nations and the African Union have worked together successfully
on conflict resolution, concrete examples of which include the peacebuilding
processes in Côte d’Ivoire and Guinea-Bissau and peacekeeping through the Joint
Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel and the Multinational Joint Task Force.
Despite those advances, issues such as violent extremism, terrorism, corruption
and impunity continue to be major factors for instability in some countries in the
region. Combined with the adverse effects of climate change, they constitute a real
threat to political stability. In addition, the increase in the number of internally
displaced persons and refugees helps to aggravate the humanitarian situation in a
large number of countries in the region.
Similarly, there continue to be difficulties in meeting the demands of
populations, ranging from effective arms control to combating impunity and
establishing a common regional security framework to create the conditions for
integration and development across the entire continent.
We therefore believe that cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union should be stepped up in order to provide assistance in all relevant
areas through the exchange of experiences and good practices. Strengthening
coordination while investing in capacity-building should be at the heart of our
efforts. Using the comparative advantages of each organization could lead to better
use of resources, less overlap and greater efficiency. In order to achieve that, strong
cooperation is essential.
While the United Nations should continue to strengthen its support for the
AU-United Nations Framework for the Implementation of Agenda 2063 and the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, as well as the Silencing the Guns initiative,
its collaboration should also extend to greater coordination with Africa’s regional
20-1669529/38

S/2020/1179

cooperation mechanisms. The meaningful participation of women and young people
is critical in that regard and requires joint action.
Finally, Africa faces multiple challenges that have been exacerbated by the
social and economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Strengthening multilateral
cooperation is the answer. Let us unite our efforts to achieve a peaceful and
stable Africa.

30/38

20-16695

S/2020/1179

Annex XV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations, Nicolas de Rivière
[Original: English and French]
I commend South Africa, as the current Chair of the African Union and
President of the Security Council, for choosing to highlight the issue of cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union. It is a strategic partnership, not
only in terms of preventing and resolving crises in Africa, but also because we need
the African Union and African States to be able to respond to global threats. That
is why we support the efforts of the Secretary-General and the African Union to
strengthen this partnership.
The African Union plays a major role in the prevention and resolution of
political crises in Africa. We saw it in Madagascar in 2018 and in the Sudan in
2019. This year, once again, the South African presidency succeeded in arranging
African Union mediation on the issue of the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam.
Those successes must be acknowledged. We also welcome your mobilization for a
peaceful resolution of the crisis in Ethiopia, Mr. President.
The Security Council must support the African Union’s commitment to the
prevention and resolution of crises on the continent. That principle is at the heart
of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, on cooperation between
the Security Council and regional organizations. The partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union is also of strategic importance in security
matters. The African contribution to peacekeeping is invaluable, and we have a
collective interest in strengthening it. France supports the development of sustainable
and predictable financing for African peace operations, including through
United Nations-assessed contributions.
African countries must be able to ensure their own security and strengthen
their regional cooperation within the framework of the African Peace and Security
Architecture. Meetings between the Security Council and the African Union Peace
and Security Council should enable progress to be made on this issue in 2021.
The Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel is an example to be promoted.
Our objective is for it to become fully autonomous, but that still requires the most
ambitious support possible, to which the Security Council must contribute.
The partnership between the United Nations and the African Union can
go even further by supporting projects to concretely implement the Silencing the
Guns initiative, the Paris Agreement on Climate Change and the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. We encourage the African Union to continue its efforts to
operationalize the African Continental Free Trade Area.
Cooperation must also be strengthened in the face of health threats. Resolution
2532 (2020), which we co-authored with Tunisia, calls for a cessation of hostilities
and for greater cooperation between regional and international organizations in
facilitating the fight against the pandemic. The African Union has contributed to the
global effort by very quickly mobilizing the Africa Centres for Disease Control and
Prevention. President Macron has advocated for a moratorium on the debt of African
countries. France has pledged to mobilize €1.2 billion to help African countries fight
the coronavirus pandemic.
The partnership between the United Nations and the African Union can be
successful only with the involvement of civil society. I commend the African Union
Special Envoy on Youth Solidarity for her determination to bring the demands
20-1669531/38

S/2020/1179

of young African women to the Generation Equality Forum that France will host
together with UN-Women and Mexico. Their demands will be heard. We call on the
Special Envoys of the United Nations and the African Union to work together so that
actions on the ground benefit women and young people more systematically.
I want to conclude by once again congratulating South Africa on this
meeting and its presidency this month, and more broadly on its biennium in the
Security Council. The past two years have enabled your country to contribute
significantly to the success of the multilateral method, Mr. President.

32/38

20-16695

S/2020/1179

Annex XVI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Vassily Nebenzia
[Original: Russian]
We welcome your personal participation in today’s debate, Sir, in your
capacities as President of the Security Council and the current Chair of the African
Union (AU). We also welcome the participation of the high-level briefers, SecretaryGeneral António Guterres and Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the
African Union Commission. We thank them for the information and assessments
they have shared with us today.
Russia consistently advocates for strengthening the cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union. The dialogue between the two organizations
on issues of peace and security in Africa has made genuine and tangible progress
in recent years. Two framework agreements have been signed and are being
successfully implemented. The Security Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council have been holding annual meetings and full-fledged conferences.
The discussion of key problems on the African agenda in those formats, as well as
joint events, field trips and visits by special representatives, helps to enhance the
effectiveness of joint efforts to prevent and resolve conflicts. The African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, which has now completed its mandate,
and the assistance provided by the United Nations to the African Union Mission
in Somalia and the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel are examples of
successful cooperation on the ground.
We are pleased that the African voice in the Security Council is united
and resonant. We welcome the high level of coordinated action between the three
African members of the Council, together with the like-minded Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines. We appreciate the South African delegation’s contribution to the
work of the Security Council in addressing key problems in the maintenance of
peace and stability over the past two years.
It is important that Africans are increasingly taking the initiative in dealing
with peace and security issues on their continent. In that regard, we should not omit
to mention the efforts that you have made, Mr. President, to resolve the situation
regarding the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam and the crisis in northern Ethiopia.
The decisive attitude of regional players is clearly evidenced by the flagship
AU initiative to put an end to armed conflict on the continent. We believe that
United Nations cooperation with African regional organizations should be based
on the understanding that regional actors should be the ones to take the lead in
defining the paths to settling disputes on the African continent, based on Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. The aim of our global Organization to
provide multifaceted support to these efforts is in the spirit of the African Union’s
declared principle of African solutions for African problems. We believe that the
effectiveness of further cooperation on this track will depend on how the following
priority issues are resolved.
First, we understand the concerns of our African partners regarding the
provision of resources for African peacekeeping operations. It is important to
improve their predictability, reliability and flexibility. We are ready for further
constructive dialogue on this both in the Security Council and on other platforms
within the Organization, once we have agreed on a united position on financing
peacekeeping missions within the framework of the AU.
20-1669533/38

S/2020/1179

It is also important to work on conflict prevention and the development of
an early warning system on the African continent. Nor must we relax our efforts to
counter the influx and spread of illicit weapons.
We believe that the growing terrorist threat requires special attention. Terrorist
organizations are taking advantage of the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic to
consolidate their positions. The recent severe deterioration of the situation in the
Sahel-Sahara region is particularly alarming. We are ready to share our experience
in countering terrorism with our African partners and to implement projects to
help countries on the continent build their capacity to address threats of terrorism
and extremism.
Lastly, optimizing United Nations cooperation with African countries would
also help to resolve problems related to the illegal unilateral sanctions that continue
to be imposed on various States in Africa. In that context, we would like to once
again express our support for the Secretary-General’s call for an end to unilateral
restrictive measures that undermine States’ ability to address the COVID-19
pandemic effectively. We also continue to advocate for the timely review of
Security Council sanctions regimes. They must not affect the ability of States to
respond to the threats such as organized crime and terrorism through efficient
security bodies. Also, such regimes must not aggravate the humanitarian situation.
In pursuance of the decisions of the first of its kind Russia-Africa Summit that
was convened in October 2019, our country will further develop equitable cooperation
with African partners. At this point, our priority is to help Africa overcome the
consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic and improve the epidemiological situation.
We reiterate our readiness to promote cooperation on this track among other things
in terms of supplies and the start of production on Sputnik-V, the vaccine that Russia
successfully presented at the United Nations not long ago.

34/38

20-16695

S/2020/1179

Annex XVII
Statement by the Political Coordinator of the Permanent Mission of
the United States of America to the United Nations, Rodney Hunter
I thank you, Mr. President, and President Ramaphosa for organizing today’s
discussion. I also thank the Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African
Union (AU) for their comprehensive overviews this morning.
The African Union has proven itself, time and again, as an indispensable
partner to the United Nations on the African continent. In recent years, we have
deepened cooperation between the United Nations and the AU, recognizing each
organization’s distinct advantages, shared values and common interests. Together we
are firmly committed to the spirit of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and Agenda 2063: The Africa We Want.
We recognize the good work of both the United Nations Office to the AU and
the AU Peace and Security Council, whose close collaboration in decision-making is
critical for preventing and responding effectively to conflicts across the continent.
We also praise the United Nations for its wide-ranging support to the AU’s
Silencing the Guns in Africa initiative and its political, technical and logistical
support for the African Union’s mediation and peace agreement implementation
efforts in the Central African Republic, Guinea-Bissau, Mali, South Sudan and
the Sudan.
We appreciate the coordinated efforts of the United Nations and AU to address
instability in Somalia. Despite a perilous operating environment, the joint efforts
will bring long-term stability and security to the Somali people.
We similarly recognize United Nations-AU efforts in Darfur over the past
decade — particularly through the work of the United Nations-African Union Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) — to protect civilians, support the extension of
State authority and monitor human rights violations and abuses. The United States
remains committed to ensuring UNAMID draws down responsibly. We also expect
to see the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan be
well-positioned to take over key responsibilities from UNAMID, including support
for the implementation of the Juba Peace Agreement.
And at this very moment, the strong United Nations-AU partnership has
been crucial to addressing the conflict in Tigray and the unfolding humanitarian
emergency that threatens stability across the region. The violence has already caused
tens of thousands to flee their homes and imperils the lives of many more, both
through direct attacks on civilians and because of ethnic discrimination. Working
together and with the support of the international community, the United Nations and
the AU are best positioned to secure the protection of civilians; to secure free, safe,
and unhindered humanitarian access; and to push for a peaceful, durable solution.
The United Nations and the AU have also jointly undertaken efforts to stem
the spread of COVID-19 throughout the region. The African Union Commission
is working tirelessly to complement efforts by Member States and to support and
implement a continental response to the pandemic. The United Nations has contributed
by developing security plans and assisting with the formulation of guidelines for
peace support operations to ensure protection from COVID-19 transmission during
the pandemic.
We also applaud the United Nations and the AU on their cooperation to
promote the women and peace and security agenda, including the October 2019
high-level solidarity mission to the Horn of Africa. Women and girls continue
20-1669535/38

S/2020/1179

to be disproportionately affected by conflict, and it is essential to increase the
representation of women at all levels of decision-making related to peace and security.
The needs and perspectives of women and girls must be included in all aspects of
conflict prevention, management and resolution to better protect and respond to the
needs of the entire population. Doing this will lead to more durable peace in future.
Building on this momentum, we look forward to continued work with the
AU and the United Nations on improving the quality of our peacekeeping efforts,
including preventing sexual exploitation and abuse and addressing allegations thereof
levelled at personnel from both organizations on the ground in Africa. We continue
to be deeply troubled by continued allegations against peacekeepers in the Central
African Republic. It is essential that both the AU and the United Nations create
effective mechanisms to prevent exploitation, abuses and misconduct and to promote
accountability when allegations arise. We urge all troop- and police-contributing
countries to strictly enforce the United Nations and AU zero-tolerance policies.
Allow me to take this opportunity to thank South Africa for its leadership in
the African Union over the past year, including establishing an inclusive strategy to
address COVID-19 on the African continent. This has been tremendously helpful in
addressing this health crisis and containing the economic fallout of the pandemic.
Your work, President Ramaphosa, and the dedication of your country and your
people to the people of the continent has literally saved innumerable lives. We also
appreciate the positive role you played in securing the AU a mediation role in the
negotiations around the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam.
The African Union is an essential partner in working towards peace and
security, and we look forward to our continued collaboration in future.

36/38

20-16695

S/2020/1179

Annex XVIII
Statement by the President of Somalia, Mohamed Abdullahi
Mohamed Farmajo
It is a great honour to have been invited to participate in this important and
timely dialogue on cooperation between the Security Council and regional and
subregional organizations, with a specific focus on the African Union, by His
Excellency Mr. Matamela Cyril Ramaphosa, President of South Africa. I congratulate
South Africa on its presidency of the Security Council and thank all the members
of the African Union and the Security Council for their continued cooperation and
support in Somalia’s journey to stability, progress and sustainable development.
Somalia, as a member of both the African Union and United Nations,
sees both organizations as twin, complimentary agencies for peace, security and
sustainable development across the African continent and beyond. In this globalized,
interconnected and interdependent world, we must not be misled by simple and neat
geographical demarcations but rather be guided by the necessity to progress and
prosper together on a global scale. What the coronavirus disease pandemic continues
to teach us all is that, the more effective partnerships we can build and maintain, the
better the opportunities for win-win development for all.
The focus of this meeting on the effectiveness of African
Union-United Nations partnership in contributing to the resolution of conflicts in
Africa and sustaining peace, including contributing to the African Union’s ambition
to silence the guns on the continent in the near future, is extremely timely.
Sadly, across the African continent, while many conflicts are winding down,
new conflicts are breaking out. The peace and security challenge of Africa is one
that has a strangulating effect on its peoples’ opportunities. It is also a stain on
national reputations and a source of frustration and disappointment for international
partners and investors. While Africa is no longer the “hopeless continent”, it has
not totally succeeded in silencing the guns that made it appear such a failure to the
rest of the world. Indeed, conflicts everywhere, including the African continent, are
dynamic, complex and difficult to resolve without addressing root causes. However,
no meaningful analysis or action is possible in the pursuit of conflict management or
prevention without dialogue and robust partnerships.
Since the adoption of resolutions 1809 (2008) and 2033 (2012) there has
been strong partnership between the peace and security architecture of the
United Nations and the African Union, which has been bolstered by regular
interactions. Furthermore, the annual report of Secretary-General António Guterres,
on strengthening the partnership between the United Nations and the African Union
on issues of peace and security in Africa (S/2020/860), clearly highlights the strong
spirit of collaboration and clear commitment to approaching peace and security
challenges together. This is a practice that must be nurtured and a strategy that has
to be further institutionalized to be even more effective.
In Somalia, the United Nations-African Union partnership is clearly evident
in the operations of the forces of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM),
which are bravely fighting alongside the Somali National Army to defeat the last
remains of international terrorism in the form of Al-Shabaab. With Security Council
and African Union support, we are working on successfully transitioning full
security responsibilities from AMISOM to the Somali National Army at the earliest
opportunity. However, we are fighting a tough and determined international terrorist
group with global ambitions and absolutely no regard for human life.

20-1669537/38

S/2020/1179

Accordingly, it is my Government’s sincere belief that we cannot be expected
to fight a national fight of global significance with the United Nations arms embargo
hampering our efforts. The Security Council and African Union partnership must
now, more than ever, either lift the arms embargo or support Somalia in finding a
structured path out of the embargo so that we can defend our people properly and
provide the stability the region, continent and world need to recover better from the
socioeconomic crisis brought on by the coronavirus disease.
In all matters of peace and security, it is fundamental to seek peaceful
political solutions through dialogue and mediation, as envisaged by the Joint
United Nations-African Union Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace and
Security. It is also paramount to address the root causes, which often are many and
complex. In Somalia, we are working hard on this through ongoing reconciliation
and by completing the constitutional review process to ensure inclusive politics,
fairness, justice and economic opportunities to cement our peace and stability.
No partnership is perfect, and the United Nations-African Union’s collaboration
in peace and security on the continent could benefit from a better alignment of
scarce resources and more joint activities to build the capacities of the people and
institutions of conflict-affected States. The partnership must also be even more
proactive and act when the earliest conflict warning signs are clear. Accordingly,
maintaining peace and peacebuilding activities must be prioritized and executed
effectively, as they are more beneficial and less fiscally onerous than peacekeeping
for all stakeholders.
In Somalia, we say “One finger does not wash your whole face”, so the
United Nations-African Union partnership for peace and security in Africa is an
important initiative we must all support and invest in. In Somalia, we understand the
pain of conflict and that the long, steep and harsh road back from it is never easy.
However, what is also evident from our experience is that there must be a greater
focus on addressing root causes, early conflict-prevention measures and resources,
human and financial, to transition from fragility to sustainable peace and security.
In this regard, the partnership between the United Nations and the African Union in
enhancing peace and security in Africa has never been more important.

38/38

20-16695
