S/PRST/2015/16

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
28 August 2015
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 7515th meeting of the Security Council, held on 28 August 2015, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Reports of the
Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan”, the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the 26 August 2015 signature by
President Salva Kiir Mayardit on the “Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan” as well as the signatures by
SPLM/SPLA-IO Chairman Dr. Riek Machar Teny, Former Detainees
representative Mr. Pagan Amum Okiech on 17 August 2015, and joined by
other stakeholders, and recognizes these signatures as a commitment by the
parties to implement the Agreement, as contained in the annex to S/2015/654.
The Security Council expresses its concern with any statement by any party
suggesting a lack of commitment to implement the Agreement, as contained
exclusively in the annex to S/2015/654.
The Security Council expresses its deep appreciation for the work of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) in leading the mediation
since the onset of the crisis, and commends the recently expanded efforts of
the “IGAD-Plus” configuration involving nineteen nations and organizations
including the United Nations and friends of South Sudan from Africa and
abroad, to develop and achieve a comprehensive solution that has now
established a foundation to deliver a peace to South Sudan. The Security
Council urges the continued close engagement of IGAD and IGAD -Plus
partners in the critical period ahead.
The Security Council acknowledges that this Agreement is the first step
in reversing the difficult political and economic situation, and humanitarian,
and security catastrophe resulting from this crisis, calls upon the parties, with
support from the United Nations and international community, to fully
implement the Agreement and reaffirms its unwavering support of the people
of South Sudan.
The Security Council calls upon the parties to adhere to the permanent
ceasefire immediately, confirms its intention to move swiftly to update the
mandate of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) to support
implementation of key tasks in the Agreement, and expresses its readiness to
consider appropriate measures to ensure full implementation of the Agreement,
as contained exclusively in the annex to S/2015/654 in full and without
15-14650 (E)

280815

*1514650*

S/PRST/2015/16

exception and address any violations or failures of any party to implement its
provisions, including through the imposition of an arms embargo and
additional targeted sanctions.
The Security Council notes the African Union Peace and Security
Council’s 24 August 2015 Press Statement warning that all those undermining
the lasting resolution of the conflict, including implementation of the
Agreement, would be held accountable for their actions.
The Security Council underscores the pressing need to ensure
accountability for serious violations and abuses of human rights and serious
violations of international humanitarian law. The Security Council takes note
in this regard of Chapter V of the Agreement. The Security Council further
recognizes the work of the African Union Commission of Inquiry in
independent and public human rights monitoring, investigation and reporting,
and anticipates with interest its findings and recommendations and encourages
the public release of the final report as soon as possible on South Sudan.
The Security Council renews its deep appreciation for the courageous
actions taken by UNMISS personnel and troop- and police-contributing
countries to protect hundreds of thousands of civilians under threat of physical
violence and to stabilize the security situation across South Sudan.”

2/2

15-14650
