S/PRST/2008/38

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
21 October 2008
English
Original: English/French

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5998th meeting of the Security Council, held on 21 October 2008, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo”, the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council expresses its grave concern at the resurgence of
violence in the eastern provinces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
its potential regional implications. It is alarmed by the humanitarian
consequences of the recent fighting and urges all parties to immediately
respect a ceasefire.
“The Security Council expresses its deep concern over continued threats
to the safety of the civilian population and to the conduct of humanitarian
operations. The Council strongly condemns the continuing recruitment and use
of children by armed groups as well as the continued prevalence of sexual and
gender based violence in the eastern region of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. It urges all parties to comply fully with their obligations under
international law, including international humanitarian law, human rights law
and refugee law.
“The Security Council reiterates the need to respect the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It once again
calls on all armed groups to immediately lay down their arms and present
themselves without any further delay or preconditions to Congolese authorities
and MONUC for their disarmament, repatriation, resettlement and/or
reintegration, as appropriate.
“The Security Council reaffirms that the Goma and Nairobi processes
constitute the framework within which long term stability in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo should be pursued. The Security Council
urges all the parties to the Goma and Nairobi agreements to implement their
commitments effectively and in good faith. In this respect, the Council
strongly condemns the recent declarations by Laurent Nkunda calling for a
national rebellion.
“The Security Council reiterates its strong support to the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) in
helping restore peace in the Kivus and encourages MONUC to reinforce its
action to ensure the protection of civilians. The Council expresses its full

08-56279 (E) 211008

*0856279*

S/PRST/2008/38

support for the disengagement plan elaborated by MONUC and accepted by
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and urges all parties
to abide by it.
“The Security Council welcomes MONUC’s intention to reconfigure its
forces and optimise their deployment so as to enhance its efficiency within the
existing mandate and troop ceiling. The Security Council takes note of the
additional capacities for MONUC requested by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General. The Council requests the Secretary-General to present a
full analysis of the situation and recommendations in his next report to the
Council.
“The Security Council urges the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to take effective steps to ensure that there is no cooperation
between elements of the FARDC and the FDLR. The Council also calls upon
the Governments in the region to cease all support to the armed groups in the
eastern region of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
“The Security Council urges the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Government of the Republic of Rwanda to urgently
engage in efforts to settle their differences, including through reactivating the
Joint Verification Mechanism, and calls upon them to implement the Nairobi
communiqué fully. The Council encourages the Secretary-General to step up
his efforts to facilitate dialogue between Rwanda and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
“The Security Council strongly condemns the recent attacks by the
Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA), including the abduction by the LRA of 159
schoolchildren in villages in the Oriental Province. The Council recalls the
International Criminal Court indictments against members of the LRA
leadership on charges of, among other things, the enlistment of children
through abduction, as a war crime.”

2

08-56279
