S/PV.8368

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8368th meeting

Wednesday, 10 October 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Llorentty Solíz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bolivia (Plurinational State of))

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Ipo
Ms. Edjang Mangue
Mr. Woldegerima
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Almunayekh
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Allen
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the Permanent Representative of
Colombia to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and the President
of the Security Council (S/2016/53)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia (S/2018/874)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-31201 (E)
*1831201*

S/PV.8368

Colombia

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the
Permanent Representative of Colombia to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
and the President of the Security Council (S/2016/53)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia (S/2018/874)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Colombia to
participate in today’s meeting.
On behalf of the Security Council, I warmly
welcome His Excellency Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Jean Arnault,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2018/874, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia.
I now give the floor to Mr. Arnault.
Mr. Arnault: I am grateful for this occasion to
present the report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia (S/2018/874).
It is a great pleasure to be able to do so in the presence
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia,
Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo, and one of our closest
partners in the Colombian Government, Mr. Emilio
José Archila, High Counsellor for Post-Conflict.
I am also pleased to inform the Council that since
the Secretary-General’s report was issued, the key
mechanisms provided for the implementation of the
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building
a Stable and Lasting Peace — in particular, those
provisions on the reintegration and security of former
2/19

10/10/2018

members of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP) — have
resumed their work for the first time since the start of
the new Government. They include the Commission
for the Follow-up, Promotion and Verification of the
Implementation of the Final Agreement; the National
Reintegration Council; the technical board to oversee
the security of former combatants; and the working
group on legal guarantees.
The Mission participates in several of those
mechanisms, and we welcome the spirit of cooperation
that has been prevailing in the meetings of those
bodies. We trust that spirit will be sustained in the
weeks and months to come. As the Secretary-General
has said several times, reintegration in the current
circumstances in Colombia is a very complex task, and
both sides have an important role to play in completing
it successfully. As those bodies resume their work, a
short assessment of where reintegration stands seems in
order, together with a review of the challenges ahead in
their various aspects: political participation, security,
economic opportunities and legal guarantees.
With regard to political participation — a central
aspiration of the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del
Común (FARC) and a driving consideration behind its
decision to negotiate an end to the conflict — we take
a positive view of the current situation. Eight of the 10
FARC representatives afforded seats in the two chambers
of Congress have assumed their responsibilities and are
contributing to the debates and the legislative activities
of these bodies. We welcome the collegial spirit that is
being displayed in Congress in spite of sharp political
differences. We also note that the financial difficulties
that undermined FARC participation in the elections at
the beginning of this year have been largely overcome.
We appreciate the fact that the efforts of President
Duque Márquez to build political consensus on policy
issues have included FARC members of Congress.
In relation to physical security, Council members
have noted from the Secretary-General’s report the
stark contrast between the situation of those former
guerrillas who are under security measures provided by
the State, and those who are outside their scope. While
not incident-free, the security perimeters that protect
the designated areas where reintegration is taking place
have been effective, as have been the close protection
teams granted by the National Protection Unit of the
Ministry of the Interior to hundreds of FARC leaders
and residents of the reintegration areas. I note that the
18-31201

10/10/2018

Colombia

goal in the peace agreement of training and recruiting
1,200 close protection personnel is nearing completion.
A significant number of those personnel are women — a
first in the National Protection Unit.
To address security risks outside the training and
reintegration areas, the police are providing former
members of the FARC-EP with training in selfprotection. The National Protection Unit, the security
forces and the Mission have deployed tripartite teams
to 18 departments where groups of reintegrated
combatants are present. Those teams monitor closely
the security situation in those areas and take action
as required. With the number of FARC-EP members
killed outside the Government security umbrella now
reaching 74 since the signing of the peace agreement, it
is obviously imperative that those measures soon make
a difference.
Economic reintegration remains today a subject
of serious concern. The vast majority of those in the
process of reintegration still have no clear economic
prospects beyond the monthly stipend that is to end by
August of next year. The resumed National Council on
Reintegration has therefore a huge task before it, in the
difficult circumstances of a much wider geographical
dispersion of the former members of the FARCEP. To succeed where the previous Council failed, it
needs a solid consensus on its approach to productive
projects, land and the proper mix of collective and
individual reintegration.
Some of the lessons learned from the past year
are shared between the Government, the FARC and
ourselves. They include the need to connect reintegration
much more directly to local development, to empower
local authorities, and to link up more systematically
with the private sector, universities and other actors
willing and able to assist with long-term reintegration.
Resources will, of course, be critical. We have taken
note that the Government’s budget proposal for 2019
provides that public spending on reintegration be
maintained at the same level as last year. We hope that
Congress will uphold that proposal. I should add that the
Mission and the United Nations as a whole will continue
to do their utmost to support effective reintegration. In
that respect, I would like to acknowledge the countries
whose voluntary support has enabled the Mission
and the United Nations country team to step up their
contribution to productive projects.

S/PV. 8368

In addition to the need to broaden and accelerate
economic reintegration efforts, a heightened subject of
concern at this point is the sense of legal uncertainty
that remains pervasive among former FARC-EP
members. As mentioned in the Secretary-General’s
previous report (S/2018/723), that sense of uncertainty
has dogged the reintegration process over the past
couple of years owing to the controversy surrounding
the peace agreement and the protracted political, legal
and constitutional debates over the establishment of
the Special Jurisdiction for Peace. While the ruling
from the Constitutional Court last August upheld the
powers of the Jurisdiction, it has not removed the
persistent questioning of its role in some sectors. That
is not a situation unique to Colombia. Reconciling
peace and justice is a controversial and emotional issue
everywhere. To overcome it, the Colombian peace
process has sought to innovate by bringing together the
full guarantees of due process, victims’ participation
and the benefits of restorative sanctions. That is a
promising solution to an old and difficult dilemma.
Those magistrates who bear today the heavy
responsibility of providing truth and reparation to
victims and reliable access to transitional justice
for participants in the conflict are deserving of the
respect and support of State institutions, and the full
cooperation of all persons under their jurisdiction. They
are also deserving of the support of the international
community. It is the field of conflict resolution as a
whole that will benefit when the Special Jurisdiction
succeeds. Of course, once again financial support is a
critical dimension. I welcome the fact that the funds
assigned to the system of court lawyers attached to
the Jurisdiction were just made available. We also
note that the Government has proposed a slightly
increased budget for the three bodies that make up the
system of truth, justice, reparation and non-repetition,
and we hope once again that Congress will endorse
that proposal.
Unfortunately, the tragic killing of social leaders
continues. Over the weekend, in the department of
Cauca, the coordinator of a coca crop substitution
committee was killed, together with his two sons. The
fact that this leader was promoting a Governmentsponsored programme that is part of the peace
agreement illustrates the brazenness of the killers and
the pressing need to mobilize State institutions for the
prevention and prosecution of those crimes. We fully
share the sense of urgency expressed by the President,

18-312013/19

S/PV.8368

Colombia

the Attorney General, other national and departmental
authorities, as well as civil society, who subscribed in
August to the national pact for life and the protection
of social leaders and human rights defenders. As a first
step towards translating that commitment into action to
stop the killings, we look forward with anticipation to
the action plan under preparation by the Government to
implement the national pact.
Before concluding, on behalf of all the staff of
the Verification Mission in Colombia I would like
to express our deep gratitude to the Government of
Colombia, to FARC and particularly to the Council
for its support for the extension of our mandate. We
believe that we have contributed to overcoming several
of the implementation challenges the peace agreement
has faced and to preserving confidence in the future.
The new Administration has decided to take on the
great responsibility of carrying the peace process
forward. The Mission and the United Nations as a
whole are committed to continuing to do our part to
ensure success.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Arnault for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council wishing to make statements.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Arnault for
his briefing, which chimes very closely with our own
assessment and analysis of the developments over
the past three months. Let me also warmly welcome
Foreign Minister Trujillo to the Security Council for
the first time.
The United Kingdom welcomes Colombia’s
continued commitment, clearly set out by President
Duque, to implementing the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace. As we have all said many times in this Chamber,
the agreement represents an opportunity for lasting
peace in Colombia, as well as being a positive example
to the rest of the world.
Like Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Arnault, we also welcome the steps taken by the
new Government so far, including the commitment to
pushing ahead with the effective reintegration of former
members of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP), as well as the
appointment of key officials in important institutions
4/19

10/10/2018

for the peace process, in particular the Commission
for the Follow-up, Promotion and Verification of
the Implementation of the Final Agreement and
the National Reintegration Council. We share the
Secretary-General’s hope that Colombian institutions
will continue to pursue the peace process, including
security, development and the rule of law in conflict
zones, an effective justice system and reparations for
victims and the essential commitment to those who
have laid down their arms.
Recent progress in the investigation of initial cases
by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace has been a key
step in achieving those goals, and we encourage all
parties to support the extremely important work of that
institution, but as the Secretary-General has said, the
challenges ahead remain formidable. We are particularly
concerned by two important and concerning trends.
First, the departure of several former FARC-EP
commanders from some of the territorial areas for
training and reintegration has highlighted weaknesses in
the reintegration process. We agree with the SecretaryGeneral that economic reintegration activities need to
resume on a larger scale and faster than has been the
case to date and that the security of members of the
Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Común must
be assured.
Secondly, we share the Secretary-General’s
concern about the expansion of illegal economies, the
competition of criminal groups for territorial control
and the persistence of violence, which is continuing to
claim the lives of human rights defenders and social
leaders. We welcome President Duque’s commitment to
tackling those issues, and look forward to those who
signed the national pact for life and the protection of
social leaders and human rights defenders on 23 August,
implementing their commitments.
With that in mind, we welcome the renewal of the
mandate of the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia. We hope and believe that the Verification
Mission will continue to play an important role in
maintaining confidence and cooperation among the
parties and encouraging them to work together on peace
implementation. For our part, the United Kingdom is
fully committed to working with the new Colombian
Government, just as we did with the last, as Colombia
works towards securing a lasting and sustained peace.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We appreciate the convening of this meeting and
18-31201

10/10/2018

Colombia

the important briefing by Mr. Jean Arnault and we
commend the work he and his team are doing. We
also welcome the participation of Mr. Carlos Holmes
Trujillo, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, and
Mr. Emilio Archila, High Counsellor for Post-Conflict.
Peru follows with special attention and firmly
supports the peace process in the sister Republic of
Colombia. We underscore the country’s commitment
to building sustainable peace, and the steps taken by
the Government of President Iván Duque to implement
the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and
Building a Stable and Lasting Peace on the basis of
national consensus.
We welcome the renewal of the mandate of the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia,
which reflects the will of the parties to continue to
enjoy the qualified support of the Organization, as well
as the unity of the Council in its support for the peace
process. In that regard, we would like to express our
appreciation for the work of Mr. Arnault and his team.
We also welcome the appointment of senior officials
to the Commission for the Follow-up, Promotion
and Verification of the Implementation of the Final
Agreement, the National Reintegration Council and
the National Commission on Security Guarantees.
We believe that this should revitalize the established
mechanisms for implementing the peace agreement.
We also highlight the new Administration’s
initiative to work on a pact against corruption with all
political parties and with civil society. We consider it
to be a top priority for the Government to convene and
lead national efforts on this key theme for building a
peaceful, just and inclusive society. In our view, all
of these developments are good news and allow us to
look optimistically towards the future and to address
the challenges posed by the process in issues related to
security, the reintegration of former combatants and the
rule of law.
With regard to the security situation, we underscore
the importance of the national pact in which the
country’s political forces condemn the assassinations
of political leaders and human rights defenders that
regrettably have occurred. In that context, we stress the
importance of the measures adopted in the so-called
territorial areas and of close protection mechanisms to
counter the presence of criminal groups in rural zones
throughout the territory.

S/PV. 8368

We also underscore the need for the Attorney
General to carry out timely investigations of the cases
before him and to ensure access to justice. We commend
the work of the Ombudsman, particularly through the
early-warning system, and the importance of close
coordination with other relevant national institutions in
order to reduce the vulnerability of women, children
and ethnic minorities.
As for the reintegration process, we note the
transformation of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo into a political party
and its participation in democratic life. We also note
the recent visit of the Senate Peace Commission to a
territorial area for the training and reintegration of excombatants in San Vicente del Caguán. Additionally,
the increased allocation of resources for their
socioeconomic reintegration, with a territorial and
communal focus, will undoubtedly promote economic
development and the reconciliation process. In that
connection, we welcome the recent visit to the country
of a Peacebuilding Fund mission.
We want to highlight the fact that more than
77,000 Colombian families have signed voluntary
crop substitution agreements. Our own experience
in alternative development has demonstrated the
effectiveness of such initiatives as long as participating
communities have the full support of the national
authorities. We highlight the support of the mission for
reintegration programmes and its strategy to implement
the recently adopted Security Council resolution 2419
(2018), on youth, peace and security, and commend its
work with civil society and UN-Women to promote the
participation of women in dialogue and reconciliation.
On the rule of law, we underline the important role
of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace in promoting access
to justice and national reconciliation in Colombia.
In conclusion, I welcome the progress made in the
Colombian peace process, which serves as an example
to the rest of the world and is of crucial importance
for consolidating Latin America and the Caribbean as
a region of peace.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Jean Arnault, for his insightful
briefing today on the outstanding work of the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia. I also
welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia,
Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo, who is participating for

18-312015/19

S/PV.8368

Colombia

the first time in a public meeting of the Council on
Colombia since the new President of Colombia was
inaugurated in August.
The implementation of the historic Final Agreement
for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and
Lasting Peace between the Government of Colombia
and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de ColombiaEjército del Pueblo (FARC-EP) is now entering a new
stage. In the wake of the political changeover following
the legislative and presidential elections, whose
organization we have already commended, the new
Colombian authorities must now continue to implement
the commitments made in the framework of the peace
agreement, in particular the reintegration of excombatants and security guarantees, as monitored by
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia.
Like previous speakers, France welcomes the recent
decision of the Government of President Duque to fill
key positions in institutions in charge of reintegration,
in accordance with the peace agreement. In the context
of that the change of Administration — a sign in
and of itself of the vitality of Colombian democracy,
independent of the positions adopted by the political
parties — I wish to make three observations.
First, I want to note the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace, which is the pillar of transitional justice. The
independent Jurisdiction has the responsibility of
giving assurances both to victims and to participants
in the conflict in the framework of a comprehensive
system of justice, truth, reparation and non-repetition.
The ambitious choice of signatories of the agreement,
which is an important innovation and could ultimately
be transposed or adapted to other conflicts, requires
judges to be allowed to carry out their juridical duties
independently and, above all, that the Jurisidication’s
operational rules not be changed.
France has had the opportunity on several
occasions to demonstrate its commitment to the pillar
of transitional justice, and I believe it important to
stress that the new Colombian authorities, who have
shown their determination to keep Colombia on the
path of peace and prosperity, continue to preserve the
independence of the Special Jurisdication for Peace and
to do their utmost to bolster the system of justice, truth,
reparation and non-repetition.
My second point has already been raised in
previous meetings but remains relevant. I refer to
the deterioration of the security situation in former
6/19

10/10/2018

conflict zones. That insecurity affects former FARCEP combatants, who are now the targets of criminal
groups seeking to extend their area of influence. It also
affects social leaders, human rights defenders and those
who participate in coca crop substitution programmes.
Their murders must be vigorously condemned.
Improving the security situation in zones previously
controlled by the FARC-EP is a major challenge that the
new Colombian Government must address in order to
reap the dividends of peace. Although some measures
have been taken in that regard, France encourages
the Colombian authorities to redouble their efforts to
provide public services in those areas and thereby build
long-term peace. In that connection, we welcome the
national pact for life and the protection of social leaders
and human rights defenders, adopted on 23 August.
Thirdly and finally, the successful implementation
of the peace agreement will depend on the success of
economic reintegration. Too many revenue-generating
projects initiated by ex-combatants have failed for lack
of support. All relevant State services must therefore
be mobilized to give ex-combatants the opportunity to
contribute to the economic development of their country.
Key elements for development and reintegration include
access to land. Progress in this area in particular is
anticipated following the commitments undertaken
by the Government of Colombia, because it is those
lands that will definitively turn the page on 50 years of
conflict and testify to the commitment of ex-combatants
to improving their country.
The people of Colombia and their new Government,
represented today by the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
can count on the full and fraternal support of France in
this period of building a historic peace.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Jean
Arnault, for his briefing today and for the very valuable
work he is doing. We continue to strongly support the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia.
I also want to welcome Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Colombia, Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo. We are very
grateful for his commitment to the peace effort and
we know his personal dedication to this issue, based
on his very long experience, including as former
Peace Commissioner.
The Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and
Building a Stable and Lasting Peace in Colombia is the
result of a historic process, aimed at ending more than
18-31201

10/10/2018

Colombia

50 years of conflict and violence. Colombia has proved
that through leadership, dialogue and diplomacy, even
the most difficult conflicts can be brought to an end.
At a time when too many conflicts are becoming more
entrenched, Colombia is an important inspiration to the
world. It also provides a very clear example of how a
united Security Council can contribute to peace.
President Duque and the leadership of the Fuerza
Alternativa Revolucionaria del Común (FARC) should
be praised for their sustained political will and dedication
to the peace process. Their determination to implement
the peace agreement has provided an opportunity to
bring peace, socioeconomic development, security and
the rule of law to all parts of Colombia. Although an
irreversible course for peace has been set out, many
challenges remain. As very often after a complex and
long-standing conflict has been resolved, that is to be
expected. The continued engagement of all parties is
now crucial. To address the underlying causes that
have fuelled conflict and violence for so many years,
outstanding issues must be resolved. In that regard,
we are pleased to see that appointing members to
the Commission for the Follow-up, Promotion and
Verification of the Implementation of the Final
Agreement was one of the first actions of the new
Government. The Commission is without a doubt the
appropriate forum for taking those discussions forward.
Following conflict, as Jean Arnault just said, it is
often challenging to strike the right balance between
peace and justice. At the same time, it is an issue of
decisive importance for sustainable peace. The Special
Jurisdiction for Peace, with its objectives of guaranteeing
truth, justice, reparation and non-repetition, is a key
component of the agreement. Its independence and
autonomy must be fully respected. Cooperation among
all parties continues to be essential in enabling progress
on that central aspect of the agreement.
The transformation of the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo
(FARC-EP) into the FARC political party has been a
central part of the peace process. For the peace agreement
to remain credible, it is critical that effective and
adequate protection be ensured. It is also an important
component if the agreement is to serve as a model for
other efforts, including for the process with the National
Liberation Army (ELN). The killing of human rights
defenders, community leaders and FARC-EP members
and their families reportedly continues unabated. That
is of grave concern and underscores the need for the

S/PV. 8368

State to fill the power vacuum and safeguard the rule of
law. We therefore welcome the national pact for life and
for the protection of social leaders and human rights
defenders, adopted on 23 August.
Bringing security, development and the rule of
law to conflict-affected areas is critical. We welcome
President Duque’s emphasis on more focused and
tightly coordinated action by State agencies. A stronger
presence of civilian authorities and agencies providing
services to communities should be paired with efforts
to improve security in conflict-affected areas. The
necessary resources must be made available for bringing
Colombian institutions to all parts of the country, as
well as for mobilizing civil society, communities and
the private sector. The international community should
give all possible support to that endeavour.
We continue to stress the importance of the full
political, legal and socioeconomic reintegration of
former members of the FARC-EP. That includes
implementing productive projects, as well as addressing
the key issue of access to land. We welcome President
Duque’s firm support for more effective reintegration.
On the ELN, we welcome continued direct
contact between its members and the Government.
Sweden, as a member of the Grupo de Países de
Apoyo, Acompañamiento y Cooperación a la Mesa
de Conversaciones, will assist the process as much as
it can.
We welcome the commitment of Vice-President
Marta Lucía Ramírez to maintaining dialogue with
women’s groups. Effectively implementing the gender
provisions of the peace agreement remains crucial for
achieving sustained peace. We also hope that the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia will become
a best-practice case study when it comes to youth and
the implementation of resolution 2419 (2018), which we
follow with great interest.
In conclusion, Colombia has travelled far on its
path towards peace. It is now crucial that it stay the
course and that all parties continue to do their part. The
unwavering support of the international community,
including the Council, remains critical. We must
collectively ensure that this historic opportunity can
bring peace and prosperity to all Colombians and
that Colombia continues to serve as an inspiration to
the world.

18-312017/19

S/PV.8368

Colombia

Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): At the outset, I join
my colleagues in welcoming His Excellency Mr. Carlos
Holmes Trujillo, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Colombia, to the Security Council. My delegation also
thanks Special Representative Jean Arnault for his
informative and much needed briefing.
Kazakhstan welcomes the unanimous extension of
the mandate of the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia to 25 September 2019. We commend the
Mission’s continued hard work on the ground and
reiterate our full support for its work in securing the
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building
a Stable and Lasting Peace and ensuring lasting peace
and reconciliation in Colombia.
We welcome the commitment of the Government
of Colombia to implementing the peace deal in order
to bring stability and security to the country. The
nomination by President Iván Duque of top Colombian
officials to revitalize the Government’s participation in
the tripartite commission that monitors the country’s
peace process with the demobilized guerrillas of the
Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito
del Pueblo (FARC-EP) demonstrates the Government’s
sincere intentions to implement the peace agreement.
In that context, we particularly commend the adoption
on 23 August of a broad-based seven-point national
pact for life and for the protection of social leaders and
human rights defenders.
Nevertheless, we acknowledge that no peace
process is an easy task to implement at once. To
succeed, the firm commitment and participation of all
stakeholders are required. Obviously, the Colombian
peace process is no exception or any different. We are
aware of the obstacles caused by the threat of dissident
and paramilitary groups that intend to take control of
former FARC-EP territories.
We are also deeply concerned about the
continued violence committed against social leaders,
community activists and human rights defenders. In
addition, the current vulnerable security situation
and socioeconomic reintegration of former FARC-EP
combatants and their family members could very well
jeopardize their reincorporation into society. However,
it is our strong belief that, despite existing setbacks
and impediments, the continued commitment of
Colombia’s new Administration to fighting corruption
and guaranteeing the more effective socioeconomic and
8/19

10/10/2018

political reintegration of former FARC-EP rebels into
society will bring about positive results.
Furthermore, harnessing innovative approaches
and strategies, utilizing confidence-building measures,
building trust, engaging in practical disarmament and
non-proliferation, addressing the scourge of terrorism,
promoting the rule of law, creating the potential for
interlinkages between security and development,
including at the regional level, supporting cropsubstitution policies and rural reform, as well as
providing security guarantees to vulnerable groups,
will secure the gains achieved thus far. We are confident
that it will definitely be conducive to the success of the
peace process. We therefore call on all parties involved
to comply with their obligations and work in the interest
of security and stability. We urge the international
community to stand ready to support Colombia in
its priority goal to bring about peace and accord to
all Colombians. We also look forward to a definitive
bilateral ceasefire with the National Liberation Army,
which would end decades of armed conflict for good.
Lastly, Kazakhstan pledges to do its best in the
context of multilateral efforts to bring about peace and
progress in Colombia.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): First, allow me to thank
Mr. Jean Arnault for his very detailed and informative
briefing and the Secretary-General for his most recent
report on the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia (S/2018/874). I would also like to warmly
welcome His Excellency Mr. Carlos Trujillo, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Colombia.
We are satisfied to see the first promising steps by
the Government, as embodied in the resumption of the
work of the Commission for the Follow-up, Promotion
and Verification of the Implemenation of the Final
Agreement and the National Reintegration Council. It is
good to see that the new Administration is shouldering
its responsibility in implementing the Final Agreement
for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and
Lasting Peace, with regard to security guarantees and
reintegration. Moreover, we welcome the commitment
made by Vice-President Marta Lucía Ramírez to
maintaining dialogue with women’s groups. It is of
vital importance to ensure the effective implementation
of gender provisions outlined in the peace agreement
with regard to security guarantees and reintegration.
We agree that while the peace process is not exempt
from serious challenges and has been marked by
18-31201

10/10/2018

Colombia

political controversy since its inception, the perception
of the peace agreement’s importance for the country’s
future has grown. We hope that Colombian institutions
will continue to pursue what is at the core of the peace
agenda: security, development and the rule of law in the
zones affected by conflict; an effective system for truth,
justice and reparation to the victims; and the essential
commitments made by those who laid down their arms.
We cannot fail to mention our concern about
continued insecurity and violence in some conflictaffected areas, including the assassination of social
leaders and human rights defenders. We welcome the
signing of the national pact for life and the protection
of social leaders and human rights defenders on
23 August and look forward to its prompt and
inclusive implementation.
We cannot stress enough the importance of the
full political, legal and socioeconomic reincorporation
of former members of the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo
(FARC-EP). We are concerned about the current pace of
the reincorporation process, especially in its economic
dimension, as well as killings of former FARC-EP
members. Legal and security guarantees are needed
for former FARC-EP members in order to strengthen
their confidence in the peace process. We continue to
support the work of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace
and other transitional justice processes that are playing
a critical role to protect the rights of victims and the
overall success of the peace process.
Political reintegration remains one of the brightest
elements and successful examples of the peace
agreement’s implementation. Representatives of the
political party, the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria
del Común (FARC), are playing a vital role in the newly
sworn-in Congress. However, two out of 10 seats remain
unoccupied. We hope that the issue of allocating the
remaining seats will be shortly resolved by the relevant
institutions. We also hope that the Review Chamber
will have a chance to independently consider the case
of Jesús Santrich, which remains highly divisive in
terms of political opinion, especially when it comes to
former members of the FARC-EP.
We note the Secretary-General’s call on the
Government to make the necessary resources
available for critical investments. We also call on the
international community to remain closely engaged to

S/PV. 8368

support and encourage the effective implementation of
the peace agreement.
Unfortunately, widespread coca cultivation is still
one of the looming obstacles. There is an undeniable
connection between drug trafficking and widespread
insecurity in some regions near strategic drugtrafficking routes. According to the latest report of
the Secretary-General, if it is not properly addressed,
it will continue to be a source of violence and pose a
threat to the peace process. In that connection, we once
again highlight the role of the United Nations Mine
Action Service in Colombia and other efforts aimed
at putting an end to the suffering of people caused by
the widespread presence of landmines and explosive
remnants of war.
We want to express our full, continuous support
for the peace process in Colombia. We must remind
ourselves that Colombia’s peace process remains a
source of inspiration for efforts in many parts of the
world to end conflicts and build peace. The most recent
request of the Government of Colombia and the FARC
party to renew the Mission’s mandate demonstrates
their commitment to see thie process through to its
successful conclusion and that they trust the Mission
can contribute to this end.
To conclude, I would like to reiterate our support and
appreciation for the work of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Jean Arnault, and the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Jean
Arnault for his important and detailed briefing today.
We warmly welcome Foreign Minister Trujillo García
and the other Colombian guests.
The historic peace accord that ended half a century
of fighting in Colombia brings us together today. The
United States welcomes the unanimous renewal of the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia last
month. We join the Security Council in our enthusiastic
support for peace in Colombia, but the success of the
peace process is, in turn, dependent upon other areas
of progress. Nevertheless, we believe that this is truly a
time of rebirth for Colombia. President Duque Márquez
said it well when he introduced himself to the General
Assembly a couple of weeks ago (see A/73/PV.8),
identifying himself as a member of a new generation of
Colombians committed to uniting his country around
common goals.

18-312019/19

S/PV.8368

Colombia

The continuing success of peace in Colombia is
caught up in the achievement of those goals. One of the
goals mentioned by the President is economic and social
growth based on democratic institutions — and, indeed,
the Colombian Government is extending governance,
justice and economic opportunity throughout the
country. It is providing security infrastructure and
public services to the rural regions that were most
affected by the war. That work is critical to the
peace process.
Expanding equal justice in Colombia means
ensuring accountability for serious crimes committed
during the years of armed conflict. It also means doing
more to investigate and prosecute the killing of human
rights defenders. We are encouraged by the early
efforts of President Duque Márquez to protect social
leaders and others who are vulnerable in Colombia
today. The literal silencing of those important voices
undermines the peace process. Another goal that will
help determine the success of peace in Colombia is
doubling down on the fight against drug trafficking and
the criminality and corruption that flow from it. The
news in that regard is good, but progress is incomplete.
When President Trump put out the Global Call to
Action on the World Drug Problem, during a high-level
week event, Colombia was one of the first countries
to answer the Call. Our Colombian friends stand
shoulder to shoulder with us in fighting the epidemic
of addiction that afflicts us all, and we understand
what a difficult fight it is. The United States is working
to reduce the demand for illicit drugs. Colombia is
working hard to reduce the supply, but they must do
more. Cocaine production surged last year, a trend that
must be reversed if we are going to achieve our joint
goal of cutting coca cultivation and cocaine production
in Colombia in half by the end of 2023.
Finally, the future of the peace process in Colombia
depends on that country’s ability to continue to deal
with the massive influx of desperate Venezuelans.
In his speech to the General Assembly, President
Duque Márquez said the crisis was a question of selfdetermination of the Venezuelan people. We could not
agree more. The Maduro Moros regime has robbed
the Venezuelan people of control over their lives
and their future. The people of Colombia and their
Government have responded with great generosity
to the approximately 1 million Venezuelans who
seek food, medicine and shelter in their country. The
United States has helped with nearly $55 million in
10/19

10/10/2018

humanitarian aid, but real relief for both the Venezuelan
and the Colombian peoples will not come until after the
Maduro regime. That day cannot come soon enough.
The United States stands with President Duque
Márquez and all Colombians as they seek to build
a more peaceful future. Colombia has emerged as a
strong democratic partner for the United States, a
partner in building a freer and more democratic western
hemisphere. We are excited to witness the birth of a new
Colombia, and we are committed to helping it achieve a
peaceful and prosperous future.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): Let me begin
by thanking Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Jean Arnault for his comprehensive briefing
and for the tireless efforts for peace by him and his
team. Let me also welcome to the Security Council
Colombia’s Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Carlos
Holmes Trujillo García, as well as the High Counsellor
for Post-Conflict, Mr. Emilio José Archila.
The presence of the Minister today is a
demonstration of Colombia’s continued partnership
with the United Nations in support of durable peace.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands consists of four
autonomous countries, including Aruba and Curaçao,
which are close maritime neighbours of Colombia.
A close friendship exists between our peoples, and
our Prime Minister, Mark Rutte, looks forward to his
visit to Colombia in November, together with highlevel delegations from Aruba and Curaçao. I assure
Mr. Trujillo that the Kingdom of the Netherlands
is fully committed to peace in Colombia, which we
support both politically and financially.
Today’s discussion comes soon after the mandate
renewal of the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia. The joint request by the Colombian
Government and the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria
del Común (FARC) to extend its mandate reaffirm their
sustained commitment to the peace agreement and to
sustainable peace. The implementation of the Final
Peace Agreement remains a challenge. It can succeed
only with the full attention and commitment of the
Colombian Government and the other parties involved.
In that light, I will address three issues today: first,
the importance of an inclusive approach; secondly,
socioeconomic and legal reintegration; and, thirdly, the
security situation.
My first point concerns the need for an inclusive
approach. In his inauguration speech, President Duque
18-31201

10/10/2018

Colombia

Márquez expressed the intention of his Administration
to bring Colombians together, seek consensus and
overcome polarization. We applaud his expressed
commitment to inclusivity. We call upon the Colombian
Government to engage with civil society and foster
ownership and inclusivity of the peace process, while
including women and youth. Inclusivity is particularly
important for marginalized and vulnerable groups, such
as the indigenous and Afro-Colombian communities
and the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex
community. We welcome the resumption of the work
of the Commission for the Follow-up, Promotion
and Verification of the Implementation of the Final
Agreement and the National Reintegration Council.
We also welcome the meeting held by President
Duque Márquez with representatives from indigenous
communities and his expressed commitment to promote
indigenous development. We also appreciate the
efforts of the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia, the Colombian authoriti non-governmental
organizations to implement the relevant gender
provisions of the peace agreement. We underscore the
need to continue to prioritize gender-mainstreaming.
The engagement of youth is similarly important. The
project of the youth-led organization BogotArt entitled
“Letters for Reconciliation” promoted an exchange
of letters between students and former combatants of
the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de ColombiaEjército del Pueblo (FARC-EP). That very important
project was awarded the Youth Carnegie Peace Prize
at The Hague last month. The project shows that peace
in Colombia is much more than an agreement signed
by the Colombian Government and the FARC-EP. It
is also a process of reconciliation among all parts of
civil society.
That brings me to my second point, which is the
need for socioeconomic and legal reintegration. The
reintegration of former combatants of the FARCEP represents a core pillar of the peace agreement.
Stimulating income-generating activities and providing
social services can address the root causes of conflict,
promote self-reliance and sustain peace. We therefore
call on the Government and the FARC to expedite the
design and effective implementation of a comprehensive
reintegration strategy. The provisions for transitional
justice are another core pillar of the peace agreement.
We underline the critical importance of the independent
and effective functioning of the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace. It is a key institution for guaranteeing victim’s
rights and ensuring transitional justice.

S/PV. 8368

That brings me to my third point, namely, the security
situation. We are deeply concerned about the continued
high level of insecurity in the areas that were most
affected by the conflict. Restoring comprehensive State
authority, with the presence of both civil and military
institutions, is a key priority in that regard. Violence
against former FARC-EP combatants strikes at the core
of the peace agreement. In our view, it is essential for
the Government to uphold their security guarantees.
The ongoing and increased number of assassinations
of social leaders and human rights defenders remains
alarming. Mr. Arnault spoke of that in his briefing, and
we thank him for that clear statement. It is unacceptable
that those Colombians who have the courage to stand up
for human rights are made to pay the highest price. Let
me underline the statement of our Swedish colleague in
that regard. We welcome the adoption of the pact for life
and the protection of social leaders and human rights
defenders. We look forward to its urgent follow-up to
ensure effective prevention and protection, as well as to
ensure the prosecution of perpetrators. We encourage
the Government and the National Liberation Army to
continue to assess the scope for peace negotiations and
maintain an open line of communication. The Kingdom
of the Netherlands stands ready to support that process.
(spoke in Spanish)
In conclusion, let me emphasize that the signing
of the peace agreement marked a historic success and
serves as an inspiration throughout the world. Colombia
must now spare no effort to ensure that peace become
permanent, as peace is much more than an agreement.
Peace must be inclusive, based on ownership by civil
society and respect for human rights. Peace is grounded
on effective State institutions that provide security,
respect for the rule of law and development. Peace
attracts investments that are directed towards shoring up
public capacities. Peace requires sustained commitment
together with the pledge to ensure reconciliation
and a safer future that includes Colombians from all
sectors. As Colombia’s neighbour, the Kingdom of the
Netherlands stands ready to continue its support for the
peace agreement and its effective implementation.
Ms. Edjang Mangue (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): I begin by congratulating the delegation
of Bolivia on its outstanding presidency of the Security
Council and expressing our praise for Mr. Arnault and
his team for his briefing. We also commend and are
grateful to His Excellency Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo
García and his team for joining us today.

18-3120111/19

S/PV.8368

Colombia

The environment that has prevailed with regard to
the major political events in Colombia this year, such
as the most recent legislative elections and the June
presidential elections, is encouraging and building
confidence within the international community
vis-à-vis the peace process in the country. That reflects
not only the will of the people and of the parties
involved in the process, but also the substantial work
of the United Nations. Equatorial Guinea reaffirms
its support for the Government of President Duque
Márquez and harbours the hope that his Government
will strengthen its commitment to promote a dynamic
encouraging the peace process, upon which the future
of millions of Colombians depends. In that regard, we
welcome the recent appointments to the Commission
for the Follow-up, Promotion and Verification of the
Implementation of the Final Agreement, the National
Commission on Security Guarantees and the National
Reintegration Council, given their importance with
regard to the Final Agreement. Similarly, we commend
recent statements by the President in which he
highlights his firm support for the reintegration and
increased effective participation of former combatants
in the peace process and the adoption of the pact for life
and the protection of social leaders and human rights
defenders as a response to continued assassinations of
community leaders in conflict zones.
We nonetheless are concerned about actions that
tend to hinder the increasing progress by the parties
involved in the process, as well as about the departure
of several former combatants from the territorial areas
for training and reintegration in the south-eastern
region. The competent local entities must investigate
and thoroughly assess the concerns that led to that
action and formulate an expeditious solution, while
considering that such inappropriate and continued
withdrawal could create a new gap, which would be
unhelpful to the peace agreement.
We welcome the fact that the Special Jurisdiction
for Peace has opened its first cases. The unhindered
functioning of that body is essential for ensuring
accountability, above all for crimes committed in the
past. Kidnappings and violent acts that affected AfroColombian and indigenous communities, including
extrajudicial executions, must be duly addressed. In
that regard, we underline the gesture by the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del
Pueblo in August 2017 in handing over assets to provide
reparation to victims. We also commend the fact that
12/19

10/10/2018

that judicial process enjoys the cooperation of various
State and non-State actors.
According to the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/874), illicit economies based on drugs and
mining are continuing to add to the violence in Colombia
and pose a threat to the peace process. According to
data provided by the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, it is estimated that more than 77,000
families have signed voluntary substitution agreements
under the national comprehensive programme for the
substitution of illicit crops. Thanks to those agreements,
several thousand hectares of coca have been destroyed.
We hope that the Government will promote those types
of motivational programmes for those families and
others who join that initiative.
It is regrettable that the sixth round of talks between
the Government and the National Liberation Army
(ELN) was not able to reach definitive agreements.
The inclusion of the ELN is important to guarantee a
comprehensive and secure peace process in Colombia.
In that regard, we invite the parties to work towards
facilitating conditions that will lead to the next round
of talks and take into account the points already
agreed upon.
As we said at the meeting on 26 July (see S/PV.8319),
the chief guarantor of national unity and the balance of
State institutions, by virtue of the attributes conferred
upon them by law, is the Government, which must
ensure that the needs of the people are met in order to
defuse possible divisions and overcome the challenges
the country faces.
Before concluding, I would like to express
Equatorial Guinea’s willingness to work towards the
peace process in Colombia, as well as extend our praise
and recognition for the excellent work that the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia is carrying
out to encourage and strengthen that process in support
of the Colombian people.
Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to welcome His Excellency
Mr. Carlos Trujillo García, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Colombia, who is present with us today for
the first time. I also want to thank Mr. Jean Arnault,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia, for his valuable briefing and comprehensive
presentation on the major achievements and challenges
facing the Colombian peace process. We also commend
18-31201

10/10/2018

Colombia

the steps taken by the Government of President Iván
Duque Márquez to continue with the implementation
of the Colombian peace process. We look forward to
the development plan, which will be submitted by the
President in November. In my statement, I will focus on
three key issues.
First, the socioeconomic reintegration of former
members of the Fuerza Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP) has been
lagging, while there are negative repercussions from
the withdrawal of former leaders of the FARC-EP from
the reintegration process as a result of the risks that the
process may pose to their personal security and legal
status. However, we commend the relentless efforts of
the Colombian Government to assess and adopt a special
integrated approach to implement the reintegration
process. We value the role of the Mission in that regard
and its work with the Resident Coordinator, the High
Commissioner for Peace and the leadership of the
Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Común (FARC)
to submit a joint proposal to the Peacebuilding Fund on
socioeconomic reintegration and reconciliation.
Secondly, with regard to the security situation, we
are concerned about the ongoing killings, violence and
threats against social leaders, human rights defenders
and indigenous leaders. In that regard, we commend
the pact for life and the protection of social leaders
and human rights defenders, which was adopted by the
Colombian Government, in addition to the preparation
of guidelines on the policy to be established, which
would provide security guarantees to local communities,
human rights defenders and social leaders.
Thirdly, we welcome the ongoing efforts by
the Mission under Mr. Arnault, in cooperation with
national, regional and local authorities, as well as
civil society organizations, the private sector and the
international community. We also applaud the positive
role of the Mission in communicating with women’s
groups and organizations and promoting dialogue with
them. We commend as well the adoption of a strategy
to implement resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018),
on youth, peace and security, with a focus on the
role of young people pertaining to reintegration and
assurances. That would protect them both during and
post-conflict and ensure their participation in peace
processes and measures that will greatly contribute to
the promotion and maintenance of international peace
and security.

S/PV. 8368

We appreciate the current cooperation between
the Colombian Government and the FARC. That was
demonstrated by the request submitted to the Security
Council to renew the mandate of the Mission and by
the adoption of Council’s resolution 2435 (2018),
reflecting the belief of both parties in the Final Peace
Agreement and the Council’s belief in the importance
of supporting it.
In conclusion, we reaffirm the support of the State
of Kuwait to the Colombian Government and the peace
agreement that ended a protracted conflict and paved
the way to a stable and lasting peace. We encourage
the Colombian Government and the FARC to resume
the implementation of the ceasefire agreement and to
reach an agreement that meets the aspirations of the
Colombian people and ends the current instability,
which has lasted for many years in Colombia.
Mr. Zhang Dianbin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s
meeting, and I welcome Foreign Minister Trujillo
García to the Chamber. I would also like to thank
Special Representative Arnault for his briefing.
Colombia’s presidential and parliamentary elections
were recently held smoothly, and its peace process has
yielded some positive progress. China appreciates the
effort made by former President Santos, the Colombian
Government and other relevant parties. I also appreciate
the fact that since President Duque Márquez’s
inauguration, the new Colombian Government has
made efforts to conduct a comprehensive assessment of
the situation in the country, formulate a new national
development policy and commit to implementing the
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building
a Stable and Lasting Peace, with the aim of continuing
to promote the peace process in Colombia. That will
help to realize peace and development in Colombia and
is also very significant for the maintenance of peace
and stability in the whole region. For the next phase,
Colombia still needs to comprehensively implement
the peace agreement and achieve the reintegration of
former combatants into society, including into political
and economic aspects of life. At the same time,
Colombia is still facing security challenges such as
organized crime and drug trafficking. Achieving social
and economic development will continue to be a long
and arduous task.
Against that backdrop, China hopes that all parties
in Colombia will further consolidate a consensus on

18-3120113/19

S/PV.8368

Colombia

maintaining State security and stability, achieving
development, firmly promoting the peace process and
working to solve differences through dialogue and
negotiation. The stage that the Colombian peace process
has reached today did not come about easily, and it is
an example of the Security Council’s cooperation in
responding to regional hotspots. The Security Council
should work together with the international community,
continue to strengthen its support to Colombia, respect
the leadership of the Government and the people and
provide constructive assistance to Colombia in its
peace process.
China is grateful to Special Representative Arnault
and the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia
for their contributions to promoting the peace process
in Colombia over the past year. We welcome the recent
adoption of resolution 2435 (2018), which renewed the
mandate of the Mission for a year. We hope that the
Mission will further strengthen communication with
the Colombian Government and the relevant parties,
work to address the reintegration of former combatants
and guarantee the security of the conflict-affected
areas, as well as promote mutual confidence among all
the parties in Colombia and positively implement the
peace agreement.
China would like to work with all other members
of the Council to support the Verification Mission in
the implementation of its mandate, advance the peace
process in Colombia and make our contribution to
realizing comprehensive peace and stability in Colombia
as soon as possible.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): Côte
d’Ivoire welcomes the convening of today’s meeting
to consider the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/874) on the latest developments in the situation
in Colombia and the activities of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia. We warmly welcome
Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo García, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Colombia, whose presence reflects
the importance that the Colombian authorities attach
to the ongoing peace process in their country. We also
thank Mr. Jean Arnault, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Colombia and Head of the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, for
his comprehensive briefing.
My delegation would like to comment on the
following points in the report: the recent progress in the
implementation of the peace process, the difficulties
14/19

10/10/2018

that have been encountered and the prospects for the
future. With regard to recent progress, Côte d’Ivoire
welcomes the Colombian authorities’ determination to
continue to cooperate with the Mission with a view to
achieving a just and lasting peace. In that regard, we
were pleased to note the letter to the Security Council
from the Colombian authorities, in agreement with the
Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Común (FARC),
requesting the extension of the mandate of the United
Nations Verification Mission, which was due to end on
26 September.
We also welcome the various initiatives launched
by President Iván Duque Márquez since his accession
to the presidency of Colombia with a view to promoting
a new dynamic in the peace process. They include
appointments to commissions established under the
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building
a Stable and Lasting Peace, the signing of the national
pact for life and the protection of social leaders and
human rights defenders, and the strengthening of
social dialogue.
My country commends the commitment of all
Colombian institutions to providing adequate responses
to key issues related to security, the promotion of
human rights in conflict-affected areas, and the truth,
justice and reparation system. In that regard, we
welcome the adjustments and clarifications made by the
Constitutional Court to the relevant provisions of the
peace agreement when assessing their conformity with
the Constitution. We also welcome the holding of the
first hearing of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, and
the referendum on the proposals to address terrorism
and corruption and promote transparency, held at
the initiative of several political parties and with the
support of President Duque.
With regard to the difficulties facing the peace
process, my delegation is concerned about the violence
that has persisted throughout the country. We are
sorry to note the insecurity in areas where training
and reintegration centres for former combatants are
located, which is forcing them to leave the centres. A
number of pressing and sensitive issues also require
sustained attention, as they are a source of concern
for the Council. They include delays in implementing
the process for the economic reintegration of excombatants of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo, the growing illegal
economies, clashes between illegal armed groups for
the control of territories, and the issues of victims’
18-31201

10/10/2018

Colombia

rights and the Special Jurisdiction’s independence
and financial autonomy. All of these call for urgent
action on the part of the Colombian authorities and the
international community.
In terms of responding to the difficulties with the
peace process, my delegation urges the Colombian
authorities to redouble their efforts to implement the
peace agreement together with the FARC, including
through measures to restore trust. In that regard, it
is imperative to strengthen the State’s presence in all
the conflict zones and to accelerate the process of
economic reintegration by providing adequate financial
resources. Furthermore, while welcoming the steps
already taken in the field of security, my delegation
encourages the Government to continue its efforts
to resolve this thorny issue. We also urge the new
Colombian authorities to engage in discussions with
representatives of the National Liberation Army.
My delegation believes that significant progress
has been made. We therefore urge the Security Council
to support the peace and reconciliation efforts of the
Colombian people and their Government. In that regard,
my country reiterates its support to the Verification
Mission and the United Nations country team in
Colombia for their commitment and the work they have
already accomplished. We particularly commend the
efforts in the area of peacebuilding and related issues.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire assures the Colombian
authorities of its willingness to work with them to ensure
the success of the peace and reconciliation process.

S/PV. 8368

human rights defenders was also a big milestone in
addressing the main challenge to the implementation
of the peace agreement. We believe that the new
Government’s commitment to bringing development,
security and the rule of law to the conflict-affected
communities in a more coordinated and focused way is
the most important decision that it has reached to date
with regard to consolidating the gains made so far.
We know that Colombia is still facing so many
challenges in making the terms of the peace agreement
a reality, and the Council should continue to provide
all the necessary support to the Colombian parties in
addressing those challenges and expediting the full
implementation of the agreements. As the SecretaryGeneral’s report indicated, the departure of several
former FARC-EP commanders from training and
reintegration areas, especially in the south-eastern
region, is a worrying sign. The underlying reasons for
that departure should therefore be addressed as quickly
as possible.
We are also aware of various sensitive issues,
including the delays in the socioeconomic reintegration
of FARC-EP combatants into civilian life, the issue of
illicit economies, the continued killings of community
leaders and former FARC-EP members and other issues
highlighted in the report that might potentially create
difficulties for the efforts aimed at consolidating peace
in the country.

Mr. Woldegerima (Ethiopia): We thank Special
Representative Arnault for his briefing on the report
of the Secretary-General on the activities of the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia (S/2018/874).
We are very pleased to welcome the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Colombia, Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo García,
who is here with us this morning. The commitments
made by the new President of Colombia during his
inauguration certainly sent a positive message to all
who closely follow the implementation of Colombia’s
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a
Stable and Lasting Peace. Real commitments were made
to supporting the more effective integration of former
combatants of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP), as noted in
the Secretary-General’s report.

With regard to the negotiations between the
Colombian Government and the National Liberation
Army, we are encouraged by the report that the two
parties have concluded a sixth round of negotiations.
While that is good progress, the parties should continue
to engage in constructive dialogue with a view to
reaching a permanent peace agreement. We commend
Special Representative Arnault and the United Nations
personnel in Colombia for all their efforts in support of
the peace agreements. We also reiterate our appreciation
to the countries of the region and other international
partners that continue to closely support and monitor
the implementation of the peace agreement. Finally, we
want to take this opportunity to reaffirm our continued
support to the full implementation of the Colombian
peace agreement and stand in solidarity with the people
and Government of Colombia as they continue their
march towards sustainable peace.

The signing of a broad-based seven-point national
pact for life and the protection of social leaders and

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Given that this is my first meeting under your

18-3120115/19

S/PV.8368

Colombia

presidency, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, and
wish you every success during the month of October.
We welcome the presence in the Chamber today of
Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo García, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Colombia, to discuss this important issue, and
we thank Mr. Jean Arnault, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Colombia and Head of the
United Nations Mission in Colombia, for his detailed
briefing and his assessments.
The report of the Secretary-General presented
today (S/2018/874) reflects the situation on the ground
reasonably objectively and therefore leaves a twofold
impression. On the one hand, during the year that
the Verification Mission has been operational there
have been significant changes for the better. The
rebel movement has been transformed into a political
party, there have been parliamentary and presidential
elections and the Special Jurisdiction for Peace has
been launched. It will be important to consolidate
and develop all of those achievements. On the other
hand, in the past three months, starting right when the
previous report (S/2018/723) came out, the direction
that the situation has taken has aroused a certain
degree of concern. The report shows a lack of progress
in areas that are important to ensuring stability,
such as civilians’ security and the implementation
of reintegration programmes. There is still a great
deal of work to be done to create the conditions that
will enable the population to have stable and legal
incomes. And there are also problems with Parliament’s
representativeness. Two of the parliamentary seats that
the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Común was
guaranteed under the Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace are
still unoccupied.
Urgent action is also needed to investigate and
prevent murders and attacks on the civilian population,
which now includes former rebels. Partly as a result of
the fact that those problems are still unresolved, many
ex-combatants are taking up arms again for their own
security. Around 10 per cent of the combatants who
acceded to the peace agreement have already returned
to the rebel ranks. If anyone thinks that number is
insignificant, I should point out that among them are
five former high-ranking members of the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del
Pueblo, and that does not include field commanders.
The National Liberation Army is also closely following
this situation.
16/19

10/10/2018

We have already said that the only thing that can
halt this trend is additional efforts on the part of the
Government to meet its commitments under the peace
agreement. We realize that some of the delay in resolving
the issue is linked to the period of transition to a new
administration. In that context, we are pleased to note
the Secretary-General’s very positive assessment of the
commitment of Colombia’s new President, Mr. Iván
Duque Márquez, to the ex-combatants’ socioeconomic,
political and legal reintegration, which represents
three key elements of the peace agreement. It was
the agreement and its central element, the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace, that made it possible for the
Secretary-General and the Security Council, whose
own authority is invested in the business of ensuring
peace in Colombia, to support the peace process. The
peace agreement is therefore the only international
legal foundation for a settlement, and we hope that
all of those who signed up to it will maintain their
commitment to it. We are grateful to the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia, under the leadership
of Mr. Arnault, for monitoring the implementation of
the agreement, and we supported the Council’s adoption
in September (see S/PV.8351) of resolution 2435 (2018),
which extended the Mission’s mandate for another year.
Here in the Security Council it has frequently been
emphasized that the normalization of the situation
in Colombia is an example of effective cooperation
between the United Nations and a host country. It is the
sense of national responsibility and the desire to find
politically sustainable solutions shown by Colombians
that have made peace in their country possible. For
our part, we will continue to support the people and
the Government of Colombia in the work of building a
stable peace and post-conflict development.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I will now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Plurinational State of Bolivia.
First of all, we cordially welcome Mr. Carlos
Holmes Trujillo García, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Colombia, and Mr. Emilio Archila, High Counsellor for
Post-Conflict. We would like to take this opportunity
to express Bolivia’s support for the task ahead of
consolidating Colombia’s long-awaited peace. We
would also like to welcome Mr. Jean Arnault, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and
to thank him again for his commitment to peace and to
our region.
18-31201

10/10/2018

Colombia

Together with the beginning of the mandate of the
new Colombian Government, we are also witnessing
a new stage in the peace process, in which the
commitment to implementing the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace in order to effectively reintegrate ex-combatants
of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de ColombiaEjército del Pueblo (FARC-EP) into civilian life is
crucial to the entire peacebuilding agenda in Colombia.
In what has now been almost two years, Colombia
has seen a definitive ceasefire between the Government
and the FARC-EP, the laying down of arms, a significant
drop in the levels of violence, the formation of a new
political party and its participation in this year’s
electoral process and assumption of its new legislative
duties. We must always keep in mind the magnitude
of what has been achieved in order to be sure that this
process is irreversible. And although the tasks ahead
are not simple, we must reaffirm the commitment that
we all have to the Colombian people.
We are encouraged by President Duque Márquez’s
positive statements and by the measures he has taken
in these initial months, among which we want to
highlight the appointment of high-level officials
to the Commission for the Follow-up, Promotion
and Verification of the Implementation of the Final
Agreement. The role of Colombia’s institutions in the
implementation of the agreement is essential, and we
encourage them to continue working on that process.
The presence of the High Counsellor and Foreign
Minister Trujillo in the Council today is a clear sign of
the new Government’s willingness to continue working
with our Organization and the international community
to build a stable and lasting peace in Colombia.
My country is of the view that the peace agreement
is also an opportunity to comprehensively address
the fundamental problems in Colombia by seeking
to eliminate the deep-rooted historical discrepancies
between rural areas and cities, and the poverty,
inequality and absence of the State in the areas affected
by the conflict.
All the progress we have made in implementing
the agreement has taught us important lessons about
our ability to address Colombia’s challenges. To briefly
mention the issues that my country believes are urgent,
the first is that respect for the independence and
autonomy of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace must be
ensured and victims’ right to truth, justice, reparation

S/PV. 8368

and non-repetition guaranteed. It is also vital to
eliminate the uncertainty and fear that FARC-EP excombatants feel with respect to their legal guarantees,
and to ensure their access to transitional justice.
Secondly, regarding security guarantees, as the
Secretary-General says in his report (S/2018/874), the
competition of criminal groups for territorial control
and the expansion of illegal economies has allowed
violence to persist in the areas that were under the
control of the FARC-EP. We firmly condemn and
express our deep concern about the assassinations of
social leaders, former FARC-EP members and human
rights defenders. We believe it is essential to expand
the presence of public law enforcement beyond the
reintegration areas. We also encourage compliance
with the national pact for life and the protection of
social leaders and human rights defenders agreed to on
23 August.
Thirdly, with regard to the numbers related to
progress on economic reintegration, of the dozens of
projects proposed for almost 14,000 ex-combatants, only
17 have been approved and two funded. It is vital that
the National Reintegration Council resume its activities.
Support is also needed for productive projects and for
generating income for FARC-EP ex-combatants, for
which access to landownership, among other things, is
crucial. In that regard, we of course reiterate the call for
ensuring that the United Nations agencies in the country
are well coordinated with the rest of the international
community. The initiative of Vice-President Marta
Ramírez highlights the importance of the economic
empowerment of women in this process. Promoting and
supporting gender and ethnic perspectives and the role
of young people in reintegration processes is vital to the
proper implementation of the peace agreement.
Finally, I would like to emphasize our unwavering
commitment to the Colombian people, in this and other
forums and through our observers on the ground, and
to the objective of continuing to contribute to our
brother country of Colombia’s attainment of its longdesired peace.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Colombia.
Mr. Trujillo García (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I want to thank the Ambassador of Bolivia for convening

18-3120117/19

S/PV.8368

Colombia

this briefing, as well as Mr. Jean Arnault for his briefing
on the Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/874).
This being the first time that I am addressing the
Security Council, on behalf of President Iván Duque
Márquez I would like to express our appreciation to the
Secretary-General and to all the members of the Security
Council for their continued support to Colombia through
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia,
whose mandate has been extended unanimously.
Our recent elections gave President Duque a clear
democratic mandate to lead our national Government
for the next four years on the pillars of legality, equity
and entrepreneurship. The mandate supports the
unquestionable commitment of President Duque and his
Government to peace, stabilization and consolidation,
that is, to strengthening democratic institutions and
the rule of law, creating greater opportunities for
economic development and sustaining and expanding
social progress. That commitment goes further than the
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building
a Stable and Lasting Peace, signed in 2016 by the
Government and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP), and
above all corresponds to the values and principles of
the Constitution of 1991.
The agreement with the FARC-EP is an opportunity
that Colombia must take advantage of. As President
Duque indicated in the general debate of the General
Assembly a couple of weeks ago,
“Peace is an objective of all Colombians and all of
us, absolutely everyone, will work decisively for it.
However, peace needs to be built with the rule of
law, which combines the public goods of security
and justice. Our Government is going to work so
that the process of demobilization, disarmament
and reinsertion put forward in the past few years
will go forward successfully.” (A/73/PV.8, p. 23)
There are many challenges facing the Government
of Colombia with regard to the implementation of the
Final Agreement. Among other things, we are dealing
with a disconnect and a lack of funding, as is reflected
in the Secretary-General’s report. That situation
requires corrective measures, which will be publicly
announced and carried out through institutional routes
with the aim of ensuring that the implementation of
the Final Agreement is truly conducive to its intended
goal of peace, stabilization and consolidation. All the
high-level Government bodies with responsibilities in
18/19

10/10/2018

the areas of public order and citizen safety are fully
committed to that objective, not only with regard to
former FARC-EP combatants, but also in order to fully
ensure the human rights and democratic freedoms of
all Colombians.
We agree with the Secretary-General’s report that
it is bad news that some of the leaders of the former
FARC-EP guerrillas who were in the areas used for
training and reintegration have abandoned their duty
to actively support the process. From this Chamber, we
urge them to return to their original course of action
and not to stray down a path of violence and illegality.
The assessment of the economic reintegration
process has acknowledged its uncertain progress, and
we share the concerns about it. We therefore intend
to adopt a new approach, with the aim of making up
for lost time and ensuring that the process has greater
impact, which will enable us to meet the expectations
that former combatants have of becoming full
citizens, meaningful members of their families and
economic actors contributing to the development of
their communities.
The social and economic integration of former
combatants is central to the implementation of the
Final Agreement, and our Government is aware of that.
However, as we work on it, it will be crucial to closely
coordinate all stakeholders, including State authorities,
the private sector, international assistance and United
Nations agencies. At the same time, combating the
cultivation of illicit crops is particularly urgent, given
its unprecedented expansion in recent years, as the
Secretary-General’s report mentions. The fight against
illegal economies in all their forms and manifestations
is key to stabilizing Colombia and strengthening
peaceful coexistence. Our Government is committed to
making intelligent and responsible use of all the tools
and resources available to it within the framework of
the Constitution to tackle this problem, which threatens
not only the successful implementation of the Final
Agreement but also the integrity of our institutions and
our citizens’ security.
We were pleased to note that the SecretaryGeneral’s report recognizes the importance of some
of the initiatives that President Duque’s Government
has undertaken, such as the national pact for life and
the protection of social leaders and human rights
defenders. In formulating the pact, we made progress
on the adoption of a comprehensive social policy that
18-31201

10/10/2018

S/PV. 8368

Colombia

includes early-warning alerts, quick-reaction protection
mechanisms, risk-prevention models and instruments
aimed at ensuring the effective punishment of
perpetrators of crimes against people from various
walks of life who are contributing to their communities’
well-being. We hope that this will ensure that acts such
as those of last week will not be repeated.
The Government of Colombia stresses its
willingness to begin a dialogue with the National
Liberation Army as long as the conditions that have
been repeatedly outlined are met — that is, the release
of kidnap victims and a unilateral end to committing
verifiable criminal acts.
President Duque is aware of the deficiencies in the
peace agreement’s implementation and his entire Cabinet
is already working to resolve them. His Government’s

peace agenda is the Constitution’s peace agenda, and
although it goes far beyond the peace agreement, it
acknowledges that its implementation is a valuable and
essential opportunity. We will therefore make sure that
we do not sacrifice that opportunity to the failures and
problems that the current Administration is facing at its
start. In that endeavour, we will continue to underscore
the issues of gender, ethnicity, children, victims and
justice. To that end, the support that the Council and its
members, together with the international community,
can continue to give us is crucial to ensuring that our
future generations inherit a fairer, safer and more
equitable and enterprising Colombia.
The meeting rose at 11.35 a.m.

18-3120119/19
