S/2014/957

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 December 2014
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo submitted pursuant to paragraph 39
of Security Council resolution 2147 (2014)

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 39 of Security Council
resolution 2147 (2014), by which the Council requested me to conduct a strategic
review of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and the wider United Nations presence in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in order to provide recommendations on
MONUSCO’s future objectives, activities and exit strategy and effective
deployment of resources to the Security Council by 30 December 2014, b earing in
mind the need to continue to increase the effectiveness of the Mission. The report
contains the main findings of that review and recommendations with regard to the
future direction of MONUSCO.

II. Strategic review
2.
Further to Security Council resolution 2147 (2014) and based on a revised
conflict analysis, MONUSCO and the United Nations country team in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo took stock of the implementation of the
Mission’s mandated tasks and discussed conditions for the future drawdown of
the Mission. In order to finalize the review and develop recommendations, I
dispatched an integrated team from United Nations Headquarters to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo from 5 to 14 November. The team received briefings from
MONUSCO and the wider United Nations system and consulted representatives of
the Government, including the Prime Minister, the Ministers of Foreign Affairs,
Defence, Interior and Justice and senior representatives of the Armed Forces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (Forces Armées de la République Démocratique
du Congo (FARDC)) and the Congolese Police National. It also met the Presidents
of the Senate, the National Assembly, leaders of parliamentary groups, the President
of the National Independent Electoral Commission, provincial and territorial
administration officials and representatives of the diplomatic community,
non-governmental organizations and civil society. Members of the team visited
Beni, Bukavu, Bunia, Dungu, Goma, Kalemie, Lubumbashi, Mano no, Mbandaka
and Shabunda in addition to Kinshasa.
14-67877 (E)

090115

*1467877*

S/2014/957

3.
The visit of the team was preceded by a visit of the Office of Peacekeeping
Strategic Partnership undertaking a review of uniformed personnel, welfare
provisions, adequacy of support services and operational issues that have affected
the safety and security of uniformed personnel.

III. Findings
A.

Political situation
4.
The upcoming elections dominated discussions with interlocutors from across
the political spectrum. Speculation about a constitutional review aimed at extending
presidential term limits prior to the 2016 national elections contributed to increasing
political tension, with some political figures from within the ruling coalition joining
the voices of the political opposition, the Catholic Church and civil society in
opposing any constitutional revision. The gap between the announcement by
President Joseph Kabila in October 2013 and the actual Cabinet reshuffle on
7 December 2014 compounded the uncertainty among the political elite.
Interlocutors from opposition parties and civil society across the country called on
the international community to prevent a change in the constitution. International
partners identified a peaceful transition of power as essential for the country’s future
peace and stability.
5.
Many interlocutors saw the upcoming elections as a likely source of tension,
competition and possibly violence and human rights violations in different places
across the country, especially if the elections were not perceived as fr ee and fair.
This view was not shared by the Government. Some interlocutors mentioned an
increasing restriction of political space, freedom of expression and the media, with
the potential to trigger violence and human rights violations. International partn ers
and human rights defenders unanimously condemned the Government’s decision to
expel the Director of the United Nations Joint Human Rights Office following the
publication of the human rights report on violations allegedly committed by the
police during Operation Likofi. The Government’s decision was viewed as a signal
that the space for human rights defenders was shrinking and had to be negotiated.
Allies of the President voiced concern that the political opposition lacked a
constructive approach, alleging that Radio Okapi was being used to promote
instability. The recent reshuffle of FARDC was interpreted by some as a move by
the country’s leadership to tighten control before the upcoming electoral cycle,
although others mentioned that the restructuring could also contribute to its further
modernization. Politically motivated manipulation of armed groups was viewed as
an increasing phenomenon in the pre-elections context.
6.
The Government noted progress towards completing the legislative framework
for the elections. Three draft laws were submitted to Parliament for debate and
adoption, including a proposal by the Government to amend the relevant provisions
of the Constitution to modify the voting system from direct to indirect provincial,
gubernatorial and senatorial elections. The proposed modification was critici zed by
opposition parties, which interpreted it as a means to delay the 2016 presidential
elections. Many interlocutors anticipated delays in holding the polls, in view of the
steps that remain outstanding, including the revision of the voters roll, the planned
administrative census, the adoption of the electoral cycle road map and the budget.

2/18

14-67877

S/2014/957

7.
There were divergent views about the sequencing of the polls and the
importance of holding local elections, which are the last part of the electoral cycle
envisaged by the 2002 Global and All-Inclusive Agreement. Local elections will
involve approximately the same number of voters and polling stations as the
national elections, but will be considerably more complex with potential candidates
estimated to be in the hundreds of thousands. Most interlocutors noted that local
elections had the potential to further exacerbate local and intercommunal conflicts
and the competition over resources. Noting that preparations were under way to
hold local elections in 2015, the President of the National Independent Electoral
Commission emphasized the need to first update the voters roll based on the
population census.
8.
The Government indicated that it would welcome technical and logistical
support for the organization of the elections. Opposition parties and civil society
called on MONUSCO to use its good offices to ensure the timely holding of the
elections in line with the Constitution, with some calling for MONUSCO to play a
similar role as it did in supporting the 2006 elections. Following President Kabila’s
request for MONUSCO to discontinue its round-table initiative in the context of the
elections, the Government clarified that it was not against the Mission us ing its
good offices so long as this was done with respect to the key principles of
sovereignty and in a non-formal way. International partners stressed that their
engagement and financial support were contingent on the publication of a complete
electoral calendar and the adoption of the electoral law. Donor support for the
programme of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) for the
elections remains outstanding.

B.

Implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
9.
Government interlocutors emphasized that the implementation of its national
commitments under the Political, Security and Cooperation Framework was well
under way. Opposition members reiterated their demand for national dialogue to
continue, while civil society called for progress with regard to key reforms. The
Government noted a lack of progress by other signatories in the region in
implementing their commitments under the Framework. This view was shared by
interlocutors across the political spectrum in the Democra tic Republic of the Congo,
who called on the international community to ensure that all signatories abide by
their commitments. Many interlocutors claimed that some neighbouring countries
played a destabilizing role.
10. Discussions with the Government on the implementation of the national
commitments focused on security sector reform. Referring to a 10 -year army reform
plan, the Minister of Defence highlighted progress achieved towards establishing
the legal framework and building the capacities of FARDC. In addition to the
provision of technical advice, the Minister requested MONUSCO’s assistance in
providing infrastructure and equipment and finding solutions for the approximately
100,000 FARDC members who are beyond retirement age or not fit for service. In
response to MONUSCO’s proposal to contribute to the training of FARDC through
the provision of a comprehensive training package for a rapid response unit, the
Government expressed its preference to continue training with bilateral partners.
MONUSCO’s proposal envisages bringing together national and bilateral trainers
under the umbrella of the United Nations.

14-67877

3/18

S/2014/957

11. The Government noted progress made in building the capacities of the police,
including the adoption of essential legislation underpinning the overall police legal
framework and the five-year plan for police reform; the establishment of the main
reform coordination bodies and steps taken towards the creation of a Police
Academy. However, two thirds of the Congolese National Police personnel still lack
basic training. The Government expressed appreciation for the training efforts by
the United Nations police and requested its continuation. Other interlocutors
underscored the need for more political engagement and financial support from the
national authorities to advance national police reform.
12. Noting progress in the reform of the judiciary, including towards the
establishment of the Constitutional Court, the Cour de Cassation and the Conseil
d’Etat as envisaged in the Constitution, the Minister of Justice stressed the
importance of establishing tribunals in each of the 145 territories to effectively
restore State authority and adjudicate disputes at the local level.
13. Decentralization was assessed by most interlocutors as a complex longer -term
process, fraught with tension. Although 9 out of 15 draft laws on decentralization
have been voted by Parliament, the process is blocked. Provinces are to be increased
from 11 to 26, but disagreement persists over the delimitation of boundaries of the
new provinces in Katanga and Kasai Orientale. Local authorities emphasized
the need for the central Government to implement the constitutional provision for
the provinces to receive 40 per cent of the revenues generated by them, so that state
administration has the means to function at the local level.
14. The Prime Minister highlighted progress in the area of macroeconomic
stability. However, in spite of strong macroeconomic performance, with economic
activity steadily accelerating and inflation declinin g sharply, poverty remains
pervasive and the economy vulnerable, exposing this progress to the risk of reversal.
Limited fiscal space and shocks to revenues have hampered the critical investment
spending necessary for inclusive growth.

C.

Security, the protection of civilians and human rights
Security situation
15. The military defeat of M23 in November 2013 and the subsequent extension of
State authority to liberated areas were highlighted as important achievements that
had improved the security situation in many areas. However, the lack of progress in
implementing the Nairobi Declarations risks undermining these achievements. Of
particular concern are the stalled implementation of the amnesty law and
repatriation of Congolese former M23 fighters from their cantonment sites in
Rwanda and Uganda to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
16. The military defeat of M23 notwithstanding, Congolese and foreign armed
groups, including the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF), Forces démocratiques pour
la libération du Rwanda (FDLR) and the many Mayi-Mayi groups continue to pose
a threat to the civilian population and the overall stability and development of the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes region. These armed
groups are involved in criminal activities, including the illicit exploitation of natural
resources, trafficking of weapons and ammunition, smuggling and illegal taxation.

4/18

14-67877

S/2014/957

There are continued reports of corruption and collusion between these armed groups
and individuals within the Congolese administration and security forces.
17. Over the past few months, the FARDC undertook military operations against
ADF with MONUSCO’s support in Beni territory, North Kivu, with heavy
casualties on both sides. Though considerably weakened, the ADF support networks
remained intact and the group retained most of its command and control structures.
The group retreated to remote areas, from where it has been conducting asymmetric
attacks against civilians and FARDC. Since October, attacks attribute d to ADF and
unidentified collaborators have resulted in the brutal killing of over 250 civilians.
They also triggered displacement and anti-MONUSCO sentiments, partly fuelled by
the perception that the Mission had not sufficiently engaged in military oper ations
against ADF, and in political manipulation.
18. In Beni, the local authorities and civil society have called for the more active
involvement of the MONUSCO Force in military operations against ADF, including
through conducting unilateral operations. As the situation in Beni area illustrates,
efforts to neutralize armed groups that are dispersed and enjoy the support of local
criminal networks and elements of FARDC take some time to translate into visible
results. It also underscores the need for the Mission to step up the non-military
aspects of its response, such as intensified interaction with local communities,
confidence-building measures, and efforts to counter misinformation and
manipulation by local spoilers in order to address the possible po litical
underpinnings of the incidents.
19. FDLR has been at the heart of the recurrent instability in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes region over the past 20 years. Protecting
communities against FDLR has become the stated raison d’être for several active
Congolese armed groups. Earlier this year, FDLR announced plans to disarm,
demobilize and enter into a peace process. In early June, 186 low-ranking fighters
disarmed themselves in North and South Kivu and entered two tempora ry
demobilization camps, along with 428 dependants. Most of them have been
transported to a transit site in Kisangani. No significant FDLR surrenders have been
reported since 9 June as part of the voluntary disarmament announced by FDLR,
although some 150 elements surrendered on 28 December.
20. On 2 July, a joint Ministerial meeting of the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) and the International Conference for the Great Lakes Region
gave FDLR a final six months, until 2 January 2015, to fully a nd unconditionally
surrender, or face military action. This decision has since been endorsed at several
regional summits.
21. The Congolese Government has indicated that it will stand firm on the
2 January 2015 deadline. Planning and preparations for mil itary operations against
FDLR are under way by MONUSCO, taking into account the dispersed nature of the
group and its immersion within the local population. Based on lessons from the
past, military operations have the potential to weaken, but not eliminate , FDLR.
Military action must be part of a comprehensive strategy that includes a series of
non-military steps aimed at cutting off the group’s finances, splitting the leadership
from the rank and file by creating incentives to increase defections, administ ering
justice for serious crimes, and cutting it off from its recruitment pool. MONUSCO
and the Office of the Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region are supporting such
non-military initiatives.

14-67877

5/18

S/2014/957

22. While joint operations against the Alliance of Patriots for a Free and Sovereign
Congo and the Nduma Defence of Congo/Cheka (NDC/Cheka) continue in North
Kivu, MONUSCO continues to play a role in the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) affected areas in Orientale Province. Its current deployment may be reviewed, in
view of the overall improvement in the security situation as a result of joint
operations carried out with the FARDC and African Union Regional Task Force
against LRA. In Ituri district, Mayi-Mayi Simba elements continue to attack
civilians in Mambasa territory. FARDC operations against the Forces de résistance
patriotiques en Ituri have been suspended as a result of negotiations for the group’s
surrender between the Congolese authorities and the Forces de résistance
patriotiques en Ituri leader Cobra Matata, which are ongoing.
23. Katanga, the country’s richest and most politically sensitive province, faces a
challenging security situation and a complex humanitarian crisis, with some
583,000 internally displaced persons. The Bakata Katanga movement has
destabilized large parts of the province since 2012, when, following his escape from
prison, Kyunugu Mutanga Gédéon began forcing local populations, including
children, to join his ranks or flee. Atrocities committed include killings, the looting
and burning of houses, extortion, torture, forced labour and recruitment into armed
groups, as well as sexual violence, causing the displacement of approximately half a
million people, while hundreds of homes, schools, clinics and other public buildings
have been destroyed. FARDC operations have prevented the Bakata Katanga from
occupying the main population centres. Intercommunal conflict between the
Balubakat and the Pygmies in Kalemie, Kabalo and Nyunzu territories have resulted
in displacement and gross human rights violations, mainly perpetrated by the
Balubakat militia against the Pygmies. In addition, armed groups from North and
South Kivu provinces, including FDLR, the Forces nationales de libération, Raia
Mutomboki, and Mayi-Mayi Yakutumba groups are now present in Katanga,
attracted by artisanal gold and coltan mines in its north. The absence of State
authority has also led to the creation of community self-defence groups to protect
communities from armed groups, which often have become a source of conflict
themselves. The presence of MONUSCO was welcomed by the local authorities and
civil society, but was viewed as insufficient in view of the size of the province and
its challenges. The Government chose not to elaborate on the role it wanted
MONUSCO to play in Katanga.
24. The security situation has remained relatively calm in western Democratic
Republic of the Congo. There is a potential for local flare ups, particularly in
provinces that have been traditional strongholds of the political opposition,
including Bas Congo, Equateur and the two Kasais.
MONUSCO’s role
25. Interlocutors were unanimous that the Force Intervention Brigade remained an
important tool in a broader strategy to end the recurrent cycles of violence in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes region. Government
interlocutors reaffirmed that the neutralization of armed groups remained a key
priority, reiterating that operations against ADF were its top priority. Recognizing
the support provided by MONUSCO in operations against armed groups, the
Government stressed the need for more joint combat operations. It also underscored
the need to enhance the Mission’s efforts in monitoring the borders, including
through the use of the unmanned aerial systems.

6/18

14-67877

S/2014/957

26. MONUSCO underlined that joint operations with FARDC were more
effective, as FARDC often had better intelligence and the capacity to hold areas
freed from armed groups. Joint operations also increased national ownership and
determination and contributed to preventing huma n rights violations by FARDC.
These advantages notwithstanding, unilateral operations by MONUSCO were found
indispensable in cases where the Government fails to protect civilians under threat.
Logistical support provided to FARDC, in accordance with the human rights due
diligence policy, for joint operations was assessed as essential to conduct effective
military operations and maintain FARDC’s will to fight and cooperate with
MONUSCO. The human rights due diligence policy remains vital to the discharging
of MONUSCO’s mandate, although the Government voiced concern about the
policy affecting the effectiveness of its operations.
Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
27. Offering sustainable alternatives to former fighters is an essential part of
neutralizing armed groups. The Government has put in place the third national
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration plan and commenced assembling
former fighters in three sites in Kitona, Kamina and Kotakoli. Recent reports of
former fighters who died from disease and starvation in the Kotakoli camp
underscore the need for the Government to provide the necessary resources to
address the poor conditions in the pre-disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration sites, including by making available its pledged $10 million
contribution to the new plan. The Mission’s activities in support of the plan are
expected to increase once it enters the reinsertion and reintegration phase in 2015,
including with regard to weapons and ammunition management activities .
28. The reintegration of former fighters, including children associated with armed
forces and groups, was identified as the major concern. The creation of sustainable
reintegration opportunities for former fighters in their communities of return is vital
for the establishment of lasting peace and stability in the country. Securing the
required funding remains a key challenge. The country team stands ready to support
the Government on reintegration, if funds are made available.
Protection of civilians and human rights
29. The protection of civilians remains MONUSCO’s priority task. Prevailing
insecurity and the fear of being attacked were the main concerns raised by
representatives of local populations in areas affected by conflict. They called on
MONUSCO to do more to protect them. Interactions with civil society illustrated
that MONUSCO’s mandate and capacity were not clearly understood by the
population. There was a perception among local populations that only the
intervention brigade could take robust action to protect civilians, which is not
accurate. Most non-State actors advocated for MONUSCO to increase its efforts to
protect civilians, while the Government made a strong push for a significant
reduction of MONUSCO’s troops, as outlined in paragraph 41 below, although it
wanted to retain the Force Intervention Brigade.
30. The performance and effect of some MONUSCO contingents has drawn much
criticism, especially from national interlocutors. MONUSCO’s deployment is
mainly static and passive. Neither the Force Intervention Brigade nor the framework
brigades were found to operate at the optimum level. Many framework brigades

14-67877

7/18

S/2014/957

were described as not having conducted patrols to the most vulnerable areas on
several occasions, while limiting their patrolling activities to daylight hours only.
There were reports of certain contingents being reluctant to engage militarily
against armed groups despite orders from the MONUSCO leadership to do so.
31. MONUSCO’s leadership and members of the diplomatic corps noted the need
to remove the distinction between the Force Intervention Brigade and the
framework brigades. While it may be impractical for all contingents to be
authorized to conduct targeted offensive operations to neutralize armed groups,
urgent measures are required to ensure a more active contribution by the framework
brigades to activities in the context of the neutralization of armed groups and the
protection of civilians. Equally with the Intervention Brigade, they have full
responsibility to protect civilians and full authority to take all necessary measures
for that purpose.
32. In spite of a significant decrease in violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law by all parties over the last decade, armed groups and
national defence and security forces continue to commit serious violations with
continued impunity. In spite of some progress, too many perpetrators, in particular
senior-ranking FARDC and Congolese National Police officers, are not prosecuted
and convicted. This includes FARDC elements involved in the mass rape in Minova,
South Kivu in 2012. Removing human rights abusers from the army, police and
other security forces, while strengthening civilian and military accountability
mechanisms, was found essential to ensure longer-term stability in the country.
33. Government interlocutors and members of Parliament reaffirmed their
commitment to promote and protect human rights and establish the National Human
Rights Commission in close cooperation with MONUSCO. The recent appointment
of an Adviser to the President on sexual violence and child recruitment was seen as
a demonstration of the President’s commitment to the fight against conflict -related
sexual violence and recruitment and use of children.

D.

Humanitarian situation
34. The Democratic Republic of the Congo remains a complex operating
environment, with four competing emergencies, namely violence and armed
conflict, malnutrition, epidemics and natural disasters. Seven million people are
estimated to be in need of assistance throughout the country, including 5.2 million
targeted in the 2015 Humanitarian Response Plan. Some 2.7 million people are
internally displaced, mainly in North and South Kivu, Katanga and Orientale
Province. While some internally displaced persons have returned to their areas of
origin, new displacements continue to occur owing to continued insecurity.

E.

Stabilization
35. Following the launch of the national Programme of Stabilization and
Reconstruction of Armed Conflict Zones (STAREC) in eastern De mocratic Republic
of the Congo, the United Nations approved the International Security and
Stabilization Support Strategy in 2008. It provides the framework for stabilization
projects in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. Its current portfolio o f
projects has a combined budget of $60 million, including $8 million from the

8/18

14-67877

S/2014/957

Peacebuilding Fund. The United Nations system is implementing joint programming
initiatives under the support strategy with good results, although there is a need to
strengthen the link between the different programmes and the Government’s efforts
on stabilization.
36. The islands of stability is a recent and high-profile approach by MONUSCO as
a first step towards stabilization in remote areas where the presence and capacity of
the country team to support the extension of State authority is limited. The triggers
for initiating an island of stability and indicators for measuring progress, including
the Government’s own contributions, are not understood by and communicated
clearly to all stakeholders. There are concerns that MONUSCO may not have the
programme management capacity or the human resources to sustain the
implementation of the concept in the medium term, while links between the various
stabilization instruments and plans in place will need to be articulated, in close
coordination with the Government.
37. There is limited focus by MONUSCO and the wider United Nations system on
the illegal exploitation of natural resources, land issues and intercommunity
conflicts, although there was agreement that natural resource governance and
transparency will be essential to achieve sustainable peace, stability and
development.
Regional dimension
38. Ending the recurrent violence in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
requires a number of collective actions at the regional level. As outlined in
paragraph 15 above, the implementation of the Nairobi Declarations remains an
urgent priority, and progress will go hand in hand with initiatives aimed at building
mutual trust and confidence in the region. Additionally, strengthening regional
cooperation, particularly in the judicial sector and assistance to refugees in
accordance with relevant agreements, deepening regional economic integration, and
supporting regional initiatives against the illegal exploitation of natural resources
will contribute to regional stabilization and development.

F.

Transition/transfer of tasks
39. There are lessons to be learned from the transfer of tasks between MONUSCO
and the United Nations country team. The transfer of tasks lacks a strategic
framework and assumes a one-to-one transfer of responsibilities without sufficient
consideration for the comparative advantage and capacity of the country team, the
role of the Government, the changing needs on the ground, logistical challenges and
the overall reconfiguration of the United Nations presence. The timeframe for such
a transition is taking longer than the envisaged 18 months and cannot yet be
presented as “successful or completed”. Nor does the transfer reflect the transitional
nature of the process and the possibility of transferring certain tasks to the
Government. In a zero or even negative-growth budget environment, the
engagement of partners and donors should have been secured from the outset t o
ensure that they understand the objectives of the process and the risks involved, and
provide their support to its successful implementation.

14-67877

9/18

S/2014/957

IV. Exit strategy
40. Much has been achieved in the 15 years since the establishment of the
peacekeeping operation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo on 30 November
1999 Congolese interlocutors themselves acknowledge: the withdrawal of foreign
armed forces, the reunification of the country, the establishment of the Transitional
Government and two national elections. It is time now to re-evaluate and
reformulate the strategic partnership between the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and MONUSCO, the United Nations system and the broader international
community. After 15 years, MONUSCO finds itself embedded in the fabric of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, especially in the east. The peacekeeping
operation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo has adapted itself over the years
to help to support Congolese efforts to meet emerging challenges. It is time for the
Government to begin discussions with MONUSCO on the gradual takeover of tasks
that the Mission has been performing.
41. With regard to MONUSCO’s future role and exit strategy, the Government did
not provide sufficient clarity on its vision for the coming years. Meaningful
discussions are needed to develop a common vision for how MONUSCO will
eventually be able to leave the Democratic Republic of the Congo without reversing
the gains achieved. While international partners, civil society and oppositi on
members cautioned against an early exit, the Government expressed the view that
the MONUSCO Force should significantly reduce its strength, suggesting a
reduction of 5,000 troops by the end of 2014, and 7,000 by mid -2015, without
providing a rationale for these figures, in spite of repeated requests. The request for
a reduction of MONUSCO’s troops was echoed in President Kabila’s address to the
nation of 15 December.

V. Support considerations
42. The country’s poor and often non-existent infrastructure and the Government’s
lack of resources affect the operational capacity of national and international
partners, including the United Nations system. The vast majority of the country is
reachable in reasonable time only by air transportation, while grou nd supply lines
are often impassable during the rainy season or even totally absent. This has
generated a great reliance, if not dependence, on the Mission’s resources, including
air and ground transportation assets. In certain areas, the Mission has de fa cto
replaced the Government and the local authorities in the provision of transportation
and logistical services.
43. While MONUSCO has strengthened its presence in the east, its logistics
infrastructure in the west has been largely dismantled. This affects the Mission’s
capacity to rapidly redeploy uniformed personnel to protect civilians under threat in
the west, should the situation so require, as well as to support the broader activities
of the country team. The capacity of the MONUSCO antenna offices in provincial
capitals in the west to implement the mandate is limited.
44. There is a need to further streamline and maximize the Mission’s use of
existing capabilities. The same is true for its human, logistical, financial,
communications and information technology resources, particularly as the Mission
adjusts its footprint through the ongoing review of locations and deployments.

10/18

14-67877

S/2014/957

VI. Safety and security of United Nations personnel
45. Security threats facing United Nations personnel in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo remain fluid. Kinshasa and other areas in the West experienced
relatively low threat levels, although crime rates remain a source of concern. In
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, security threats from armed clashes and
violent civil unrest, often exacerbated by political tension, continue to be a source
of concern. Increasing tension and violence in the run-up to elections may affect the
safety and security of United Nations personnel across the country. Overall,
MONUSCO’s support to FARDC-led operations against armed groups has not
resulted in any discernible increase in threats to United Nations personnel, although
in the Beni area, the complex and volatile security situation has had implications for
staff, partly as a result of an apparent campaign to discredit and undermine public
confidence in MONUSCO.

VII. Recommendations
A.

Implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework and elections
46. It is recommended that MONUSCO put added focus on the imple mentation of
its political mandate by streamlining its activities, while intensifying dialogue with
the Government on key policy issues. This may require some adjustments to its
configuration, including the reinforcement of the senior management team at
MONUSCO headquarters in Kinshasa to ensure strategic-level engagement with the
Government and other key partners at the appropriate level. It will be essential for
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General to continue using his good
offices to contribute to the creation of a conducive environment for the elections
and facilitate the implementation of the national commitments under the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework. At the same time, the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region should continue focusing on the
regional commitments and play a role in building confidence among regional actors.
47. It is recommended that MONUSCO and the United Nations country team
support the holding of presidential, legislative, provincial and local elections in
compliance with the Constitution. MONUSCO should provide political support and
promote a level playing field for all candidates. The level of logistical support will
be determined once the electoral cycle road map and budget are in place. The
provision of logistical support should be continually assessed and reviewed
according to the progress made by the Congolese authorities in the steering of the
electoral process, in accordance with the criteria set out in paragraph 16 of Se curity
Council resolution 2053 (2012). The possible provision of logistical support to the
electoral process will have considerable support implications, including in areas not
affected by conflict where MONUSCO has reduced its presence. This will require
the preparation of contingency plans, to ensure timely, temporary deployment to
areas where the Mission’s footprint has been significantly reduced, taking into
account existing resources and intermission cooperation arrangements.
48. The upcoming electoral process requires MONUSCO to enhance its
monitoring and analysis capacity in Kinshasa in order to maintain situational

14-67877

11/18

S/2014/957

awareness across the country, including in areas in the west where the Mission has
reduced its presence. Monitoring and reporting on violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law across the country should remain an essential part of
MONUSCO’s mandate prior to, during and after the elections.
49. MONUSCO should continue to support the Government in implementing its
national commitments under the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework on
security sector reform, including through the provision of technical advice and
support in the area of physical security and stockpile management. While the
training of FARDC and Congolese National Police units remains essential, any
training programme for FARDC should be linked to the establishment of a
functioning supply chain within the army to ensure the sustainability of the efforts
and investments made. It should also take into account the Government’s requests
for equipment, infrastructure and social services. It is recommended that
MONUSCO continue to contribute, with donors, to the development of a realistic,
balanced formula for security sector reform assistance that includes elemen ts of
governance, accountability and parliamentary oversight.
50. Efforts to ensure close cooperation between MONUSCO and the Office of the
Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region should continue. These efforts should
focus on supporting the implementation of the regional commitments under the
Framework, such as strengthening regional cooperation and deepening economic
integration, while at the same time coordinating initiatives aimed at addressing the
root causes of the conflict, including ethnic division, land and refugee issues, and
the illegal exploitation of natural resources.

B.

Neutralization of armed groups, protection of civilians and
human rights
51. Neutralizing and disarming the armed groups remains a key requirement for
the Mission. It is therefore recommended that the deployment of the Force
Intervention Brigade be extended for another year. The Brigade should, however, be
re-energized to take a lead planning and combat role in joint offensive operations
with FARDC and, where necessary and appropriate, take unilateral action to
discharge its responsibility to neutralize armed groups. At the same time, the
framework brigades must become more engaged in joint operations.
52. MONUSCO’s framework brigades must also play a more active role in
protecting civilians by deterring and, if necessary, preventing and stopping armed
groups from inflicting violence on the population. Measures will be taken to prepare
troop-contributing countries to conduct operations aimed at mitigating the threat
from armed groups and protecting civilians, including through the use of lethal
force. Troops and police should be better prepared to engage in protection tasks,
including the prevention of conflict-related sexual violence. Troop- and policecontributing countries should therefore ensure, including through self-certification,
that personnel being deployed have received pre-deployment training on protection
of civilians. Mission-level efforts to “unify” the Force under a single concept of
operations and enabling rules of engagement should be pursued as a matter of
priority, to ensure that the differing yet complementary roles of the framework
brigades and the Intervention Brigade are clearly articulated.

12/18

14-67877

S/2014/957

53. Although the physical protection of civilians from violenc e remains important,
added focus should be placed on protection through political and civilian processes,
reconciliation efforts at the community level, and the establishment of a protective
environment in close coordination with the United Nations country team and other
protection actors. MONUSCO should seek to enhance its capacity to generate more
human intelligence and analysis of better quality, while stepping up its efforts to
address the underlying causes of conflict. At the same time, it will be impo rtant to
continue to prioritize the promotion and protection of human rights and efforts to
fight impunity, including through support to the military and civilian justice systems
and the implementation of the Action Plan to prevent and respond to child
recruitment and use and the Action Plan to prevent and respond to sexual violence
by the armed forces.
54. It is recommended that the MONUSCO Force be transformed to become more
efficient and effective in implementing the mandate. This will require revising t he
concept of operations to reflect a more mobile and agile force, able to pre -empt or
respond to crises quickly, while eliminating redundancies. This transformation will
require different types of manoeuvre forces, enhanced intelligence and aviation
assets, lighter equipment, fewer static operating bases, flexible logistic support, and
above all a willingness by all troop-contributing countries to engage in protection
tasks. The deployment of rapidly deployable units over the coming months will
enable the Force to operate more effectively over a greater geographical area,
thereby negating the need for some static capabilities. The Force has also identified
certain military assets that are currently underutilized and can be repatriated without
an adverse effect on the Mission’s ability to conduct operations. Based on these
measures to increase effectiveness and in the light of the improving security
situation in certain parts of the country, it is recommended that MONUSCO’s
authorized strength be reduced by 2,000 troops. A reduction beyond the
recommended figure would have negative implications for the ability of the Force to
implement its mandate.
55. The transformation of the MONUSCO Force will require the development of
an integrated military-support concept of operations that ensures a connected,
mobile and flexible response as well as a review of the current aviation
arrangements. Its implementation will take time, advanced planning and resources,
as the transformation will have significant logistical and financial implications.
56. MONUSCO should maintain its operational focus on the east. It is
recommended that the Mission review its deployment in northern Katanga in close
consultation with the Government with a view to enhancing its support to the crisi s
response. This should include exploring ways to extend stabilization efforts through
STAREC and the International Security and Stabilization Support Strategy to
Katanga, as well as the use of good offices, given the political roots of some of the
conflicts. There is a need to review the deployment of formed police units and
individual police officers in view of the likely increase of law and order challenges
during the upcoming electoral process, taking into account the Mission’s mandate to
protect civilians across the country. The number of MONUSCO police, both formed
police units and individual police officers, may be insufficient to implement the
Mission’s mandate during this sensitive period. There is, however, an urgent need to
replace the two units that were deployed to the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS) earlier this year. Efforts should continue to build the capacity of
Congolese National Police officers to contribute to the protection of civilians.

14-67877

13/18

S/2014/957

57. MONUSCO should continue to prioritize its monitoring and reporting on
violations of international humanitarian and human rights law, particularly killings,
sexual violence and grave violations against children, while supporting the
Government in its efforts to address the legacy of massive violations through
transitional justice mechanisms and enhanced efforts to fight impunity. The
Prosecution Support Cells should increase their focus on supporting investigation
and prosecution of serious crimes involving FARDC commanders. Support shou ld
be provided to the justice sector reform process, in close partnership with the United
Nations country team. The establishment and strengthening of accountability
mechanisms within the security and defence forces should also be supported.
58. It is recommended that MONUSCO continue providing logistical support to
the FARDC in strict compliance with the human rights due diligence policy as part
of an overarching plan to shift security responsibilities to them. Support should be
conditioned on progress made by the Congolese authorities towards the
establishment of a functioning supply chain within FARDC. This should be
accompanied by efforts to enhance the accountability of FARDC and its respect for
human rights. Over the past year, as a result of intensified military operations
against the armed groups, MONUSCO has increased its logistics support to FARDC
troops by 226 per cent. MONUSCO is supporting an average of 27,000 FARDC
troops per day with rations and 247 FARDC vehicles with fuel for joint operation s.
Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
59. While advocating for more Government engagement and ownership,
MONUSCO’s support to disarmament, demobilization and reintegration activities
will be vital. It should be based on a clearly defined division of responsibility
between the Government and its partners, including MONUSCO. As only
Congolese members of national and foreign armed groups will be covered by the
national programme, other channels, including disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation, resettlement and reintegration, will be needed for the voluntary
repatriation of foreign combatants. Disarmament, demobilization, repatriation,
resettlement and reintegration activities will therefore need to continue but could be
drawn down once foreign armed groups have been largely disbanded.

C.

Stabilization
60. Supporting the restoration and extension of a minimum level of sustainable
State authority to areas freed from armed groups requires enhanced commitment
from the Government to deploy State administration, including police and judicial
and corrections personnel with the necessary resources. It is therefore recommended
that MONUSCO enhance its advocacy work and political engagement at the
national level to ensure the necessary Government ownership. These efforts should
go hand in hand with targeted technical assistance to the national judicial and
corrections systems in order to promote justice and corrections sector reform and
develop independent and functioning criminal justice institut ions and processes, in
close collaboration with the country team.
61. There are a number of stabilization instruments and plans (STAREC,
International Security and Stabilization Support Strategy, islands of stability) but
there seems to be a lack of a common approach within the United Nations system

14/18

14-67877

S/2014/957

itself. Islands of stability are conceived as a short-term stop-gap measure. The use
of quick-impact projects for stabilization is not sustainable. Islands of stability
initiatives must be linked to the International Security and Stabilization Support
Strategy and other medium- and longer-term stabilization programmes and the
multidimensional nature of stabilization should be better articulated. It is
recommended that the United Nations contributions to the stabi lization agenda be
aligned and harmonized as part of the upcoming revision of the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF).
62. Stronger United Nations engagement is recommended to address the root
causes of the conflict, including by supporting natural resource management
initiatives and conflict prevention and resolution mechanisms. MONUSCO will use
its good offices to encourage the consolidation of an effective national civilian
structure to control key mining activities and manage, in an equitable manner, the
extraction and trade of natural resources in the east, while combining its efforts with
the expertise of the United Nations agencies and international financial institutions.

D.

Transition/transfer of tasks
63. It is recommended that the discussion be reframed from “transfer of tasks” to
the transition and reconfiguration of the United Nations presence in country. The
UNDAF is the overall framework within which the discussion on transition should
take place and the realignment of roles and responsibilities should be adjusted in the
context of its upcoming review next year. Capacity-building and longer-term
stabilization activities should be transitioned, to the extent possible, to the country
team, in areas where it has a comparative advantage. In order to facilitate a seamless
transition, innovative measures should be explored, including the development of an
integrated financial framework, which could allow for greater cooperation on
transition arrangements between MONUSCO and the United Nations country team.

E.

Exit strategy
64. Given the numerous political and security challenges that remain,
MONUSCO’s exit should be gradual and progressive, tied to specific targets to be
jointly developed by the Government, the Mission and the United Nations country
team, in consultation with other stakeholders. It is recommended that MONUSCO
and the Government enter into a strategic dialogue to jointly develop targets to
which both parties agree to contribute. Their achievement would trig ger a
progressive reduction of MONUSCO’s tasks and capabilities. It is recommended
that the Government and MONUSCO jointly develop a road map and exit strategy
over the coming months. This should be based on a common assessment of the
partnership to date and build on the work of the regular joint assessment process
initiated in 2010 by MONUSCO and the Government. It should contain mutually
agreed upon targets with timelines and guide MONUSCO’s gradual drawdown.
Once the road map is developed, there should be a periodic joint assessment so that
course correction can be made, if necessary.
65. The road map for MONUSCO’s exit should be accompanied by intensified
efforts by the international community to enhance regional cooperation in order to

14-67877

15/18

S/2014/957

minimize any external threats and risks to the peace consolidation process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

VIII. Observations
66. The situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes
region remains complex and requires the continued attention of the Security
Council. The Framework for Peace, Security and Cooperation remains a relevant
and valid instrument to break the pattern of recurring cycles of violence in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes region. Import ant
results were achieved with the military defeat of M23. However limited headway
has been made in translating the political commitments under the Framework into
concrete action, including with regard to the implementation of the Nairobi
Declarations and the voluntary surrender of FDLR. For the Framework to fulfil its
potential, more even progress is needed. Pursuing robust military action against
foreign and Congolese armed groups remains essential. However, there is a need to
step up, in parallel, efforts to advance critical political processes and reforms, which
remain the main avenue to address the underlying causes of conflict, end the
violence and establish the conditions for lasting peace and stability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes region.
67. I am concerned about the continued attacks on civilians in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo and political tensions related to the upcoming electoral
process. They illustrate the fragility of the situation country-wide and the continued
need for MONUSCO’s presence. The good offices role of my Special
Representative will remain essential to help create the conditions for a free, fair and
credible electoral process accepted by all stakeholders, and facilitate the
implementation of the national commitments under the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework.
68. I am appalled by the targeted killings of hundreds of innocent civilians and the
resulting population displacement in Beni. I deplore the continued serious violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law in other parts of the country,
which are equally unacceptable. The Congolese people have suffered grave human
rights violations and there will be no long-term peace and stability without justice
and respect for human rights. There can be no impunity for those responsible for
violations of international humanitarian law and violations and abuses of human
rights. In particular, those responsible for war crimes and crimes against humanity
must be arrested and held accountable. Promoting and protecting human rights,
including through public reporting remains an important aspect of MONUSCO’s
mandate. I reiterate that United Nations staff must never be threatened or sanctioned
for doing their work, which is based on the Charter of the United Nations and, in
this instance, mandated by the Security Council. The expulsion of the Director of
the United Nations Joint Human Rights Office from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is therefore unacceptable.
69. Initial results notwithstanding, more needs to be done to neutralize foreign and
Congolese armed groups in order to reduce the threat they pose to a level that can be
managed by national justice and security institutions. This requires not only
MONUSCO to be more robust and proactive, but also more commitment from the
Government to work in partnership with MONUSCO to combat these groups,

16/18

14-67877

S/2014/957

restore State authority and find durable solutions for former fighters. The swift
neutralization of FDLR and ADF are essential for longer-term peace and stability. I
call on all stakeholders to ensure that the deadline of 2 January 2015 for the FDLR
to complete their voluntary disarmament remains binding and non -negotiable.
MONUSCO is determined to take action in accordance with its mand ate in the event
that this deadline is not met.
70. The establishment of the Force Intervention Brigade within MONUSCO has
proven to be a valuable tool in support of the broader objectives of the Framework.
Its deployment should be extended. However, urge nt measures are needed to
re-energize the Brigade and, at the same time, ensure a more active contribution
from the framework brigades both with regard to operations to neutralize armed
groups and to protect civilians. Transformation of the MONUSCO Force alone will
not result in the changes necessary to more effectively implement the Mission’s
mandate. It must involve a change in the behaviour of certain troop -contributing
countries. All contingents must be ready and willing to use armed force against
those who pose a threat to the civilian population, and to do so proactively. As
outlined in paragraphs 41 and 54 above, based on the measures to increase
effectiveness and the improving security situation in certain parts of the country, it
is recommended that MONUSCO’s authorized strength be reduced by 2,000 troops.
A further reduction beyond the recommended figure under the current circumstances
would affect the ability of MONUSCO to implement its mandate.
71. Given the numerous political and security challenges that still remain,
MONUSCO’s strategic priorities, outlined in resolution 2147 (2014) remain
relevant. MONUSCO should focus on these priorities and continue to calibrate its
activities, while intensifying dialogue with both the United Nations country team
and the Government to prepare with them the transfer of specific tasks from the
Mission.
72. Addressing the regional dimension of the conflict in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo remains essential. Efforts must be stepped up to address
bilateral sources of tension, cross-border economic relations and the return of
refugees so that we can move away from crisis management and truly resolve the
two-decade-old conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
73. MONUSCO will not stay in the Democratic Republic of the Congo forever. Its
exit should be gradual and progressive to preserve the gains and investments made
so far and avoid a major relapse into instability or conflict. A reduction of the threat
posed by Congolese and foreign armed groups to civilians, the establishment of
stronger and accountable State institutions and the strengthening of democratic
practices to reduce the risk of instability should remain the key criteria guiding
MONUSCO’s gradual drawdown. Progress in security sector reform and the
building of professional and accountable institutions, a credible electoral process
and the subsequent peaceful transition of power will be key elements accelerating
MONUSCO’s eventual departure. As outlined in section VI I of the present report, I
call on the Government to enter into a strategic-level dialogue with MONUSCO to
jointly develop a road map and exit strategy based on mutual targets to which both
parties agree to contribute. This dialogue should be viewed as an opportunity to
redefine the partnership between the United Nations and the Government and
improve cooperation, which would greatly facilitate the transfer of responsibilities
from MONUSCO to the Government and the Mission’s exit.

14-67877

17/18

S/2014/957

74. There will be no sustainable peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Great Lakes region without development. Growth in the property, banking
and natural resources sectors has not been adequately reflected in increased
government revenues or translated into improved living conditi ons for the
population as a whole. There is a need to tackle the causes of this non -redistributive
growth, while taking concrete measures to improve the management of natural
resources and advance key governance reforms.
75. Finally, I would like to express my sincere appreciation to my Special
Representative for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Head of MONUSCO,
Martin Kobler, and my Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region, Said Djinnit, the
men and women of MONUSCO, the United Nations country tea m and all
humanitarian aid workers for their tireless efforts in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Great Lakes region.

18/18

14-67877
