S/PV.7963

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7963rd meeting

Thursday, 8 June 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Llorentty Solíz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bolivia (Plurinational State of))

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Ms. Gasri
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Akahori
Mr. Temenov
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Schoulgin Nyoni
Mr. Yelchenko
Ms. Mulvein
Ms. Sison
Mrs. Nuñez

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-16182 (E)
*1716182*

S/PV.7963

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.

warrants were issued has been arrested and transferred
to the International Criminal Court. Let us not forget:
those men stand accused of multiple charges for some
of the world’s most serious crimes as foreseen under the
Rome Statute.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Ms. Bensouda.
Ms. Bensouda: At the invitation of the Security
Council, I have come from The Hague to provide my
twenty-fifth report on the situation in Darfur, pursuant
to resolution 1593 (2005).
When the Council referred the situation in Darfur
to my Office, it represented a high-water mark in the
international community’s collective efforts to realize
justice and accountability for the grave crimes under
the Rome Statute committed in Darfur. Undoubtedly,
that referral not only provided hope but also raised
expectations for the thousands of victims in the
Darfur situation that justice would be done. Some of
those victims put their faith in the Council and in the
International Criminal Court (ICC), and bravely came
forward to tell my Office their accounts of the horrific
events that they had witnessed and suffered. They often
did so at great personal risk and cost.
The evidence obtained from those courageous
witnesses provided, in large part, the basis for multiple
warrants of arrest, including for Mr. Omar Al-Bashir,
Mr. Ahmad Harun, Mr. Abdel Raheem Hussein, Mr. Ali
Kushayb and Mr. Abdallah Banda. With the issuance of
those warrants — and, in the case of Mr. Banda, the
confirmation of the charges against him — hope for
justice was high. Regrettably, however, for many that
hope has increasingly been replaced by disappointment,
frustration and even anger at the slow progress in the
Darfur situation. Not one of the suspects for whom
2/18

08/06/2017

Today, in this important public forum, I say to
those victims and their families who continue to
long for justice in Darfur, do not despair and do not
abandon hope. Despite the many challenges, hope
must not be lost, as my Office remains steadfast in
its commitment to the task. When choosing between
perpetrators and justice, time is in favour of the latter.
The United Nations ad hoc tribunals for Rwanda and
the former Yugoslavia offer examples that remind us
that persistence and determination can result in the
arrest and surrender of suspects many years after the
issuance of arrest warrants.
I reiterate that my Office remains as determined
as ever to pursue justice in Darfur. Despite budget
constraints, I took the decision to add additional
investigators and analysts to the Darfur team. That
increase in the size of the team is yielding results.
Existing cases are being strengthened through the
collection of additional evidence. Extensive analytical
work is also advancing those cases. My Office is
also intensifying its investigations into new crimes
allegedly committed in Darfur. I take this opportunity
to publicly thank my team for their continued efforts
in the Darfur situation and for their determination,
resilience and professionalism in the face of extremely
challenging circumstances, not least the continued
policy of complete non-cooperation by the Government
of the Sudan and the consequent inability to conduct in
situ investigations.
Notwithstanding the challenges my Office
continues to face, there are reports of some improvement
in the conditions on the ground in Darfur. It is my
hope that any genuine improvement may present those
committed to peace and justice in the region with an
opportunity to make progress.
As the Council is aware, the work of the African
Union High-level Implementation Panel, the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) and other major stakeholders has led to
reports of some recent improvement in the Darfur
situation. For example, at the briefing to the Council
on UNAMID in April (see S/PV.7912) it was noted
that fighting between the forces of the Government
17-16182

08/06/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

of the Sudan and armed opposition movements had
diminished and that the cooperation of the Government
of the Sudan had improved. UNAMID access to areas
in Jebel Marra that were previously off-limits was
reported to have improved, although, as my report
makes clear, any increased access will count for little if
not maintained.
Of course, as my report also notes, serious
problems persist in Darfur. In May, after the briefing
I just mentioned, there were reports that the Sudanese
army, supported by the rapid support forces, clashed
with armed opposition movements in North and East
Darfur.
In addition, internally displaced persons continue to
be subjected to multiple crimes, including in particular
alleged attacks against their camps and sexual and
gender-based violence. In that regard, I note that in
resolution 2340 (2017), adopted in February 2017, the
Council deplored
“the violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights violations and abuses
committed by Government of Sudan security
forces, their proxies, and armed groups, including
those opposing the Government of Sudan, against
civilians, including IDPs, particularly in the Jebel
Marra area” (resolution 2340 (2017), sixteenth
preambular paragraph).
I welcome the Council’s call, as articulated in that
resolution, for all armed actors to refrain from all acts
of violence against civilians.
My latest report also highlights a worrying increase
during the reporting period of arrests and prolonged
detentions of human rights activists and political
opponents of the Government of the Sudan. Challenges
remain in Darfur. Nevertheless, I cautiously welcome
reports of some improvement in the Darfur situation.
As members of the Council have noted on numerous
occasions, including in response to my biannual
reports, lasting peace in Darfur can be achieved only
if the root causes of the conflict are addressed. Those
causes are multiple and complex, but they include
the pervading toxic culture of impunity in Darfur for
Rome Statute crimes. Tackling impunity and pursuing
justice for atrocity crimes in Darfur is the task that the
Council mandated to my Office. It is a mandate that
I will continue to pursue independently, vigorously
and impartially, without fear or favour. But I need the

S/PV.7963

renewed support of the Council and of all States, in
particular those that are party to the Rome Statute.
In 2005, through resolution 1593 (2005), the Council
triggered its de facto and de jure relations with my
Office regarding the Darfur situation. Those relations
and obligations did not stop upon the adoption of that
resolution; on the contrary, they only commenced at
that juncture with the expectation of adequate followup action and support as necessary. I once again ask
this body to provide tangible support for the work of my
Office concerning the Darfur situation. In particular,
I renew my long-standing request for the support of
the Council in relation to efforts to execute the arrest
warrants issued by the Court against the suspects in the
matter. I am equally compelled to repeat my request
for the Council’s assistance in facilitating financial
assistance by the United Nations for my Office’s work
in the Darfur situation.
Before the July judicial recess, the Pre-Trial
Chamber of the Court will decide whether South Africa
acted in non-compliance with the Rome Statute when
it failed to arrest and surrender Mr. Al-Bashir in June
2015 and, if so, whether to refer South Africa to the
Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute of the
ICC and/or the Security Council. In making its decision,
the Chamber will have the benefit of submissions by
South Africa, Belgium, the Southern Africa Litigation
Centre, as amicus curiae, and my Office. Taken together,
those submissions will allow the Chamber to formulate
a reasoned decision that, I hope, will provide the basis
for improved coordination among my Office, the Court,
States parties and the Council in future efforts to arrest
and surrender the Darfur suspects. Those collective
efforts are needed now more than ever.
In terms of travel to States parties, most recently
Mr. Al-Bashir travelled to Jordan on 29 March
2017. Despite being reminded by the Registry of its
obligations to arrest and surrender Mr. Al-Bashir,
regrettably Jordan declined to do so. As a consequence,
the Pre-Trial Chamber II invited Jordan to provide
submissions on that issue for the purpose of a
determination by the Chamber on whether to make a
formal finding of non-compliance and refer the matter
to the Assembly of States Parties and/or the Security
Council. At Jordan’s request, on 2 June, the Chamber
decided to extend the deadline for those submissions
to the end of the month. Regrettably, Mr. Al-Bashir’s
travel to non-States parties also continues. On another
occasion, under diplomatic pressure, Mr. Al-Bashir

17-161823/18

S/PV.7963

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

ultimately did not attend the Riyadh summit in Saudi
Arabia scheduled for 20 and 21 May, as previously
planned.
Inviting, facilitating or supporting the international
travel of any person subject to an ICC arrest warrant
is inconsistent with a commitment to international
criminal justice. It is also an affront to the victims in
Darfur. The States that make up the Council have the
power, independently and collectively, to influence
and incentivize States —whether or not parties to the
Rome Statute — to assist in the efforts to arrest and
surrender the Darfur suspects. That applies equally to
regional organizations. I respectfully ask the members
of the Council to exert that influence in support of the
independent and impartial justice my Office is trying
to achieve with regard to Darfur.
At a minimum, the Council should demonstrate its
support for the work of my Office by taking concrete
action in response to decisions of non-compliance or
non-cooperation referred to it by the Court. To date, there
have been 13 such decisions, and yet not one has been
acted upon by the Council. By failing to act in response
to such Court decisions, the Council is in essence
relinquishing and undermining its clear role on such
matters arising from the Rome Statute, as negotiated
and adopted, and pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005).
I again urge the Council to give serious consideration
to the proposals previously advanced by New Zealand
and other States for practical and meaningful ways
to respond to such referrals by the Court concerning
non-compliance and non-cooperation.
As part of those proposals, I also recall that New
Zealand pointed to the clear need for the Council
to find a way through the current impasse in its
relations with the Government of the Sudan. My
Office wholeheartedly supports that suggestion. In
that respect, it is worth noting that in response to my
twenty-fourth statement to the Council in December
of last year, the representative of the Government of
the Sudan referred to the “important and noble goal
of combating impunity” (S/PV.7833, p. 18). If the
Government of the Sudan is genuine in its commitment
to combating impunity, then the Council should invite
it to demonstrate that commitment by beginning a new
phase of cooperation with the Council and the Court.
Before concluding my update on cooperation, I
note that, while my Office faces challenges in securing
cooperation from a number of States, it continues to
4/18

08/06/2017

benefit from the helpful cooperation of a number of
other States in relation to the Darfur situation. For
that, I express my sincere gratitude and look forward to
continued collaboration.
In conclusion, in resolution 2340 (2017) the Council
specifically calls on the Government of the Sudan to
undertake
“effective efforts to ensure accountability for
violations and abuses of human rights and violations
of international humanitarian law, by whomsoever
perpetrated” (ibid, twenty-second preambular
paragraph).
Such efforts at accountability must surely include
the full cooperation and assistance from the Sudan
to the Court. Such cooperation is specifically
required by resolution 1593 (2005), which referred
the Darfur situation to my Office. Doing so would
demonstrate in clear terms the Sudan’s commitment
to justice for the victims of Rome Statute crimes
in Darfur — the country’s own citizens — and a
recognition of their suffering.
I also respectfully ask for the renewed engagement
of the Council with my Office, in particular in relation
to the arrest and surrender of the Darfur suspects. It is
imperative that we work together to restore faith and
renew hope that justice for the victims in Darfur will
finally be realized. Accountability is a prerequisite for
sustainable peace in Darfur. My Office continues to seek
that accountability. I ask the Council to fully assume its
responsibilities arising from resolution 1593 (2005) and
to support our efforts in the interests of justice, stability
and sustainable peace in Darfur. Should the Council
invest in accountability by adequately supporting my
Office’s work in Darfur, it will surely reap its peace
dividends. Let us not forget that the olive branch of
peace is barren without the trunk of blind justice.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Prosecutor Bensouta for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to members of the Security
Council who wish to make statements.
Ms. Mulvein (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank the Prosecutor for her twenty-fifth report on the
situation in Darfur, the continued commitment of the
Prosecutor and her Office to the investigation and for
her briefing.
17-16182

08/06/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

At the outset, let me express the United Kingdom’s
full support for the International Criminal Court (ICC)
and for its vital work to challenge impunity and bring to
account those responsible for the most serious crimes of
international concern. We appreciate the important role
that the ICC plays, often amid difficult conditions on
the ground. That is clearly the case in Darfur. Fifteen
years of violence there have shown that there can be
no military solution to the conflict. Lasting peace can
be realized only with the agreement of a permanent
ceasfire and an inclusive political settlement that
addresses the root causes of the conflict.
The United Kingdom had welcomed the reduction
in military confrontation between the Government
of the Sudan and the Darfur armed movements. The
announcements of unilateral cessations of hostilities
by the Government, the Sudan Liberation Army/Minni
Minawi and the Justice and Equality Movement in
recent months. We were hopeful that that signalled
the parties’ willingness to engage genuinely in the
peace process. Therefore, we are deeply concerned by
reports of renewed clashes in recent weeks between the
Government and the Sudan Liberation Army/Minni
Minawi. The ongoing risk of violence has a detrimental
impact to the safety of civilians and the overall stability
of Darfur.
We also continue to be extremely concerned about
the use of sexual violence in the conflict, although we
note the recent decrease in instances. We urge all parties
to show restraint, abide by the unilateral cessations of
hostilities and focus their efforts on the peace process
under the auspices of the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel.
On a more positive note, the United Kingdom
welcomes the improvements in access for the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) and humanitarian actors in Darfur, in
particular to Jebel Marra. We urge the Government of
the Sudan to strive for unfettered access throughout
Darfur. That will enable the Prosecutor to carry out her
investigation and UNAMID to carry out its mandate to
protect civilians and facilitate humanitarian assistance.
Like the Prosecutor, we remain concerned by reports of
continued attacks against internally displaced persons
and that some access restrictions remain in place. In
the light of the fragile security situation in Darfur, the
United Kingdom urges that any changes to UNAMID
during the upcoming mandate renewal be done in a

S/PV.7963

manner that is gradual, flexible and retentive of the
nation’s ability to continue to protect civilians.
Over the course of 25 reports, the Prosecutor has
consistently made it clear that the Court needs the
cooperation of States and the support of the Council
in order to move forward on the situation at hand. We
all need to look carefully at what more we can do in
order to ensure that the Court receives the support that
it deserves. The United Kingdom will continue to call
on the Government of the Sudan to meet its obligations
under resolution 1593 (2005) to cooperate fully with the
Court, execute outstanding arrest warrants and fulfil
its international obligations.
The United Kingdom is frustrated that fugitives
of the Court, including President Al-Bashir and
Mr. Hussein, continue to travel unhindered. We
appreciate that States may sometimes have conflicting
commitments to other regional and international
organizations, but we join the Prosecutor in urging
those States to consult with the Court.
For our part, we will continue to raise our concerns
with the relevant Governments with the ultimate goal of
achieving justice for the thousands of victims in Darfur.
We renew our call to all States parties to cooperate with
the ICC and to abide by their Rome Statute obligations.
We welcome the renewed vigour with which
the Office of the Prosecutor is approaching the
investigation. The Office should be commended for the
progress that it has made on the investigation despite
the fragile security situation, the access restrictions,
the continued clashes and the lack of cooperation.
Finally, the United Kingdom would like to offer
its appreciation for the effort that the Office of the
Prosecutor has put into making the most effective and
efficient use of the resources that it has available. I
take this opportunity to reaffirm the United Kingdom’s
commitment to supporting the Court as both a State
party to the Rome statute and a member of the Security
Council.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We thank Prosecutor Fatour
Bensouda for her briefing. We have great respect for
her and the responsibility that she has. There should
be no doubt about that, despite the differences that we
have had — and still have.
We strongly condemn the recent attack carried out
by an unidentified group against peacekeepers of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in

17-161825/18

S/PV.7963

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Darfur (UNAMID) in Nyala, in South Darfur state.
We mourn the death of the Nigerian peacekeeper and
express our condolences to his family, as well as to the
people and the Government of Nigeria.
The topic of this afternoon’s discussion is very
important to us indeed, for obvious reasons. Time and
again, we in Africa have affirmed our unflinching
commitment to fighting impunity and promoting
democracy, the rule of law and good governance
throughout the continent, in line with the Constitutive
Act of the African Union. That has been empirically
validated by bold actions taken by the African Union
(AU) in recent times. When it comes to the International
Criminal Court (ICC), many African Union member
States have ratified the Rome Statute, faithfully
subscribing to its cardinal objectives and principles.
Unfortunately, the manner in which the International
Criminal Court has been operating ended up being a
major disappointment and left a very bad impression
in Africa. That is why Africa has been expressing a
serious reservation about the ICC, and this has been
reflected in a number of decisions adopted by the policy
organs of the African Union.
On the issue of the Sudan and the ICC in particular,
the African Union was convinced that the referral by
the Council of the situation in Darfur to the ICC and
subsequent developments as it related to the President
of the Sudan would cause more harm than good. That
it would seriously undermine the ongoing efforts aimed
at facilitating the early resolution of the conflict in
Darfur was in no doubt.
In view of the delicate nature of the peace process,
the AU repeatedly requested the suspension of the
proceedings against President Omar Al-Bashir of the
Sudan and urged the Security Council to withdraw said
referral to the ICC. Given the indispensable role that
the Sudanese President was playing for peace, not only
in the Sudan but also in the subregion in general, it was
the conviction of the AU, including at the summit level,
that the whole effort was short-sighted, with grave
implications for the peace and security of the region.
The position taken by the AU was not by any means
the result of an emotional reaction motivated by the
urge to defend an African leader regardless; far from it.
Past experiences on our continent and elsewhere amply
demonstrate the need to balance justice on the one hand,
and security and reconciliation on the other, in complex
conflict situations. It is in the light of this fact that we
6/18

08/06/2017

in Africa have been insisting on the importance of
finding homegrown solutions to some of the intractable
conflicts on our continent.
It is on the basis of this understanding that the
African Union requested said deferral, in accordance
with article 16 of the Rome Statute, under Chapter VII
of the United Nations Charter.
It is indeed regrettable that Africa’s repeated
requests have so far been neither heard nor acted
upon. That is why we feel that it is our obligation, as
an African member, to reiterate once again the request
made by the African Union, which should be responded
to by the Council with a view to promoting lasting
peace and reconciliation in the Sudan.
The undue politicization that has victimized the
President of the Sudan needs to come to an end. I hope
that Prosecutor Bensouda will come to this conclusion,
for which she will need the support of the Council.
The fact that Sudan has been playing a constructive
role in dealing with peace and security issues in the
region is not widely recognized. President Omar Hassan
Al-Bashir has indeed been demonstrating the political
leadership and commitment necessary to resolve the
Darfur issue and also address outstanding issues with
South Sudan.
As we have been saying for quite some time now
and as acknowledged by the various reports of the
Secretary-General, including the recent special report
on the strategic review of UNAMID (S/2017/437),
the situation in Darfur has continued to show marked
progress. The hostilities between the Government of
the Sudan and rebel forces have decreased substantially,
and the security situation on the ground has improved
significantly.
I wish to applaud Prosecutor Bensouda for
recognizing and appreciating this fact. The Darfur
peace process laid out by the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel and supported by UNAMID has
also achieved some progress. This notwithstanding, the
lack of constructive engagement by the leaders of the
remaining armed movements has been a major obstacle.
Of course, we also recognize that a lot remains to
be done in addressing the root causes of the conflict in
Darfur and ensuring long-term stability. It is for that
reason that we would like to call on the Government
to redouble its efforts to implement all the remaining
tasks. The international community should also live
17-16182

08/06/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

up to its commitments, and the Council in particular
should exert pressure on the armed movements to
negotiate seriously to put an end to the suffering of the
people of Darfur.
Finally, we condemn in the strongest terms
the attacks conducted by the armed movements in
Darfur on 19 and 20 May, aimed at undermining the
implementation of the ceasefire and reversing the
positive momentum registered so far. We urge the
leaders of these armed groups to lay down their arms
and join the political process without delay. Of course,
as already indicated, the case against the President of
the Sudan is so weak that its continuation makes no
sense. In fact, it would only damage the credibility of
the Council, for the lack of action concerning the issue
would not be consistent with the primary responsibility
that the Council has for international peace and security.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
for her briefing today before the Security Council on
her twenty-fifth report pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1593 (2005). In that regard, allow me to
stress the following points.
First, there is a unified African position regarding
the manner in which the ICC deals with certain issues
relating to Africa, which is reflected in the resolutions
adopted at African Union (AU) summits. Africa,
pursuant to these resolutions, stresses, inter alia, that
at a time when the continent is committed to combating
impunity in accordance with the AU Constitutive Act,
the ICC proceedings against President Omar Al-Bashir,
President of the Sudan, must be suspended.
Secondly, the AU summit resolutions urged the
Security Council to withdraw the referral to the ICC
of the situation in Darfur, and I have expressed strong
concern at the fact that the Security Council has not
responded to the request of the AU in this regard.
Thirdly, the ICC must not take any measure that
could jeopardize peace, security, stability or the dignity,
sovereignty and safety of the countries of the continent.
The ICC must respect the provisions of international
law relating to the immunity accorded Heads of State
and other senior officials during their tenure.
Fourthly, and in conclusion, we reject any action
taken against any African country under the pretext that
it has not complied with its obligations under the Rome

S/PV.7963

Statute or on the basis of its non-cooperation pursuant
to Security Council resolution 1593 (2005), because it
did not arrest President Al-Bashir and hand him over to
the ICC, especially given that there is an obligation on
AU member States in this regard under the relevant AU
summit resolutions and the AU Constitutive Act.
Mrs. Nuñez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to thank the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her comprehensive
briefing on the twenty-fifth report on the activities
of her Office on the situation in Darfur in the Sudan.
We believe that these transparent and frank briefings
provide added value to the analysis of issues that fall
within the competency of the Security Council.
At the outset, Uruguay takes this opportunity to
reiterate its full support for the role of the International
Criminal Court as an institution that was created to
strengthen the rule of law at the international level by
judging those who are responsible for the most serious
human rights violations, which affect humankind as a
whole. In this regard, we renew our appeal to States
Members of the United Nations that are not yet parties
to the Rome Statute to join it, which would contribute
to the universalization of this instrument designed to
fight against impunity and defend the victims of crimes
so atrocious that they constitute a serious threat to the
peace and security of all humankind.
We regret that the situation with regard to this subject
has remained practically unchanged since December,
the last time we addressed it (see S/PV.7850). Having
listened to Ms. Bensouda’s briefing this afternoon, we
wish to express our dismay at the lack of cooperation
of the States parties to the International Criminal Court
and the lack of observance and implementation of the
Rome Statute. Uruguay, as a State party to the Statute,
is concerned about all cases of non-cooperation with
the International Criminal Court. In this particular
case, it is worth recalling resolution 1593 (2005), which
states in paragraph 2 that
“the Government of Sudan and all other parties to
the conflict in Darfur shall cooperate fully with ...
the Court and the Prosecutor ... [and] urges all States
and concerned regional and other international
organizations to cooperate fully”.
Uruguay supports and is prepared to work to ensure
that the Council plays a more active role in considerin
instances of non-cooperation with the Court and to
make sure that arrest warrants are executed, a necessary

17-161827/18

S/PV.7963

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

08/06/2017

condition for the Court to be able to sufficiently comply
with its mandate.

peacekeepers. For years, the conflict continued even
expanding into other parts of the Sudan.

Ms. Bensouda stressed that the Prosecutor’s Office
had welcomed the action proposed by New Zealand
last year. Uruguay agrees that such proposals could
empower the Security Council to take concrete action
in cases of non-cooperation with the Court. In this
regard, the Council should adopt a more structured
approach to considering cases of non-cooperation.
It is also imperative to resolve the current impasse
between the Council and the Government of the Sudan
in this regard, taking advantage of the improvement
in their relationship with respect to the political
process in Darfur and the performance of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.

During that time, we have consistently supported
efforts to provide justice and accountability for crimes
committed in Darfur and to finally break the cycle of
impunity. At the same time, recognizing that the people
of Darfur yearned for fewer bombings, less bloodshed,
less conflict and greater stability and safety, we have
also focused on seeing an end to the conflict. Through
bilateral engagement, we identified concrete steps to
make tangible improvements in the lives of ordinary
Sudanese and have seen results. The Government of the
Sudan has taken meaningful positive steps with respect
to the conflict, including committing to a unilateral
cessation of hostilities, and while some violence
persists, we have not seen Government military
offensives in this period as we have in every other year
since these conflicts began.

In conclusion, I would like to send a message
of encouragement and congratulate the Prosecutor
for her work to investigate the crimes committed in
Darfur, which undoubtedly promotes the strengthening
of the rule of law and the formation of a society in
which perpetrators of crimes are held accountable
and the rights and guarantees of all inhabitants are
fully respected.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda for her briefing this
afternoon.
The need to bring justice to the victims of atrocities
in Darfur is overwhelming. For over a decade, Darfur
has been synonymous with suffering and unchecked
impunity. In responding to a rebellion, the Government
launched what became a brutal campaign against the
Fur, Masalit and Zaghawa populations. As time went
on, the conflict in Darfur grew into a staggering crisis,
with thousands murdered, hundreds of thousands
deliberately deprived of the basic means of survival,
and millions displaced from their homes. Many of us
will never forget the first shocking reports of Janjaweed
militia on horses and camels storming into villages to
kill, rape, torture and burn.
The International Criminal Court (ICC) has
examined and charged a horrific list of crimes in
the Sudan: genocide by killing, genocide by causing
serious bodily or mental harm, genocide by deliberately
inflicting conditions of life calculated to bring about
the physical destruction of targeted groups, the crimes
against humanity of torture, murder and rape, and war
crimes, including pillaging and deliberate attacks on
8/18

The Government of the Sudan has also worked
closely with our own to begin to address regional
conflicts, improve humanitarian access, combat the
threat of terrorism and eliminate the threat of the Lord’s
Resistance Army. There is certainly more progress
to be made on these fronts, but these are welcome
steps towards a better future. Indeed, we now see the
possibility of long-term progress that we hope will lead
to more respect for human rights, more accountability,
more rule of law and more justice for Sudanese victims.
But as we see encouraging signs of a new approach
to addressing long-standing conflict and hope that
further engagement will spur additional progress, we
must also be clear: we must neither forget the victims
nor the perpetrators of the crimes in Darfur. We cannot
simply turn our backs on the victims of genocide who
were forced from their homes and left to die of thirst or
starvation or on the thousands of women and girls who
suffered acts of brutal sexual violence or on those who
were targeted on the basis of their ethnic identity. There
will be no stable and lasting peace in the Sudan without
justice for the many victims of crimes related to the
conflict. As Ambassador Nikki Haley has said here in
the Security Council,
“[i]n case after case, human rights violations and
abuses are not merely the incidental by-products
of conflict, but the trigger of conflict” (S/PV.7926,
p. 4).
If we do not address the victimization that has occurred
and the magnitude of the violations and abuses inflicted,
17-16182

08/06/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

any peace will be hollow and easy to shatter by those
seeking revenge for themselves, their loved ones and
their communities.
In the years since the conflict in Darfur began, we
have seen inspiring examples of accountability across
the globe, where those leaders who targeted their own
citizens in order to maintain a stranglehold on power
have been forced to face justice. Former Ivorian president
Laurent Gbagbo is now in court in The Hague, while
Charles Taylor and Hissène Habré are serving lengthy
prison sentences. Beyond Africa, senior former Khmer
Rouge officials in Cambodia have been sentenced for
war crimes and crimes against humanity, and leaders
responsible for Dirty War era crimes in Latin America
and atrocity crimes in the former Yugoslavia have also
been held to account.
The Council should not let the Sudan be an
exception. Having referred the situation in Darfur to
the ICC over 10 years ago, we must continue to demand
the Sudan’s compliance with the Council’s decisions.
While victims have not yet seen justice and refugees and
internally displaced persons continue to struggle years
after the conflict began, it is unacceptable that President
Al-Bashir still travels and receives a warm welcome
from certain quarters of the world and unacceptable
that none of the Sudanese officials with outstanding
arrest warrants have been brought to justice.
Therefore, as we pursue more engagement with the
Sudan and greater relief and protection for the survivors
of the conflict, we must also recommit to supporting
accountability to bring a just and lasting peace to the
people of Darfur.
Mr. Akahori (Japan): I would like to begin by
thanking Prosecutor Bensouda for her briefing.
Japan expresses its gratitude to the Office of the
Prosecutor for its tireless efforts in the fight against
impunity, despite the challenges it faces in Darfur.
Security Council resolution 1593 (2005) explicitly
states that the Government of the Sudan and all other
parties to the conflict in Darfur shall cooperate fully
with the International Criminal Court (ICC) and
the Prosecutor. Japan urges full implementation of
this resolution so that Member States can uphold the
credibility and legitimacy of the Council. We share
the Prosecutor’s frustration over the difficulties in this
area. We believe that the Council could do more to
address non-compliance.

S/PV.7963

While noting ongoing efforts among States parties
of the Rome statute of the ICC to improve cooperation
with the Court, States parties should make further
efforts to prevent future non-cooperation by utilizing
various measures. The tool kit prepared by some States
parties, including Japan and Senegal for this purpose,
is one such available and useful measure. Japan also
takes note of the exchanges between the ICC and
Jordan on the incident in March this year, as well as of
the ongoing proceedings in the Pre-Trial Chamber II
concerning South Africa. Japan will continue to follow
these developments closely.
Japan is encouraged by the improved security
situation in Darfur. However, we are concerned by the
recent fighting between the Government and the Sudan
Liberation Army/Minni Minawi and other rebel forces.
We underline the importance of a permanent ceasefire
based on the African Union High-level Implementation
Panel road map to resolve the conflict in the country.
In this regard, we continue to strongly support the
Joint Special Representative, President Mbeki, and his
good offices.
There are, unfortunately, still 2.7 million internally
displaced persons in Darfur according to the
special report on the strategic review of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(S/2017/437). Japan is concerned that these internally
displaced persons are vulnerable to various forms of
violence, including sexual and gender-based crimes.
Perpetrators of these and other crimes in Darfur
must be brought to justice. Japan emphasizes that the
Government’s obligations with regard to the Prosecutor
and the ICC remain unchanged.
I would like to conclude by reiterating Japan’s
continued support to the activities of the ICC. Japan
looks forward to concrete progress on this issue.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): We are grateful to the
Prosector for her detailed briefing on the situation in
Darfur. This is the third report our delegation has heard
since we joined the Council in 2016, and we find it
alarming that so little progress has been made in the
ensuing period and actually since the Security Council
referred the situation in Darfur to the International
Criminal Court (ICC) over 10 years ago. We welcome
the recent months’ reports of the visible improvement
of the situation in Darfur and we recognize the positive
role of the Sudan’s Government in this.

17-161829/18

S/PV.7963

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

08/06/2017

Nevertheless, we remain deeply concerned
about violations of international humanitarian law,
human rights violations and abuses, including attacks
against camps of internally displaced persons (IDPs),
sexual and gender-based violence and other crimes
committed in Darfur in the past. The Council should
pay special attention to these crimes. It is even more
alarming that those most responsible for them are not
held accountable. The ICC is not the one to blame for
the current situation. On the contrary, we commend
the efforts the Office of the Prosecutor of the ICC has
undertaken to move the process forward.

Darfur, as well as her briefing today and her tireless
efforts that we see each time she is in the Chamber.

However, the Court’s capacities are limited when
it comes to execution and enforcement measures. The
ICC relies entirely on States’ cooperation in carrying
out arrests and surrendering suspects. Resolution
1593 (2005), on Darfur, obliges the Government of the
Sudan and all other parties to the conflict to cooperate
fully with and provide any necessary assistance to the
Court and the Prosecutor. Unfortunately, the Sudanese
authorities continue to question the Court’s jurisdiction.

Twelve years ago, the Council decided to refer
this situation to the Court. The Court has started to
do its part. This is something the Council requested
the Court to do — examine a situation, investigate
crimes that were committed and initiate proceedings.
However, we are faced with a situation of a prolonged
stalemate, which is not satisfactory and is linked to a
lack of cooperation. This is not new for international
criminal justice. Cooperation with the Court is
essential. It is an obligation under resolution 1593
(2005); it is an obligation under the ICC Statute.
Moreover, cooperation is a measure of commitment to
the fight against impunity, and it can also be extended
voluntarily, even when an obligation stricto sensu does
not exist. It would be simply coherent with a demand
for justice for international crimes that the Council
has made and with the commitment of the Council to
establish accountability for war crimes, crimes against
humanity and genocide. There is no good reason why
perpetrators of these offenses should not be brought
to justice.

The travels of the Darfur suspects across
international borders with total impunity, including
during the reporting period, is also a matter of concern.
In this regard, we call on all actors in the region and
beyond to fully comply with all their commitments
and obligations without exception and ensure full
cooperation with the ICC. We would like to emphasize
that non-compliance with ICC decisions and requests
undermine the foundations of the international criminal
justice system. In this respect, we welcome the decision
of Gambia to revoke its withdrawals from the Rome
Statute. We hope to see its full cooperation with the
Court as the next step.
We should consolidate our efforts against impunity.
Failure to bring to justice those responsible for the worst
crimes promotes further violations. The inevitability of
punishment, irrespective of position or the nationality
of perpetrators, is a sine qua non.
Finally, I would like to thank the Prosecutor for her
dedicated efforts. We hope that her work, despite the
challenges just mentioned and limited resources, will
bring concrete and tangible results.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): I would like to thank
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court,
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for the twenty-fifth report on the
International Criminal Court (ICC) and the situation in
10/18

Yesterday, in the Chamber, we discussed the
completion strategy for the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda and the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (see S/PV.7960). Italy stressed
the fact that the closing of the Tribunal did not mean the
end of the fight against impunity. Today, with specific
reference to the referral situation in Darfur to the ICC,
let me say that we have a collective responsibility to
ensure coherence with the requests that the Council has
made to the International Criminal Court.

In this specific situation, however, the legal
obligations are rather clear and derive from a resolution
adopted by the Council under Chapter VII of the Charter
of the United Nations. Fulfilment of this obligation is
required for justice to be done. There can be differences
as to the scope of this obligation and there can be
discussion as to the modality and the mechanism for
cooperation to occur, but specific processes must be set
in place. The Council should find a way to engage with
these issues and address differences, identify possible
solutions and influence, and support the necessary
political will.
If justice is to be able to play its preventive role,
the accountability dimension must be fully integrated
into our engagement strategy, including dialogue with
17-16182

08/06/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

situation countries. If we allow perpetrators to believe
that the crimes can continue to be committed with
impunity, not only are we betraying justice as a principle,
but at the more pragmatic level we are depriving
ourselves of fundamental tools in preventing conflict
and putting an end to the perpetration of atrocities.
I would also like to add that there is no doubt that
justice requires a strong element of national ownership.
States have the primary responsibility to ensure
that justice is done for war crimes, crimes against
humanity and genocide. There can be discussion on
how to organize interaction between the international
community and national authorities, but there is no
doubt that domestic systems must be engaged in the
process. That engagement requires political will and a
shared commitment to ensuring justice for the victims
of international crimes.
The security situation in Darfur has improved over
the past year. The recent United Nations-African Union
joint strategic review of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (S/2017/437) clearly
calls on the Council to update its deliberations on the
matter. We have no doubt about the Sudan’s political
willingness to cooperate so as to prevent illicit flows,
including human trafficking that connects Darfur to
Libya, and to counter terrorism. Despite the remarkable
improvement, the root causes of instability in Darfur
still lie in persistent impunity, which can be seen in
the violation of human rights, the serious humanitarian
conditions of internally displaced persons and the
moral wounds of the past that are still to be healed. As
long as such impunity persists, peace in Darfur will
remain fragile.
As far the Council is concerned, as we have stated
a number of times, we need a stronger and broader
collective engagement in international justice issues.
The Council must find a way to be united in the
fight against impunity. To do so, it should give itself
more opportunities, particularly in formal settings, to
discuss that issue and deepen its engagement with all
actors involved, including the States concerned in the
International Criminal Court.
Mr. Zhang Dianbin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China has listened to the briefing by Prosecutor
Bensouda. Since last year, there has been marked
improvement in the political and security situation in
Darfur. The Sudanese Government has been actively
dedicated to promoting the peace process and has

S/PV.7963

worked hard to safeguard Darfur’s stability and advance
its reconstruction. China commends those efforts.
Political settlement is the only solution to the
situation in Darfur. The international community
should provide active support to the mediation efforts
of the African Union High-level Implementation Panel,
step up its assistance to the Sudanese Government,
armed groups and opposition parties of the area in the
implementation of the road map agreement, and urge
the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid to join the
peace process without conditions so as to resolve their
differences through dialogue, in pursuit of a lasting and
peaceful solution to the situation in Darfur.
The international community should uphold an
objective and fair position, respect the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of the Sudan and
play a constructive role in the political settlement of the
situation in Darfur. China’s position on the handling
of the situation in the Sudan by the International
Criminal Court remains unchanged. China believes
that the legitimate concerns of the African Union
and the Sudanese Government on the Court’s
handling of the situation in the Sudan should be given
adequate attention.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We have read the twenty-fifth report of
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
on the situation in Darfur and wish to comment
on its assessment of some of the developments
mentioned therein.
The report quite rightly notes that progress has
been made in normalizing the situation in Darfur,
including the Jebel Marra area. We welcome the
announcement made by the Sudanese authorities
concerning the extension of the unilateral ceasefire
regime. It is important that the regime be more than
mere paper — since early this year, we have had no
report of armed clashes between the Sudanese army
and the rebels. Thanks to the efforts of the authorities,
the number of intercommunity clashes and the level
of crime have declined. We are witnessing progress
in the implementation of the Doha Document for
Peace in Darfur, including in the demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants. We are also seeing
ongoing inter-Darfurian dialogue and consultations.
We also note the steps taken by the Sudanese
Government to ensure humanitarian access to Darfur, in
particular the development by the Sudanese authorities

17-1618211/18

S/PV.7963

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

of guidelines to streamline the process. We also see
very positive developments in the resolution of issues
faced by the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur, such as the issuance of visas and
customs clearance of assets for contingents. Against
that background, however, the behaviour of some
opposition groups in setting additional requirements
to continue the negotiations offer a stark contrast. We
believe that the external sponsors of the rebels should
encourage them to be more constructive.
With regard to the investigation on Darfur, the
nature and content of the report of the Office of the
Prosecutor has been the same year after year. Once
again, the Council is being asked to provide so-called
follow-up on the situation in Darfur that we believe to
be inappropriate. We do not understand why appeals to
compel States parties to the Rome Statute to shoulder
their responsibilities are made in the Council Chamber.
In our view, if there is no unity among those States
about how they should execute arrest warrants issued
with respect to Darfur, that should be discussed within
the system that governs the Rome Statute, that is, the
Assembly of States Parties and its subsidiary bodies.
Attempts to exert pressure through the Security Council
on those who disagree are counterproductive.
On more than one occasion, we have called
attention to the fact that the obligation to cooperate, as
set forth in resolution 1593 (2005), does not mean that
the norms of international law governing the immunity
of the Government officials of those States not party
the Rome Statute can be repealed, and presuming the
contrary is unacceptable. However, once again, the
Office of the Prosecutor does not wish to consider that.
As occurred recently with respect to the situation
in Libya, the issue of drawing on resources from the
United Nations budget has been raised. Everyone is
well aware of our position on that subject so we will
not repeat it.
In conclusion, we note that the activities of the
Court are not conducive to attaining the goals of justice
and sustainable peace held by the Security Council and
the international community as a whole.
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): I would like to join
others in welcoming Prosecutor Bensouda back to the
Security Council and in thanking her for her briefing
and report.
12/18

08/06/2017

The conflict in Darfur led to reports of genocide,
war crimes and crimes against humanity. It was for that
reason that, in 2005, the Council referred the situation
in Darfur to the International Criminal Court (ICC).
Impunity and the lack of accountability for violations
of international humanitarian law and violations and
abuses of international human rights law shall never
be accepted.
Now, 12 years after the Council’s referral, further
steps still need to be taken by the Government of the
Sudan to assure justice for all those who suffered the
most horrendous crimes during the conflict in Darfur.
The Security Council has an obligation to follow
through on its decisions, in this case its unanimous
decision to refer the situation in Darfur to the Court.
Sweden fully supports the efforts of the Office of
the Prosecutor, whose call for the full backing of the
Council and Member States must be heeded. That
includes through the provision of adequate resources.
It is well known that there have been tensions
between the Court and some African States, including
States parties, in recent years, and that the unanimous
referrals by the Security Council of two situations to
the Court may have added to those tensions. Sweden
is encouraged by signs of a more positive relationship
between some African States and the Court and
welcomes the initiatives by the Office of the Prosecutor
to continue its outreach regarding the function and
jurisdiction of the Court. Apart from referrals from
the Security Council, as we know, the Court only has
jurisdiction where States have accepted it.
All suspects in the ICC investigations regarding
Darfur remain at large.
We call on the Government of the Sudan to
cooperate fully with the ICC in accordance with
resolution 1593 (2005) and to fulfil its obligations to
arrest the individuals subject to arrest warrants. Like
many other States Parties to the Rome Statute, Sweden
continues to raise the issue of non-cooperation with
the Court with relevant Governments. The Court relies
on States to fulfil its mandate. It is concerning that
President Al-Bashir and others indicted by the Court are
able to continue to travel internationally, including to
States Parties to the Rome Statute. That sends a public
message that the decisions of the Court can be ignored
without any consequence which, in turn, undermines
the authority of the Council.
17-16182

08/06/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

In the light of that and, as proposed by several
Council members at the briefing last December, Sweden
shares the view that the Council should approach cases
of non-cooperation in a structured manner and, as a
minimum, discuss which tools are available to it, if any,
for an appropriate response.
Turning to the current situation in Darfur, we
welcome the overall reduction in fighting and the
progress made in the peace process. At the same
time, we are concerned by reports of incidents of
renewed fighting and recurring reports of human
rights violations and abuses, in particular, reports of
sexual and gender-based violence. In order to address
remaining challenges and to build a sustainable peace
in Darfur we must address the root causes of instability,
as well as ensure accountability and the rule of law.
Ms. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank the Prosecutor, Ms. Bensouda, for her report
and for her briefing to the Council. We also renew our
pledge of support for the Prosecutor, her teams and the
International Criminal Court (ICC).
It has now been more than 12 years since the
Security Council adopted resolution 1593 (2005). This
decision had very clear objectives — to render justice
to the victims of the most serious crimes, to prevent
the recurrence of atrocities in Darfur, and to promote
reconciliation and stability in the Sudan. Now, 12 years
after the adoption of the resolution, we see once again
that none of those objectives has been achieved and
that impunity prevails. Only legal action will put an
end to that situation. That is why France calls on all
Member States, most notably the Sudan, to implement
the arrest warrants issued by the International Criminal
Court and to honour their remaining obligations under
resolution 1593 (2005).
Without decisive Council action against impunity,
instability will continue to prevail in Darfur and civilians
will continue to be its primary victims. Admittedly, the
Secretary-General’s recent reports on the situation in
Darfur have reported some encouraging developments
on the ground, such as improving conditions in
certain areas and unilateral declarations of cessation
of hostilities. The access restrictions imposed by the
Sudanese Government on the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) have
also eased. However, as the Prosecutor pointed out
in both her report and her briefing, civilians can be
protected only if those changes are sustained. To that

S/PV.7963

end, it is essential that the Sudanese authorities allow
UNAMID to implement its mandate in accordance with
the decisions of the Council and the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union.
Moreover, sources of violence and instability
persist and intercommunal violence remains one of
the main sources of violence in Darfur. Due to the of
the weak rule of law, banditry and crime continue. The
resumption of fighting between Government forces and
armed groups in May is indiscriminately affecting the
population. Militias, including those incorporated into
the Sudanese armed forces, such as the Rapid Support
Forces, are carrying out intolerable attacks on civilians
and sowing fear among the population. Their attacks
force civilians to leave their villages and, too often,
prevent them from returning home.
Let us not forget that today 2.7 million people
of Darfur — almost one-third of the region’s
population — are still displaced. Ensuring their return
requires putting an end to all forms of violence and
addressing the root causes of the conflict. Breaking
the spiral of violence requires holding accountable
those who have fueled it. On the one hand, we owe
it to the victims, but on the other, it is essential for
moving forward.
France and its partners reaffirm the importance
of the obligation of all United Nations Member States
to cooperate with the Court, in accordance with the
resolutions adopted by the Council. That obligation
falls primarily to the Sudan, as it must enforce the
arrest warrants issued against its nationals for acts
committed within its territory and cooperate with the
Court, as required by resolution 1593 (2005).
States parties to the Rome Statute also have a special
role to play in honouring their statutory obligations to
cooperate with the ICC and to execute arrest warrants
for individuals found within their territory. In that
respect, we regret that this obligation has not yet been
kept by some of those States in recent months, and we
are grateful to the Prosecutor for following up on that
major issue.
In its bilateral relations with those countries, with
the Sudan and with its European partners, France will
continue to stress the importance it attaches to the fight
against impunity and its support for the ICC, and to call
on them to honour their international commitment to
cooperating with the Court. In that regard, the Council’s
responsibility is clear. We must ensure effective

17-1618213/18

S/PV.7963

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

cooperation with the Court and, as the Prosecutor notes,
take action in cases of non-cooperation with the Court.
We are determined to examine the working methods
of the Council on the basis of the proposals made by
New Zealand last December. In that spirit, France
proposes that the States that the Court has deemed to
be in breach of their obligations to cooperate should
be called upon to answer to the Security Council. On
the basis of that meeting, it would then be up to the
Council to decide on next steps. In any case, there must
be a follow-up. All United Nations Member States and
international organizations must be mobilized. In that
respect, we stress the importance of limiting contact
with persons with outstanding arrest warrants to
essential communication only.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Senegal is grateful to the Bolivian
presidency for organizing this important meeting and
thanks Ms. Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court, for her briefing on her report on the
current state of the investigations and proceedings of
her Office with regard to the Darfur issue, pursuant to
resolution 1593 (2005). Senegal once again pledges its
full support to Ms. Bensouda.
Nobody can deny the importance of combating
impunity for serious crimes committed anywhere
and, particularly in Africa. That combat requires
the combined efforts of all stakeholders. Senegal
recognizes the role of the International Criminal Court
in that regard and understands the hope for justice
that the Court represents for the millions of victims
of heinous crimes. Indeed, the fight against impunity
and the respect for the rule of law are fundamental
principles in which we firmly believe and which are
embodied in the Constitutive Act of the African Union.
We are particularly attached to the recognition of the
universality of human rights.
Senegal also believes that peace is our common
aspiration. As such, seeking a peaceful solution
to the situation in Darfur through dialogue, while
simultaneously addressing its victims’ demands for
justice is certainly difficult, but necessary. While my
country is commited to the principles of responsibility
and justice, it remains convinced that lasting and
comprehensive peace can only be achieved through
dialogue and reconciliation. That is also the position
of the African Union, which calls for the restoration of
peace and justice in Darfur.
14/18

08/06/2017

The report under consideration indicates continuous
attacks on internally displaced persons within the
country, including sexual and gender-based violence
in Darfur camps. In that regard, I would point out that
Senegal condemns, in the strongest terms, all forms
of violence against civilians. We call on all parties to
take the necessary steps so that the perpetrators of such
acts are brought to justice. My country nevertheless
welcomes the lifting of restrictions on movement in
certain areas of Darfur, which, it must be said, makes
it easier to carry out the mandate of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur in
the region.
Moreover, it should be recalled that the Office of the
Prosecutor is carrying out its mandate in a constrained
budgetary environment, which has the effect of limiting
investigative and prosecutorial activities. Senegal would
therefore like to reiterate that it will continue to call
and work for the Assembly of States Parties to provide
the Office with the necessary resources to conduct its
work. My delegation would also like to recall that it is
up to the Security Council to ensure that the necessary
United Nations contributions are provided to the Court
in connection with cases the Council has referred to it.
The political and security situation in Darfur
continues to pose a major challenge for the international
community and to require greater effort from us all. In
that regard, while recognizing that political dialogue,
joint efforts by stakeholders and establishing security
remain the only way to achieve lasting peace in Darfur,
we must nevertheless bear in mind that the victims
are impatiently awaiting justice, as they are the first
to suffer from the prevailing instability. My delegation
remains of the view that a spirit of dialogue and
cooperation among the parties is both the way to resolve
common problems and the best guarantee of a solution
that addresses the need for peace and the demand for
justice for Darfur.
Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): We would like to
thank the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her briefing and
for her efforts to uphold the international rule of law,
justice and accountability.
Having reviewed the twenty-fifth report of the
Office of the Prosecutor on the Court’s recent work to
implement resolution 1593 (2005), relating to Darfur,
we are pleased to note the considerable progress made
with regard to the security and humanitarian situation
17-16182

08/06/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

in the country. We encourage that all efforts be made
to maintain that positive trend, with determined steps
to further reduce the tension between Government
forces and armed groups. The fewer incidents of
inter-communal clashes during the reporting period as
compared to the previous year, as well as the decline in
incidents of rape and sexual abuse, must continue so as
to de-escalate and avert unrest.
Kazakhstan welcomes the fact that access to areas in
Darfur has been significantly facilitated and expanded,
including the ability of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) to visit
areas in Jebel Marra. We encourage the Government of
the Sudan to further continue its good cooperation with
UNAMID in all areas, in the greater interests of the
Sudanese people and to ensure progress and prosperity
for them.
Kazakhstan is confident that inclusive dialogue is
the only way towards a resolution of the Darfur crisis.
In that regard, we support the inclusive political process
under the leadership of the African Union (AU) Highlevel Implementation Panel. We encourage all efforts to
fully implement the road map agreement by all parties.
We therefore commend the unilateral ceasefire declared
by the Government of the Sudan for an additional six
months ending on 15 June. We express our hope that it
will be extended further. The time ahead of us should
be used to consolidate the gains.
My delegation believes that respecting the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
the Sudan, as well as the ownership and leadership by
the Government of the political process, are crucial
elements for long-term peace and reconciliation in
Darfur. We need to support the Sudan’s capability to
restore and promote the rule of law, address impunity
and protect human rights. The United Nations system
and international partners, together with the country
team, should make a concerted effort to help the
Sudan to continue the progress that has been made,
with a view to achieving international norms and
obligations with regard to peace and security and
sustainable development.
We commend the efforts of the AU and other
regional organizations and neighbouring countries to
resolve the crisis in Darfur. We welcome the fact that the
African Union has established a ministerial committee
to deal with the Sudan issue at the ICC. We believe
that the position stated by the AU should be taken into

S/PV.7963

consideration. In the light of that, we encourage that an
effective ongoing dialogue take place between the ICC
and the AU.
Finally, Kazakhstan stands ready to join in
multilateral action to help the Government and the
people of the Sudan to realize their national aspirations
on all fronts.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement and my capacity as the representative of the
Plurinational State of Bolivia.
At the outset, Bolivia is grateful for the briefing
by Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court, in connection with her twenty-fifth
report in compliance with resolution 1593 (2005).
We listened carefully about the progress made in
investigating alleged crimes and about the difficulties
the Office of the Prosecutor has encountered with
regard to investigations and legal activity, both of
which are linked to situations that make it difficult to
comply with the mandate entrusted to her.
Bolivia believes that those who have attacked
civilians in Darfur, violating their human rights as
well as international law, must account for it brought
justice. That is important element in achieving stable
and lasting after several years of conflict in the region.
While we express our support for the work of the
International Criminal Court, we also recognize that
some of the difficulties encountered by the Prosecutor’s
Office have brought to light legal conflicts, such as the
one pertaining, on the one hand, to the privileges and
immunities enjoyed by State officials under customary
international law and, on the other, the provisions of
article 27, paragraph 2, of the Rome Statute. Such
difficulties could give rise to problems in States’
carrying out cooperation tasks with the International
Criminal Court. At the request of South Africa, the
issue is currently the subject of consultations at The
Hague between the Court and a working group of the
Rome Statute Assembly of States Parties. We hope
that and other consultations will facilitate both States’
duties to cooperate with the Office of the Prosecutor
as well as the Court’s legal tasks. We also hope they
will contribute to the international community’s efforts
to strengthen political processes, in this case when it
comes to the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur.
It is also important to recall that when the
Security Council referred the situation in Darfur

17-1618215/18

S/PV.7963

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

08/06/2017

to the International Criminal Court — by way of
resolution 1593 (2005) — it not only decided to
activate the Court’s jurisdiction to try individuals, it
also encouraged the Court to support international
cooperation to promote the rule of law, protect human
rights and combat impunity, while also emphasizing
non-judicial activities, such as promoting peace and
reconciliation and strengthening institutions. We
believe that cooperation with the African Union is
essential in that regard. We are aware of its undeniable
commitment to the fight against impunity, as set out
in its Constitutive Act. We also recall that the African
Union has established a ministerial committee to
address issues pertaining to this case. In the same vein,
we call for establishing a constructive dialogue between
the African Union and the International Criminal Court
in order to generate trust and facilitate work between
both institutions.

capacities of the International Criminal Court due to the
non-ratification of the Rome Statute by certain parties.
That weakens the effectiveness of its work. We cannot
have a sincere dialogue so long as there are countries
that insist on the full rigour of the law yet do not meet
their own international obligations.

We have seen positive developments taking place
in the Sudan over recent months, including a significant
decrease in clashes between the Government and rebel
groups and an improvement in the Government’s
cooperation with the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). Both recent
reports of the Secretary-General and the UNAMID
strategic review, and even the Prosecutor’s own report,
recognize that progress. Bolivia believes that we have
arrived at this point mainly thanks to the joint efforts of
regional organizations, the Government, the SecretaryGeneral and UNAMID.

I have two brief comments to make. First of all,
the decision to refer the situation in Darfur to the
International Criminal Court (ICC) was not unanimous
or reached by consensus. Secondly, concerning the
question of whether genocide has taken place in Darfur,
I have the following comments to make.

It is important to highlight that the evolution and
future of international criminal justice are closely
linked to State cooperation and complementarity.
The International Criminal Court is a complimentary
tribunal to States’ primary sovereign prerogative
to administer justice on its territory. Therefore, in
addition to ensuring timely and effective trials, they
must establish local capacities. That is an indicator
which, in the case of Darfur, should be considered with
special attention after more than a decade of conflict.
In full respect for its obligations as a State party to
the Rome Statute of the ICC, Bolivia supports efforts
to achieve justice and combat impunity. We therefore
call on all States that have not yet done so to ratify the
Rome Statute so as to ensure its universal jurisdiction.
In that regard, we believe that the value of the principle
of the universality of international criminal justice is
essential. The debate on impunity for perpetrators of
crimes against humanity is undermined by the relative
16/18

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Sudan.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I
congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for this month, and thank you for
your outstanding work.
I also thank the members of the Council for
their statements.

In late 2015, the General Assembly adopted
resolution 69/323, commemorating the victims of
genocide. In our statement on that occasion (see
A/69/PV.103), and in support of designating the
International Day of Commemoration and Dignity
of the Victims of the Crime of Genocide and of
the Prevention of This Crime, we recalled all the
international testimony that categorically refuted the
assertion that any act of genocide had taken place in
Darfur. In that statement, we also quoted the testimony
of former United States Secretary of State Colin Powell;
the former Secretary-General of the United Nations,
Mr. Kofi Annan; the President of the African Union
in 2004, former Nigerian President Olusegun Obasanjo;
the European Union, the African Union and the
League of Arab States; and Médecins Sans Frontières,
which was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1999
for its role in ending the 1994 genocide in Rwanda.
Complementing all this testimony was the report of the
International Commission of Inquiry on Darfur, which
was submitted to the Council in early 2005, confirming
that no genocide had taken place in Darfur.
The International Criminal Court (ICC) and
its Prosecutor maintain their assaults and use of
inappropriate language that we in the United Nations
17-16182

08/06/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

and the other organs of international standing are not
accustomed to hearing. In the absence of the necessary
restraint on the part of the Council, the ICC Prosecutor
continues to direct offensive language against His
Excellency the President of the Sudan and the Security
Council itself, the highest political authority of the
United Nations, by using such expressions as “the
failure of the Council” or “the loss of its credibility”.
Concerning the President of the Republic of the Sudan,
the 2005 Transitional Constitution stipulates that the
President of the Republic is the symbol of the country
and its sovereignty. We do not accept any abuse from any
quarter, let alone from this defective kangaroo court.
I draw the Council’s attention to the statement
made by the representative of the Russian Federation
in the Security Council to the effect that the reports of
the Prosecutor to the Council have started to resemble
those submitted by monitoring bodies. I refer Council
members to paragraphs 24 to 29 and 34 to 36 of the
report, which illustrate the lack of knowledge on the
part of the Prosecutor and her Office as to the presumed
judicial nature of the Court. It may be appropriate here
to recall the statement made by a former President of
the Assembly of States Parties to the ICC concerning
the ineffectiveness of the Prosecutor, to the effect that
the Prosecutor was not even capable of putting together
an indictment.
The sorry state of the ICC cannot be addressed
except by ignoring it and allowing to collapse from
within, which is indeed its inevitable fate. It is an
honour for the Sudan to be the country to draw the
greatest attention to the flaws in the statute of the
ICC that will inevitably bring it into conflict with the
irrefutable and imperative norms of international law,
such as the principle of equality; the principle that
international covenants and agreements are binding
only on the parties; and the moral principle of nullum
crimen sine lege, which stipulates that there is no crime
without law.
The ICC, and especially its first Prosecutor and
now the current Prosecutor, who is the former Deputy
Prosecutor, have treated my country cavalierly and are
now tasting the fruits of their overreach, confusion,
relentlessness and politicization. Since the jurisdiction
of the ICC covers individuals or citizens of States
parties to its statute, it is sufficient for us to demonstrate
that about 60 per cent of the world’s people belong
to States that recognize neither the authority nor the
jurisdiction of the Court. These include China, Russia,

S/PV.7963

the United States, Egypt, India, Pakistan and Indonesia,
whose populations constitute no less than half of the
inhabitants of planet, and perhaps more.
The incoherence of the report before the Council
today is but the result of the earlier sin establishing a
political organ called the ICC to discharge a judicial
task — or, if you prefer, the creation of a judicial organ
to carry out a political mission. It is no coincidence that
the ICC focuses all its investigations and prosecutions
on Africa, because it believes that Africa is an easier
political mark than others. This disparity goes beyond
the prosecutors and the judges; it affects the statute and
the very idea of international criminal justice, which
are concerned primarily with individuals. Thus, every
time His Excellency the President of the Republic of the
Sudan responds to an invitation from a State Member
of the United Nations or a regional organization, the
ICC finds itself in the same predicament. We seek
a solid international legal system that invokes the
Charter of the United Nations as its primary authority
and accords it precedence in terms of commitment
and implementation.
Here we are dealing with State commitments under
the Charter of the United Nations and the immunity of
Presidents and representatives of States, and with the
commitments of States to international organizations
such as the African Union and other political groups
such as the League of Arab States, the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation or the Non-Aligned Movement.
We can only conclude that the ICC has given rise
to contradictions and conflicts in connection with two
long-standing aspects of the international system. The
first aspect involves the clashes and the conflicts that
the ICC, by its very existence, tries to provoke between
the various norms of international law. The second is
the conflict it creates between the principles of justice
and peace. What is astonishing here is that the person
who wrote this report makes reference to the need to
take into account the root causes of the conflict, without
understanding that that means seeking to conclude a
negotiated peace agreement, which is indeed what took
place in Doha in July 2011.
Since 2002, it has become evident that failure in
terms of implementation has completed a full cycle of
failure, since the very beginning, when the ICC was
founded. The result of implementation, 15 years after
the entry into force of the Statute of the ICC, is sad and
disappointing. How many cases have been ruled on by

17-1618217/18

S/PV.7963

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the ICC? How much has been spent to date? What is the
cost of one single trial, if we divide the budget of the
ICC over 15 years by the number of trials that have been
held? I defy the Prosecutor to answer those questions.
Also, supporters of the concept of the ICC have said
that the ad hoc or temporary tribunals created by the
Security Council lack the element of deterrence, while
the ICC does not, as it is a permanent tribunal. The
question here is, to what extent has the ICC succeeded in
creating an appropriate level of deterrence for violations
of human rights, the rule of law and human rights
worldwide, and what is the capacity of the Security
Council to ensure the equitable implementation of
article 13 of the Statute? Does the Court operate on the
basis of equality between all the States that have agreed
to be parties to the Statute? Those are the difficult and
important questions that the Court must answer, and
they must be answered precisely.
We believe that it will be impossible for the ICC
and its supporters to answer those questions. But what
is important to us at this meeting is the fact that all
those discrepancies and shortcomings can be covered
up by the Prosecutor only by politicizing her work,
inventing evidence or bribing witnesses.
The Office of the Prosecutor sidestepped its
judicial and legal task as stipulated in the Statute of
the Court and devoted the greater part of the report to
elements that are against the Government of the Sudan.
This deep desire to condemn the Government of the
Sudan warrants only disdain and contempt, because
the Prosecutor overlooked the principal task assigned
to her.
To our surprise, and I think that most members
of the Security Council were equally surprised, the
report welcomes the extension of the mandate of the
Panel of Experts created by the Security Council under
resolution 2340 (2017). We were surprised also to see
that the ICC has asked the Government of the Sudan to
ensure continued and unfettered access to the various
areas of Darfur, even though the report spoke about

18/18

08/06/2017

addressing the root causes of the conflict in Darfur,
as if it were thinking of itself as the Security Council.
The report states also that unless the root causes of
the conflict are addressed, the situation in Darfur will
remain unstable and unpredictable.
The catastrophe lies not only in the ineffectiveness
of the Prosecutor and her Office; it goes beyond that,
given the absence of honesty or any spirit of equity or
justice, or even balance, in stating the facts. For a very
long time, the Prosecutor and her Office have agreed
to play a political role or the role of a monitoring
mechanism. It would have been far worthier of them to
indicate that resolution 2340 (2017), for the first time
since 2005, the year in which the referral decision was
taken, states that the situation is largely back to normal
in all five states of Darfur, which are equivalent in area
to that of France or Iraq, except for a very small part of
one of the provinces of Darfur.
The report also avoids mentioning the explicit
condemnation in resolution 2340 (2017) of armed
movements that use civilian installations as shields,
which poses a threat to civilians, especially internally
displaced persons. It is the very same report that has
never, ever failed to mention paragraph 28, saying that
civilians are still in danger.
Finally, we would like to voice our appreciation
to the Secretariat, which has distanced itself from the
aims of the ICC, which sought to involve it so as to
make the ICC appear to be part of the United Nations
system when it is not. We wish also to commend the
positions of those countries that did not fall for the
instigation carried out by the Office of the Prosecutor,
as well as the firm position of the Security Council
in lending assistance aimed at definitely ending the
conflict in Darfur, supporting a political settlement and
rejecting the possibility of a protracted conflict. We are
optimistic that together and with firm steps we will
move towards attaining our common goal of security
and peace.
The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m.

17-16182
