S/2021/187

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 March 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 26 February 2021 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations; Mr. Smaïl
Chergui, African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security; Ms. Rita Laranjinha,
Managing Director for Africa, European External Action Service; and Ms. Kessy
Martine Ekomo-Soignet, Director of youth-led peacebuilding organization URU, as
well as the statements delivered by the representatives of China, Estonia, France,
India, Ireland, Mexico, the Niger — on behalf of Kenya, the Niger and Tunisia, as
well as Saint Vincent and the Grenadines — Norway, the Russian Federation, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of America
and Viet Nam in connection with the video-teleconference on “The situation in the
Central African Republic” convened on Wednesday, 24 February 2021.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives
of the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light
of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic,
these briefings and statements will be issued as an official document of the Security
Council.
(Signed) Barbara Woodward
President of the Security Council

21-02830 (E) 030321 250321

*2102830*

S/2021/187

Annex I
Briefing by the Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations,
Jean-Pierre Lacroix
I thank you for this opportunity to brief the Security Council on the situation
in the Central African Republic. As outlined in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2021/146) under consideration, the country continues to suffer from violence
despite the successful conclusion of the presidential election, albeit in challenging
circumstances. In recent weeks, some important progress was achieved against
the armed group coalition, the Coalition des patriotes pour le changement (CPC),
due in part to the remarkable efforts of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) and
bilateral partners.
Nevertheless, the situation remains very volatile. In several towns, including
Bossangoa in the west and Bambari in the centre, the Mission is providing security
to thousands of internally displaced persons who sought protection from the ongoing
violence. MINUSCA continues to support efforts to safeguard democratic order and
protect civilians in the face of persisting attempts by the armed group coalition to
asphyxiate the country by cutting of its economic lifeline, the main supply route
connecting Bangui to Cameroon.
Meanwhile, the humanitarian situation remains alarming, although we have
observed some important progress with the recent arrival of the first humanitarian
aid convoys in Bangui since the violence started. Yet 1,000 trucks carrying lifesaving supplies and food — including for our United Nations personnel — as well
as medical supplies required to fight the pandemic remain blocked at the border
with Cameroon due to the insecure conditions. The ongoing violence has resulted in
significant renewed displacement and increased humanitarian needs and has pushed
civilians to again seek refuge in neighbouring countries. The violence initiated by
the CPC has resulted in more suffering for the Central African people. The Central
African Republic is now the most dangerous place for humanitarian work, accounting
for more than 46 per cent of worldwide incidents registered by international nongovernmental organizations last month.
Despite this very fragile situation, the country is on-track to successfully
conclude a democratic transfer of power within the constitutional timeline, which
is a major achievement. It is now essential that those democratic gains be preserved
by completing the electoral process and advancing a peaceful resolution to the
crisis. Two years after its signing, the Political Agreement remains the only viable
framework for peace. To allow the country to successfully turn the corner and start
healing from the national trauma, it is vital that an inclusive and meaningful dialogue
process be initiated without delay, including with the political opposition and armed
groups that renounce violence and remain committed to the agreement. It is also
essential that the international community support that national effort by promoting
cooperation and coherence in the peace process. I welcome the engagement and
leadership of regional organizations, including the African Union and the Economic
Community of Central African States as the guarantors, as well as the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, which are working to support the peace
process. I encourage continued close coordination among all partners within the
framework of the Political Agreement.
Such an inclusive dialogue will also be crucial to creating the conditions that
will allow for a peaceful new — second — round of legislative elections, scheduled
for 14 March. Working closely with international partners, MINUSCA continues to
provide multifaceted support to this process.
2/33

21-02830

S/2021/187

Despite the rapid deterioration of the security situation, MINUSCA has
continued to serve as the main guarantor of security for the civilian population.
The Mission repeatedly repelled armed group attacks, including on the capital.
MINUSCA also successfully protected prisons in Bangui, thereby preventing the
escape of high-profile prisoners. I express my deep appreciation to the Council for
granting an extension of the temporary reinforcement of MINUSCA through intermission cooperation, which has proven vital in enhancing the Mission’s capacity to
execute its mandated priorities, including to protect the population in a deteriorated
security context. Those reinforcements will continue to play a crucial role, including
by providing security for the legislative elections in March.
However, the risk of Mission overstretch extends beyond this period, as all of
its capabilities remain fully engaged to address the volatile security situation and
respond to increased security and protection needs. The Secretary-General therefore
recommends reinforcing MINUSCA with an additional 2,750 military and 940 police
personnel. Given the new developments, that support would increase MINUSCA’s
ability to implement its priority mandated tasks — to protect civilians, create the
conditions for progress in the political process and facilitate the safe delivery of
humanitarian assistance. The proposed augmentation would also contribute to
enhanced protection for United Nations personnel and facilities, which has become
even more important in view of the killing of seven peacekeepers in hostile attacks,
and two others in the line of duty — all since the start of the electoral violence.
I wish to underscore that the request for additional military and police
capabilities is not intended as a military solution to the present challenges. Rather,
it is the result of a comprehensive assessment of the changing context on the ground
and the current capacity of MINUSCA, as well as an attempt to address the growing
needs of the people. We have factored in ongoing efforts to optimize the performance
of MINUSCA, which remains a priority for the Mission and the Secretariat. In
addition, our reinforcement plan will be sequenced and subject to regular reviews,
guided primarily by developments on the ground. I hope that the Secretary-General
can count on the Council to support his recommendation.
As we work to turn the tide on the security situation, efforts to advance peaceful
dialogue must be coupled with a renewed investment in the fight against impunity,
including for grave crimes committed in the electoral period. The number of human
rights violations has tripled since mid-December, with substantial increases in
abductions and killing of civilians, attacks against humanitarian workers, destruction
of homes, extrajudicial killings and conflict-related sexual violence.
Justice must be served for those who have perpetrated serious crimes and
violations of human rights and international humanitarian law, including the killing
of peacekeepers, aid workers and civilians. That will require a commitment by
national authorities to pursue accountability for violations by State and non-State
actors alike, while safeguarding human rights and preserving and expanding civic
spaces. Judicial and penal institutions must be strengthened so as to enable them to
protect the rule of law and combat impunity in an impartial and independent manner.
Furthermore, all instances of hate speech and incitement to violence, including
against MINUSCA and its partners, should be firmly denounced and prosecuted.
The electoral period has laid bare the important shared work that remains
ahead to ensure that national institutions can assume their sovereign responsibilities
to keep the population safe from harm. It will be important to revisit the current
security sector reform process, alongside national and international partners,
and adjust the common approach accordingly with a view to re-establishing the
operational readiness of the national defence and internal security forces. In the
interim, it is essential that the national defence and internal security forces continue
21-028303/33

S/2021/187

to demonstrate the highest level of professionalism, including through full respect
for the rule of law and international human rights principles during the state of
emergency currently in force.
The people of the Central African Republic have suffered greatly and deserve
our steadfast support and attention. As we deliberate on the situation, the voices
of the people must be heard, and I am delighted to be joined by Kessy Martine
Ekomo-Soignet, who will provide the Council with an important youth perspective.
I am grateful that she wishes to share her views and aspirations for her country
from Bangui. As the country finds itself at this very delicate juncture, we must
collectively ensure that the significant investments to advance sustainable peace,
including by the Council, are not lost.
In conclusion, I wish to express my deep admiration for the bravery and
sacrifice demonstrated by the women and men serving in MINUSCA in pursuit of
the mandate provided by the Council, in an exceptionally challenging context, and
to pay tribute to all MINUSCA personnel who have lost their lives while serving the
cause of peace in the Central African Republic.

4/33

21-02830

S/2021/187

Annex II
Briefing by the African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security,
Smaïl Chergui
Allow me to express my sincere gratitude to the President for convening this
meeting on the evolving situation in the Central African Republic. The invitation
extended to the African Union (AU) illustrates once again the importance of the AUUnited Nations strategic partnership in addressing peacemaking on the continent.
This meeting is also an opportunity to take stock of the implementation of the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic,
signed on 6 February 2019, and the ongoing political and security challenges facing
the country.
As co-guarantor of the peace agreement, alongside the Economic Community
of Central African States, we have endeavoured to work with all the stakeholders
in the Central African Republic, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), the European
Union and all other bilateral and multilateral partners so that the national institutions
can continue to discharge their mandate, with a focus on the implementation of the
peace agreement. Despite the challenges posed by the coronavirus disease pandemic,
we remained steadfast in our efforts to assist the Central African Republic to secure
lasting peace in the country.
The organization of the first round of the combined presidential and
legislative elections was a welcome development and an important and necessary
step to consolidate democracy and the implementation of the Political Agreement.
We are also pleased that, despite economic hardship, the second round of legislative
elections are scheduled for 14 March. We have seen progress, but some stakeholders
and armed groups continue to derail our common efforts to save the country from the
abyss by alleging that the elections were not inclusive or transparent. On numerous
occasions we have called on the parties to address their differences over the elections
through dialogue.
Unfortunately, some chose the path of violence through the creation
of a coalition of six armed groups, known as the Coalition des patriotes pour le
changement (CPC), which is bent on overthrowing the Government. Those groups
continue to attack the Bangui-Garoua corridor, a strategic supply route for goods and
services and the main road linking the Central African Republic with Cameroon.
These attacks have a far-reaching impact on the Government’s ability to provide
needed services to innocent civilians in the Central Africa Republic. The CPC’s
attacks have also undermined the ability of the international institutions to provide
much-needed humanitarian assistance. As the Council is aware, the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees considers the Central African Republic to be one
of the most poorly funded emergency situations in the world. Hundreds continue to
lack basic necessities, such as food, health, shelter and water — particularly refugees
living outside official sites and the communities hosting them.
I would like to take this opportunity to commend MINUSCA, Russia and
Rwanda for providing military assistance to the Central African Republic and
thwarting the CPC’s intentions of capturing Bangui. The ongoing military offensive
launched by MINUSCA and allies will, no doubt, free cities under the control of
the CPC, as well as the main corridor between Bangui and Garoua. Robust support
for MINUSCA and regional troops, in addition to the announced inclusive dialogue
process, will undoubtedly bring hope and bring the focus back to the implementation
of the Political Agreement, reconciliation and reconstruction.
21-028305/33

S/2021/187

I would like to appeal to the Council to consider calling for an immediate
end to the violence perpetrated by the CPC and its attacks on the Bangui-Garoua
economic corridor in Cameroon; condemning acts of violence and attempts to
seize power by force, including through the subversive acts perpetrated by former
President François Bozizé; and reaffirming its solidarity with the Government of
the Central African Republic and calling on all rebel groups to disarm and respect
the provisions of the Political Agreement, which provides for their dissolution and
transformation into political parties.
We furthermore call on the Council to consider calling for the rapid
implementation of the inclusive dialogue road map announced by President Faustin
Archange Touadera following his election in order to peacefully address national
concerns; imposing targeted sanctions on all persons and entities that continue to
violate the Political Agreement and international humanitarian law; and supporting
the efforts of the African Union in the ongoing deployment of its military observers
by ensuring security and transportation in the country.
As I highlighted at the start of my intervention, the Central African Republic
is at a crossroads. The situation requires our continued joint attention, and the
time has come to hold spoilers accountable. Impunity has been the licence that has
allowed Central African Republic actors to consider violence as an alternative. That
must end.
In conclusion, I wish to emphasize the AU’s appreciation to the Security
Council and our international partners that continue to support efforts to restore
stability in the Central African Republic through the implementation of the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic. I am also
grateful to the Ambassadors of the group of five plus in the Central African Republic
and their staff, who continue to work under very difficult conditions.

6/33

21-02830

S/2021/187

Annex III
Briefing by the Managing Director for Africa of the European
External Action Service, Rita Laranjinha, on behalf of the European
Union
I am honoured to address the participants of this very timely meeting on
behalf of the European Union (EU). It takes place at a crucial time for the future of
democracy, peace and stability in the Central African Republic.
Two months after the elections of 27 December 2020, the Central African
Republic remains in a critical situation indeed, with continued significant postelectoral political tensions and a new security crisis that has further worsened the
humanitarian situation.
In our view, our collective efforts need to be further pursued in three
directions by drawing all together all the necessary lessons learnt and overcome the
current crisis.
First, restoring security in the country is a priority, particularly in view of
the remaining steps in the electoral process, notably the next rounds of legislative
elections, which are scheduled for 14 March. As a partner of the country and a major
donor to the process, we consider the holding of free, fair and transparent elections
to be of paramount importance for a viable solution to the current crisis. That is
why we think that they must take place in the best possible conditions in order to
allow Central African Republic voters to participate in the vote and guarantee the
inclusiveness and political stability of the next five years.
In that regard, we would like to pay tribute to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) for the significant efforts it has made to contribute to security in the
country and for the losses it has suffered in doing so. In order to pursue its mission,
it is important that MINUSCA can mobilize all necessary means. The EU therefore
welcomes the recommendations of the Secretary-General to reinforce MINUSCA
with additional military and police resources.
We strongly condemn the attacks and actions of destabilization launched
by some armed groups signatories to the 2019 Political Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic under the newly established rebel
Coalition des patriotes pour le changement, supported by former President Bozizé,
that we have been witnessing during the last three months. Violence as a means
of raising and resolving grievances cannot be accepted. Those involved in serious
crimes and human rights violations will be brought to justice, as demanded more than
ever by the population of the Central African Republic. The fight against impunity
and respect for human rights and international humanitarian law must remain at the
core of stabilization in the Central African Republic. We are deeply concerned by the
continual reports of serious human rights violations committed during the current
crisis, including by the country’s security forces. We encourage the authorities to
stop and properly investigate.
Secondly, a sustainable and agreed solution to the political crisis requires
a genuine, inclusive political dialogue, namely, among the Government, the
democratic opposition and civil society. The representativeness of the country’s
future institutions and governance will need to be strengthened through broad
participation and inclusivity. We welcome President Touadera’s commitment to
holding an inclusive dialogue, and we encourage the Government and the Central
African Republic institutions, political actors and “forces vives” to engage in

21-028307/33

S/2021/187

a constructive dialogue with an open and positive spirit in the interest of the
country’s people.
Thirdly, and finally, the peace and reconciliation process needs to be
relaunched, with the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation remaining
the only joint and viable framework for lasting peace. Only a political solution will
help achieve sustainable peace, reconciliation and development in the country.
Two years after its signing, the Peace Agreement needs to be revitalized,
starting with a serious and honest evaluation of its implementation aimed at bringing
about, if necessary, the reforms needed to improve its effectiveness and bring
peace dividends to the people, in close coordination with national stakeholders and
international partners. A re-engagement of all parties — Government and armed
groups willing to remain or to return in the process — and greater inclusion and
participation of civil society and the “forces vives” in the process, especially women
and youth, are essential for the agreement to be credible and bring lasting peace,
but without compromising on the core of the peace process, and continuing to fight
impunity for serious crimes while strengthening proper reconciliation mechanisms
such as the truth, justice, reparation and reconciliation commission. That is the
only way to restore trust among the population, to pay tribute to all the victims the
crisis in the Central African Republic and, finally, to stop the spiral of violence in
the country.
We encourage and support any efforts made by the guarantors, the facilitators
and the region aiming at reaching those objectives, in close coordination with the
Government of the Central African Republic and key partners.
As you know, the EU has been, is and will continue to be one of the closest
partners of the Central African Republic, working for peace and reconciliation,
democracy and recovery, as reflected recently in our decisive support for the elections.
With all our instruments and through our multidimensional engagement, we will
continue to stand by the Central African Republic through its future challenges by
drawing the appropriate lessons from the current crisis.
In view of the establishment of the upcoming EU-Central African Republic
partnership cycle, we stand ready to continue to accompany the country’s people
and future authorities through an agenda of reforms towards a stronger democratic
governance and rule of law, and a strengthened, professional, accountable and
better-governed security sector, by fighting corruption and impunity; strengthening
State authority and credible and accountable institutions; and increasing economic
opportunities for all, without forgetting key societal reforms, with a special focus on
education, youth and the role of women.
One last word on growing disinformation, fed by pan-Africanist, local and
some international actors, which contribute to the country’s fragility. We condemn
the attacks on MINUSCA, the EU and other partners and encourage the authorities
to consider fighting hate speech as a key priority.
In all those efforts, we are more than ever committed to closely cooperating
and coordinating with the United Nations, the African Union and the Economic
Community of the Central African States, as well as with all partners involved, in
particular the Central African Republic’s neighbours.

8/33

21-02830

S/2021/187

Annex IV
Briefing by the Director of youth-led peacebuilding organization
URU, Kessy Martine Ekomo-Soignet
[Original: French]
It is an honour for me to address you on the situation in my country, the
Central African Republic. Indeed, thousands of my compatriots would have liked to
seize such an opportunity to speak directly to you to share with you their concerns,
their fears, their hopes and their vision for the future of this beautiful country.
That is why I consulted several young people, women and civil-society actors
living in the Central African Republic and in the diaspora in order to echo their
voices in my intervention.
The situation in my country is complex, tense and difficult. We live in fear:
the fear of losing our lives and those of our loved ones due to gun violence; the fear of
being physically abused; and the fear of not having the economic means to survive,
especially in this period of pandemic, which has exacerbated vulnerabilities.
However, despite those fears, today I would like to send a message from
the people of the Central African Republic: our hopes are stronger than our fears.
We strongly believe that it is possible to extricate ourselves from the situation of
instability in which we have lived for years.
Yes, we are aware of our vulnerability to crises and violence.
Yes, we need to be supported by our partners, and we are grateful for their
commitment and their sacrifices. I take this opportunity to pay tribute to the
memory of the men and women who made the ultimate sacrifice for the cause of
peace in my country.
Yes, our people have learned to be resilient and have always chosen the path of
peace and unity in the face of attempts at destabilization and division.
Yes, the people, especially young people and women, are ready to rise up and
turn the page on repetitive crises.
That commitment is not new. It was openly reiterated at the Bangui National
Forum in 2015, which enabled the people of the Central African Republic to speak
with one voice: the voice of peace. That passionate appeal still resonates today, six
years later.
The current context, unfortunately, reminds millions of people in the Central
African Republic of the trauma of the 2013 crisis. That trauma is real, as evidenced
by the events of 23 December 2020, and it is underlying our determination to live
together despite everything, to create, to make positive changes in country and to
rise up together as one strong and united people.
The violence perpetrated by the nebulous armed coalition called Coalition
des patriotes pour le changement has made the lives of my people very difficult.
The violence has contributed to the deterioration of the security and humanitarian
situation and has compromised the right to education of thousands of inhabitants of
the Central African Republic.
In addition, the curfew and the state of emergency established by the
Government have also impacted the life of the people on several levels, especially at
the socioeconomic level, because our country is characterized by a largely informal
and active day and night economy. At the social level, there has, unfortunately, been
an upsurge in gender-based violence and sexual assault within communities.
21-028309/33

S/2021/187

At the political level, the current situation is jeopardizing the future of the
peace process, in particular the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in
the Central African Republic.
Civil society actors, specifically young people and women, have worked
over the past two years to make the agreement the reference framework for the
establishment of lasting peace. For that reason, we have deployed advocacy efforts
with decision-makers and armed groups to advance the cause of peace and silence
the guns.
Today we are calling for redoubled efforts on the part of all stakeholders,
guarantors and facilitators of the agreement for the revitalization of the peace
process, because the people thirst for peace, and we owe such peace not only to
the present generation but also to future generations. Our people have dreams for
our country; that dream is even more vibrant in the current context, despite our
weariness and our fears.
In 2020, a participatory analysis conducted throughout the territory of the
Central African Republic that focused on the needs and aspirations of young people,
who represent more than 70 per cent of the population, showed that for those young
people, peace means, first and foremost, the freedom of movement of goods and
people. The study also showed that despite the difficult context, 86 per cent of young
people do not want to emigrate but to stay in the country and be successful.
We dream of seeing our country develop with dignity and achieve the
Sustainable Development Goals by 2030 and the aspirations of the Agenda 2063:
The Africa We Want.
We dream of seeing the vision of the founding father of the Central African
Republic, Barthélemy Boganda, formulated around the “Zo Kwe Zo”: that is,
embracing the diversity of the people of the Central African Republic by ensuring
that impunity is combated and that fundamental rights and freedoms can become a
genuine reality for all.
Thus we dream that freedom of expression and of thought will also be at the
heart of the efforts of young people, women, men, decision-makers and friendly
countries working for peace in the Central African Republic, because there is no
one voice in conflict resolution. To advocate a single voice would call into question
the diversity of our nation, especially the courage of the people who expressed their
views at the ballot box against the odds.
My people thirst for justice. They demand justice for the thousands of innocent
lives taken, they demand justice for the girls and women who have been raped and
physically abused; they demand justice for the destruction of property and other
goods. That cry for justice has always been a forceful demand on the part of the
population of the Central African Republic, which does not condone impunity.
Finally, there will be no lasting peace without the effective participation of
women and young people, who represent more than 75 per cent of the population.
How can we possibly envision a lasting peace without them? Their contribution
should not be limited to ad hoc consultations but should be made in the context
of a participatory, inclusive and active approach at all levels of decision-making.
Those young people and women peacemakers must be supported technically and
financially so as to amplify the impact of their peacebuilding actions.
I wish to conclude by reminding Council members that the people of the
Central African Republic are aware of the decisive weight that they represent for the
future of our country. Your action or inaction can save or cost lives in the Central

10/33

21-02830

S/2021/187

African Republic. We are therefore counting on the wisdom of the members of the
Council to take decisions in the service of peace and security in my country.
For our part, we remain active on the ground and nourish the strong hope
that one day our country will emerge from these repeated crises thanks to the
combined efforts of the people of the Central African Republic and the support of
the international community.

21-0283011/33

S/2021/187

Annex V
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Dai Bing
[Original: Chinese]
I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix, Commissioner
Chergui of the African Union Peace and Security Commission, Managing Director
Laranjinha of the European External Action Service and Director Ekomo-Soignet of
youth-led peacebuilding organization URU for their briefings.
The Central African Republic is at a critical stage in its political situation,
which is complex and fragile. The international community and the Security Council
should build consensus and create synergies to support the Central African Republic
in maintaining peace and stability and help it out of crisis. I would like to emphasize
the following points.
First, the hostilities and violence must stop as soon as possible. Since the
general election at the end of last year, violent conflicts have continued, along with
mounting insecurity. That has severely impacted national stability and people’s
safety. China is deeply concerned about this. We call on all parties concerned to
proceed on the basis of the development of the country and the well-being of the
people, end the conflict and violence as soon as possible and refrain from any action
that might escalate tensions.
This month marks the second anniversary of the signing of the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic. The
agreement is vital to maintaining peace and stability in the Central African Republic
and cannot be abandoned halfway. All parties in the country must continue to abide
by and implement the agreement and resolve any differences that might arise in
the implementation process through dialogue, with a view to restoring stability and
order at an early date.
Secondly, we must support the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) in performing its
duties. MINUSCA has played an important role in maintaining peace and stability in
the country and ensuring the smooth holding of the general election.
In the light of developments on the ground and for the sake of lasting peace
and security in the country, the Council should consider the efforts of regional
organizations in an integrated manner, ensure the Mission’s top-level planning and
equip it with the commensurate resources.
In the final analysis, the Central African Republic must rely on itself to
achieve lasting peace and stability. The international community should support the
Government in strengthening the building and management of the security forces
and helping them improve their capacity to maintain stability independently. China
reiterates that the Council should lift the arms embargo on the Central African
Republic at an early date.
Thirdly, regional mediation efforts should be encouraged. Regional
organizations, such as the AU, the Economic Community of Central African States
and the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region, have been actively
promoting the political process in the country. Leaders of countries of the region have
been vigorously engaged in good offices, for which China registers its appreciation.
We always support African solutions to African problems by Africans themselves.
We support the AU and subregional organizations in continuing to play an important

12/33

21-02830

S/2021/187

role. The United Nations should enhance coordination with regional organizations
to create synergy.
Fourthly, it is imperative to protect people’s livelihoods. The Central African
Republic faces multiple challenges, such as a volatile security situation and the impact
of the coronavirus disease pandemic. At present, the country is in serious economic
difficulties, with 2.8 million people needing humanitarian assistance, more than 1
million people unable to return to their homes and nearly 100,000 people falling
back into poverty. Poverty and underdevelopment are the root causes of the ongoing
conflict and violence in the Central African Republic.
The new Government must strive to restore the economy, improve people’s
livelihoods and meet the people’s aspirations for development and a peaceful life.
The international community must step up its assistance to the country and, once
the security situation stabilizes, increase cooperation in areas such as agricultural
development, infrastructure building and energy and mineral resource exploration
so as to help the country to eradicate poverty, promote development and remove the
root causes of violent conflict. China will work with the international community
to continue to contribute to peace and development in the Central African Republic.

21-0283013/33

S/2021/187

Annex VI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Estonia to the
United Nations, Sven Jürgenson
I thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for briefing us today on the difficult
developments in the Central African Republic and the steps that the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) has taken in response. I would also like to thank the other briefers
for their valuable insights and, in particular, Ms. Ekomo-Soignet for sharing her
perspective with us.
Estonia condemns in the strongest terms the targeting and killing of civilians,
humanitarian workers, security personnel and United Nations peacekeepers by
armed groups, in particular the Coalition des patriotes pour le changement. The
perpetrators and instigators of that violence must be investigated and brought
to justice.
I would like to extend my personal condolences to the peacekeepers of
MINUSCA who have paid the ultimate price while protecting the lives of the people
of Central Africa.
The rapid and robust response by MINUSCA to ensure the protection of
civilians and the delivery of humanitarian assistance has been commendable. We
look favourably at the request to increase the personnel of the Mission in order
to improve its ability to fulfil its mandate in the current volatile circumstances.
However, the primary responsibility for protecting all populations in the country and
for advancing national reconciliation and the political dialogue still rests with the
authorities of the Central African Republic.
Despite the risk of violence, the people of the Central African Republic went
out to vote and will do so again soon. Their courage clearly demonstrates the desire
for a country where authority is given by the people, not taken by force. Their
decisions must be accepted and respected by all political actors, and any disputes
regarding the electoral results must be settled peacefully and lawfully.
Estonia joins the calls for an immediate ceasefire and the revitalization of
political dialogue and the reconciliation process. There is no road to lasting peace
through violence. Moreover, with half of all registered voters being women, it should
be evident that the country can only benefit from the full and meaningful participation
of women in political and peace processes. The effective implementation of the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic
will also benefit from the active support of its guarantors and facilitators. In that
regard, I would like to welcome the strongly worded communiqué issued last week by
the African Union. Finally, I would reiterate that accountability must be established
for the spoilers of the Agreement and the democratic process of elections.

14/33

21-02830

S/2021/187

Annex VII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations, Nicolas de Rivière
[Original: English and French]
I thank the various briefers for their presentations, and I would like to
emphasize three points.
First of all, I would like to stress that only a political solution will provide
a way out of the current crisis. I want to call on the Government and all Central
African stakeholders to do everything possible to put an end to the hostilities and
take the path of reconciliation. That is the message being sent unanimously by the
Security Council and the Peace and Security Council of the African Union. That
is the thrust of the efforts of the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) and the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region, which France
fully supports.
However, we do not see any concrete progress. France urges the Central
African authorities and all Central African political actors to engage without delay
in an inclusive political dialogue under the aegis of the region. It calls on the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) and partners in the region to use all possible influence
to support those efforts. It is important that the legislative and local elections be
organized in a peaceful manner, while drawing lessons from the security challenges
that marked the 27 December elections.
At the same time, the peace process needs to be relaunched. France supports
the adoption of sanctions against those who have tried to derail that process and are
not joining the path of peace and dialogue. We have taken due note of the position
expressed in that regard by the Peace and Security Council of the African Union.
Secondly, I would like to commend MINUSCA’s response to the crisis,
sometimes with the ultimate sacrifice. I once again pay tribute to the memory of the
seven peacekeepers who have died since December.
France has taken due note of the Secretary-General’s request to strengthen
the Mission’s resources to enable it to fulfil its mandate — a request supported by
the authorities of the Central African Republic, as reflected in President Touadera’s
letter of 22 February to the Secretary-General. We support that request, and we will
soon submit a draft resolution to that effect to the Security Council.
The protection of civilians and humanitarian access must remain absolute
priorities. France calls on all parties to respect their obligations under international
humanitarian law. That is all the more essential given that the number of displaced
persons continues to rise and food insecurity is worsening. The number of attacks
against humanitarian workers has never been so high, which is completely
unacceptable. The perpetrators of those crimes must be brought to justice.
In that regard, France is very concerned by reports regarding the takeover
of the city of Bambari. We call on the authorities of the Central African Republic
and MINUSCA to establish the truth about the facts and, if violations have been
committed, not to let the perpetrators go unpunished.
Moreover, serious violations against children continue. France therefore calls
for the implementation of the conclusions of the Council working group adopted in
June 2020 (S/AC.51/2020/3).

21-0283015/33

S/2021/187

In conclusion, I would like to recall, as I did on 21 January (S/2021/76, annex
IV), that the arms embargo was not created to hinder the strengthening of the Central
African armed forces, a strengthening that France fully supports. We are listening to
the concerns of the Central African authorities, and we have taken good note of their
requests, as well as those of ECCAS and the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region, concerning this issue. In that regard, we are in favour of the Security
Council meeting in the near future in the presence of the representatives of those two
organizations, as their Chairs have requested.
It is clear that developments in the sanctions regime, for which we are ready,
must be part of an overall strategy that takes into account regional efforts, political
progress in the Central African Republic and progress in achieving the objectives set
by the Security Council in the area of arms control.
In conclusion, I express the hope that the Security Council, through its unity,
will support the efforts of MINUSCA and those of the region to stabilize the situation
in the Central African Republic, which must return to the path of peace.

16/33

21-02830

S/2021/187

Annex VIII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations, Nagaraj Naidu Kakanur
I thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for providing us with a detailed
briefing supplementing the latest report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) (S/2021/146). I thank African Union (AU) Commissioner
Chergui for his insights on the situation in the Central African Republic. I also
thank the European Union External Action Service Managing Director for Africa,
Rita Laranjinha, for the useful information.
Let me begin by strongly condemning the recent attacks on peacekeepers of
MINUSCA in the Central African Republic as we remember the seven peacekeepers
from Morocco, Gabon, Burundi and Rwanda who sacrificed lives for the cause of
peacekeeping. The authorities of the Central African Republic must investigate those
crimes immediately and those responsible must be held accountable. I pay tribute to
MINUSCA and the outstanding work that the peacekeepers are doing in the Central
African Republic, at great risk to their own lives.
The Central African Republic is passing through a critical phase, as it marked
earlier this month two years since the signing of the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic. The full implementation of the
peace agreement is the only way forward to achieve national reconciliation, end
political tensions and bring stability to the country. The onus on re-energizing the
Political Agreement lies with the leadership of the Central African Republic. The
authorities should reach out to all signatories to the peace agreement and pursue
dialogue. We also call on all opposition groups, armed group signatories to the peace
agreement, to stop fighting and join the authorities of the Central African Republic in
finding a peaceful solution. We support the ongoing efforts of the guarantors of the
peace agreement, the AU and the Economic Community of Central African States.
It is important to emphasize that a winner-takes-all approach will be detrimental to
peace and stability.
Amid the violence and tensions in the Central African Republic, the holding
of democratic elections last December was an important milestone. We commend
the authorities of the Central African Republic for conducting the elections and all
partners that supported the process. The Constitutional Court endorsed the outcome
of the elections, and the electoral phase is now set to progress to the next stage. Those
decisions must be respected. As the national authorities prepare for the next round
of legislative elections on 14 March, it is important that all stakeholders continue to
support the election process and the efforts made by the Government of the Central
African Republic on that front.
We take note of the meeting of the national-level implementation mechanism
held in Bangui on 5 February. That was one of the essential elements of the 2019
peace agreement. It is encouraging that local-level mechanisms, with the active
engagement of women leaders, also met in some areas, promoting inclusive dialogue.
Such steps must continue. The Administration should also take immediate steps to
win the trust of the rural population.
The continuing violence by armed groups in many parts of the country has
forced the authorities to declare a state of emergency for six months. We condemn
the violence and attacks perpetrated by the armed groups, especially those against
civilians, including women and children. The precarious security situation has been
aggravated by the desertion of Central African Republic forces in many parts of
the country. That again highlights the importance of security sector reform and
21-0283017/33

S/2021/187

disarmament, demobilization, repatriation and reintegration, which are important
elements of the peace agreement.
We are concerned about the humanitarian situation in the Central African
Republic. The fighting has forced more than 100,000 people to flee the country,
compounding an already dire refugee crisis, with many more internally displaced
and suffering from food insecurity. The effects of the coronavirus disease pandemic
persist amid all that. There must not be any blockade on towns and important
transport routes and the movement of essential supplies must be allowed.
We support the Secretary-General’s call for an incremental increase in the
MINUSCA troop ceiling. While those reinforcements will assist the Central African
Republic in tackling the security situation, the capacity-building of the security
forces of the Central African Republic and progress in the political process are an
imminent need for the long-term stability of the country. We hope that the authorities
of the Central African Republic will continue to take steps in the right direction.

18/33

21-02830

S/2021/187

Annex IX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ireland to the
United Nations, Geraldine Byrne Nason
[Original: English and French]
First of all, I would like to thank today’s briefers for their very enlightening
presentations. The presence of the United Nations, the African Union (AU), the
European Union and Central African civil society in the Security Council this
morning demonstrates the importance of this discussion. Furthermore, it illustrates
the deep commitment of Central African society and the international community to
peace and stability in the Central African Republic.
I would like to thank Ms. Ekomo-Soignet in particular. Her work illustrates
the great potential of young people to bring about change and the crucial role that
they can play in establishing and consolidating peace. We share her aspiration for a
future in which the young people of the Central African Republic can prosper.
The increase in violence and the targeted attacks on the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) have tragically cost the lives of seven peacekeepers in recent weeks.
That alone underlines the urgency for, and responsibility of, the Security Council
to ensure that the Mission is adequately resourced to safely fulfil its mandate.
We have a shared responsibility to do that. We welcome the Secretary-General’s
recommendations to augment MINUSCA’s numbers. We believe that the Council
should support that proposal.
Within MINUSCA’s mandate, we believe that the fulfilment of its priority
task of the protection of civilians is vitally important. We remain deeply concerned,
indeed moved, by the suffering of the civilian population. The Mission simply must
have the capacity to help create conditions conducive to the advancement of the
political process.
A better, more secure future depends on peace, which we all know can come
only from an effective political dialogue. On the second anniversary of the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic earlier
this month, President Touadera again indicated his intention to facilitate dialogue.
We welcome that commitment. We view its implementation as a matter of urgency.
A military approach will not solve this crisis. We call on all parties to engage in
a constructive dialogue to achieve reconciliation and peace. For that peace to be
sustainable, it must also be inclusive. A national dialogue should of course include
women. It should also include young people, civil society, internally displaced
persons and refugees.
Ireland knows from its own experience that the more inclusive the process,
the more durable the result. The full, equal and meaningful participation of women
is critical. Women must be meaningfully represented, we believe, in both the peace
talks and the Government, including in appointments to the Council of Ministers.
We call on the Government, with the support of the United Nations, MINUSCA and
all relevant actors, to help to ensure that.
Holding the presidential election and the first round of legislative elections
within the constitutional timeline was indeed an achievement, which should now be
built on through peaceful and inclusive elections on 14 March. I strongly encourage
all parties to engage fully in the electoral process.
The engagement of regional States and organizations has been vital so far,
and will continue to be. The Economic Community of Central African States, the
21-0283019/33

S/2021/187

AU and the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region have undertaken
important outreach to advance a peaceful resolution to the current instability. As the
Security Council, I believe that it is our collective responsibility to support that and
engage constructively with them.
Sadly, the humanitarian situation remains grim, particularly the increasing
levels of food insecurity, driven by the conflict. The arrival of humanitarian and
commercial convoys in Bangui from the Cameroonian border is welcome. But it is
far from enough to provide the desperately needed relief. Put simply, the route must
be secured as a matter of priority. We welcome the recommendation of an additional
battalion to undertake that task, which we see as urgent.
Of course, when aid arrives the task is just beginning, but humanitarians need
to be able to reach those in need without delay. We condemn in the strongest terms
attacks against humanitarian workers. With more than half of the population of the
Central African Republic in need, it is absolutely vital that humanitarian workers
can operate and that humanitarian space is respected by all security actors.
The incidences of human rights violations and conflict-related sexual violence,
along with increases in gender-based violence, are shocking. As a matter of the most
basic human concern, survivors must be able to access care and services, including
health, psychosocial support and sexual and reproductive health services. We call
on all parties, including the national defence and internal security forces, to uphold
respect for human rights and international humanitarian law.
Finally, peace and reconciliation is possible only when those who violate
international humanitarian law and international human rights law are held
responsible. The hearings on alleged war crimes and crimes against humanity in
The Hague remind us that justice can and will be rendered.
We welcome the appointment of the Commissioners to the Commission on
Truth, Justice, Reparation and Reconciliation and eagerly await the commencement
of their work.
From our own experience in Ireland, we know that the establishment of a
lasting peace is not secured at the moment an agreement is signed; it is a long-term,
intergenerational process. We have a responsibility to support the Central African
Republic in the peaceful pursuit of that goal.

20/33

21-02830

S/2021/187

Annex X
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Mexico to the
United Nations, Juan Ramón de la Fuente Ramirez
[Original: Spanish]
I thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Commissioner Smaïl
Chergui, Managing Director Rita Laranjinha and activist Kessy Martine EkomoSoignet for their briefings. I particularly welcome the inclusion of a young member
of civil society in this meeting. I welcome one and all.
Mexico expresses its deep concern about the grave humanitarian consequences
of the escalating conflict in the Central African Republic. The current situation, with
more than 200,000 people having recently fled their homes because of violence,
demands an urgent response from the international community and coordinated
action by all humanitarian actors.
The attacks by the Coalition des patriotes pour le changement, which
is blocking the road connecting Bangui to Cameroon, are unacceptable. They
directly affect the lives of the civilian population, who urgently need the basic
necessities that are transported along that road. We call on all actors not to obstruct
humanitarian access.
The high number of desertions from the national armed forces and internal
security forces is another worrisome indicator, especially given the work done in
recent years to try to strengthen State institutions.
Also worrisome is the mobilization capacity that armed groups have shown
since December to organize asymmetrical attacks, despite the fact that most of those
groups are signatories to the 2019 Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic.
My country strongly condemns the crimes against women and children
carried out by both armed rebel groups and State security forces, as indicated in the
Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2021/146). Mexico urges all parties to respect
their obligations under international humanitarian law and international human
rights law.
The recent start of the trials against Alfred Yekatom and Patrice-Edouard
Ngaïssona at the International Criminal Court should serve as a reminder to all
parties concerned of the consequences of committing crimes of this kind.
My country recognizes the important role played by the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) and commends the outstanding work it has done to protect the civilian
population in the face of increased violence, even at the cost of regrettable losses of
troops. We strongly condemn such attacks.
We take note of the Secretary-General’s request to increase MINSUCA’s
troop levels in order to address the current instability. That proposal deserves to
be studied in depth. However, a long-term solution requires the commitment of the
Central African Republic and that the authorities fully assume their responsibilities.
Reforms are also needed to improve the country’s governance and transform the
structural conditions that fuel the conflict.
Allegations of sexual abuse and exploitation against MINUSCA troops
must be investigated rigorously and transparently. The only acceptable response is
zero tolerance.
21-0283021/33

S/2021/187

The only way out of the current crisis, the most viable path, is the reactivation
of a serious, credible and effective political process. Mexico hopes that the second
round of legislative elections will take place within the scheduled time frame in a
peaceful atmosphere.
Reconciliation must be inclusive and incorporate access to justice for victims
of violence as a priority. Political negotiations cannot again be a space reserved
almost exclusively for armed groups. Dialogue must be open to the various social
leaders, particularly women and young people, in order to move towards a solution
to the conflict.
Finally, we urge neighbouring countries and regional organizations, such as
the Economic Community of Central African States and the African Union, to use
their influence with the parties to the conflict to put an end to the spiral of violence
and lay the foundations for a lasting peace.

22/33

21-02830

S/2021/187

Annex XI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Niger to the
United Nations, Abdou Abarry
[Original: French]
I have the honour to make this statement on behalf of Kenya, Tunisia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines and my own country, the Niger (A3+1).
We would like to thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for
Peace Operations; Mr. Smaïl Chergui, African Union Commissioner for Peace and
Security; Ms. Rita Laranjinha, Managing Director for Africa of the European Union
External Action Service; and Ms. Kessy Martine Ekomo-Soignet, Director of youthled peacebuilding organization URU, for their very edifying briefings.
We would first like to commend the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) for the
vigorous actions it has taken to help contain elections-related violence perpetrated
by armed groups in the Central African Republic.
We reiterate our condolences to the families of the 12 United Nations
personnel who died between October 2020 and January 2021, including seven
military personnel who were victims of attacks by armed groups.
We support the Secretary-General’s appeal to the authorities of the Central
African Republic to make every effort to track down the perpetrators of those
attacks, which may constitute crimes against humanity, and to prosecute them before
national and international courts.
Attempts to obstruct the political process during December’s legislative
and presidential elections, the resurgence of violence and the lack of trust that it
has generated among political actors have all put the peace process in the Central
African Republic to the test.
As we mentioned at the Council meeting on 21 January (see S/2021/76)
on the Central African Republic, we reiterate our firm conviction that elections
remain the only legitimate voice for accession to power, and welcome once again
the determination of the people of the Central African Republic to exercise their
legitimate right to elect their leaders despite the difficult context they face.
We remain more than ever convinced that only dialogue among the people
of the Central African Republic, with the support of the countries of the region, the
African Union, the United Nations and the international community as a whole,
remains the key to a successful exit from the crisis in the Central African Republic.
We call on all actors to accept the results of the elections, as validated by the
Constitutional Court, and support President Touadera in his determination to do
everything possible to initiate and promote an inclusive dialogue with the opposition,
the armed groups that signed the 6 February 2019 Political Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic, civil society and all stakeholders in
order to ease tensions and relaunch the implementation process of the agreement.
We welcome the significant efforts made in that regard to promote peace and
reconciliation at the national and local levels. Similarly, we welcome the progress
made in the peace process with the recent appointment of the Commissioners of the
Commission on Truth, Justice, Reparation and Reconciliation, which will facilitate
the continuation of the peace process and transitional justice.

21-0283023/33

S/2021/187

We stress, however, that dialogue must not hinder the fight against impunity.
We therefore call on the Government of the Central African Republic to strengthen
the implementation of institutional reforms, in particular security sector reform,
which is a major challenge, in view of the tests and shortcomings observed in
recent weeks.
We also call for coordinated action by the international community, starting
with the United Nations, to contribute more effectively to alleviating the suffering of
the population, especially during the coronavirus disease pandemic, by facilitating
access to humanitarian assistance and promoting human rights.
We are particularly concerned about the deteriorating humanitarian situation,
with an estimated 2.8 million people in need of humanitarian assistance, of whom 1.9
million are in emergency situations; and 2.3 million suffering from food insecurity,
more than a third of whom are in emergency situations. In addition, there are more
than 1.3 million people who are internally displaced or in neighbouring countries,
for whom we are calling on the international community, including the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, to step up efforts to repatriate
them in accordance with international humanitarian law.
The harmonization of actions must also lead to greater impact on the ground
and the full and effective implementation of the peace agreement. That should
lead us to focus our discussions on solutions to the root causes of instability in
the country and help the authorities to fulfil their primary responsibility to protect
the population.
We also understand the concerns of the authorities of the Central African
Republic and other regional and subregional organizations with regard to the essential
issue of the arms embargo, which, beyond its technical aspects, has a highly political
dimension that must be taken into account.
In that regard, we appreciate the cooperation of Council members, which have
consistently supported the authorities’ requests for arms embargo exemptions from
the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013),
concerning the Central African Republic.
The A3+1 is ready to work with the members of the Council on concrete
measures towards a lasting solution that takes into account both the demands of the
Government of the Central African Republic and the related challenges.
We support the Secretary-General’s recommendation to strengthen the
capacity of MINUSCA through adjusting its troops and police forces and providing
it with adequate equipment to enable it to guarantee the security of civilians and
peacekeepers and ensure the maintenance of law and order, in accordance with
resolution 2552 (2020), which renews the Mission’s mandate. The authorities of the
Central African Republic should be closely involved in that process.
In conclusion, the A3+1 once again commends the efforts of the African
Union, the Economic Community of Central African States and the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, in their capacity as guarantors of the peace
agreement, in the search for a solution to the crisis in the Central African Republic.
We also reaffirm our support for the leading role played by MINUSCA in
promoting peace and security, mainly through the implementation of the peace
agreement, and commend the unwavering commitment and tireless efforts of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the Central African
Republic and Head of MINUSCA for his good offices and support for the
reconciliation process.

24/33

21-02830

S/2021/187

Annex XII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Norway to the
United Nations, Mona Juul
Let me start by thanking Under-Secretary-General Lacroix, African Union
(AU) Commissioner Chergui and European External Action Service Managing
Director Laranjinha for their interesting briefings. Many thanks also to Kessy
Martine Ekomo-Soignet, Director of youth-led peacebuilding organization URU, for
sharing with us the important perspective of youth in the Central African Republic
and her insights on how young people can be included in peacebuilding.
Norway remains deeply concerned about the ongoing violence in the Central
African Republic. We urge all parties to stop the attacks and to lay down their arms.
Norway is deeply worried about the lack of respect for international
humanitarian law and the sharp deterioration of the already dire human rights
situation described in the Secretary-General’s most recent report (S/2021/146). We
are particularly concerned about accounts of conflict-related sexual violence and
human rights abuses being perpetrated by non-State armed groups. Yet there are also
reports about national security forces committing human rights violations. That,
of course, is totally unacceptable and underlines the need for a renewed focus on
security sector reform, thorough vetting and risk assessment. In that context, we
are pleased to see the participation of the European Union (EU) in today’s briefing.
Through its Military Training Mission in the Central African Republic, the EU plays
an important role in security sector reform.
We commend President Touadera for expressing his readiness to engage in
dialogue with the political opposition. Indeed, there cannot be a military solution
to this conflict. Still, expressing readiness for dialogue is not enough; an inclusive
dialogue, with the participation of women, youth and religious leaders, should start
as soon as possible.
We are pleased to note the engagement from the region — in particular the AU,
the Economic Community of Central African States and the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region — and urge them to remain involved and support the
efforts of the Central African Republic authorities. Dialogue should go hand in
hand with reconciliation efforts and confidence-building measures. One avenue is
through the important work of the Commission on Truth, Justice, Reparation and
Reconciliation. We commend the confirmation of five women Commissioners as
a positive step towards an inclusive institution and process. We add our voice to
the Secretary-General’s call for national authorities to increase efforts to pursue
accountability in an impartial and independent manner through the justice system.
The electoral-related violence has also had a devastating impact on the
humanitarian situation. The latest figures from the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees show that almost one third of the population is forcibly
displaced, and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs reports a
record number of 66 incidents against humanitarian workers in January 2021 alone.
The Central African Republic is the most dangerous place in the world for
humanitarian workers. The main supply road from Cameroon to Bangui remains
extremely unsafe. Norway strongly condemns attacks and blockades by armed
groups, preventing essential goods from reaching the capital. We again call for safe
and unhindered humanitarian access to all people in need of protection and assistance.
All parties must comply with their obligations under international humanitarian law.
These past weeks have been particularly challenging for the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
21-0283025/33

S/2021/187

(MINUSCA). Norway would like to express its great appreciation to the Mission,
to Special Representative of the Secretary-General Ndiaye and to all troop- and
police-contributing countries for their tireless efforts aimed at dealing with a very
demanding situation. We agree with the Secretary-General that MINUSCA is
overstretched and needs to be strengthened. We support the proposals to increase
the authorized ceilings for military and police personnel.
The recruitment of additional personnel should, to the extent possible, be
based on the use of the Peacekeeping Capability Readiness System, ensuring that
personnel meet United Nations standards of training and performance, including
with respect to the zero-tolerance approach to sexual exploitation and abuse. In
our view, the main objective of the reinforcements should be the enhancement of
MINUSCA’s capacity to protect civilians and ensure the safety of the Mission staff
and humanitarian actors. We look forward to discussing with other Council members
how to respond to this request in a practical manner.

26/33

21-02830

S/2021/187

Annex XIII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Anna Evstigneeva
[Original: Russian]
We thank our briefers today for their briefings.
We must note that the situation in the Central African Republic remains tense.
Armed hostilities are still in an active phase. Governmental forces, with the support
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the
Central African Republic (MINUSCA), still have to hold back attempts by rebels to
seize new territory, move towards Bangui and cut off provisions for the capital and
other major cities.
We are concerned by new reports of the regrouping of fighters and of financial
support and equipment being supplied to them from outside the country. To fight
arms smuggling, the Central African Republic’s neighbours need to energetically
boost border control.
International support for the legal authorities in Bangui should continue
and be comprehensive and coordinated in character. In this context, we welcome
the fact that the Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS) and
the International Conference of the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) have joined the
stabilization efforts of the United Nations and other foreign partners. Nonetheless,
any mediation initiatives by regional players should be carried out upon the consent
and with the participation of the Government of the Central African Republic.
We are aware of the initiative put forward by the Chair of the ICGLR, the
President of Angola, and the Chair of ECCAS, the President of the Republic of the
Congo, to organize an open dialogue with the Security Council on the prospects for
supporting Bangui in overcoming the crisis. We think such contacts are useful.
The provisions of the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the
Central African Republic, signed on 6 February 2019, are the basis for achieving
lasting peace and security in the country. Unilateral attempts to muddy or replace
those provisions are unacceptable. We think it is important to send a message to
those armed groups that have stepped away from the Political Agreement that they
need to return to fulfilling the obligations they had undertaken.
There are a number of tasks facing Central Africans in the near future,
including creating conditions for the successful completion of parliamentary
elections and the formation of a new legislature. Bangui should receive additional
assistance in guaranteeing the security of those constituencies where the Coalition
des patriotes pour le changement broke off the elections in December 2020.
We support the call from the Bangui officials for further loosening the arms
embargo, which would allow the legally elected authorities in the Central African
Republic to counter armed groups more effectively. Recent events have clearly
demonstrated that the sanctions regime in the country needs to be adapted in a timely
manner, namely, by proceeding from the primary objective of allowing the central
authorities to spread their power across the territory of the country.
With regard to the Secretary-General’s proposal of sending additional
peacekeepers to the Central African Republic, we will be guided first and
foremost by the position of the host country. We know that Bangui is ready to work
closely with the Secretariat to further agree on modalities for capacity-building
within MINUSCA.
21-0283027/33

S/2021/187

Stabilization in the country requires comprehensive support for legitimate
authorities in the Central African Republic, including on questions of increasing
the training and effectiveness of the national security forces. When the conflict
started to escalate in the middle of December 2020, Central African security forces
sustained a heavy blow. Nevertheless, with the support of bilateral partners and the
Blue Helmets, they were able to guarantee that elections were held and prevented the
capital and other cities from being seized. For the long-term solution of the situation,
it is important to further build capacity of the country’s armed forces.
For our part, we are ready to work with Bangui's international partners and
MINUSCA to continue to provide all possible support to the population and the
Government of the Central African Republic.

28/33

21-02830

S/2021/187

Annex XIV
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the
United Nations, Jonathan Allen
I would like to begin by thanking our four briefers for sharing their insights
today. I want to thank in particular Ms. Ekomo-Soignet for reminding us of the
Security Council’s duty to support the hopes and aspirations of the Central African
people, and I would particularly echo her in saying that peace and politics that are
not inclusive, particularly of women and youth, will not succeed.
The United Kingdom condemns the ongoing violence perpetrated by armed
groups in the strongest terms. All who commit atrocities and act in violation of the
2019 peace agreement must be held accountable. And I echo the French Ambassador’s
words about sanctions at this point. At the same time, we are concerned to hear
reports of human rights violations committed by members of the national armed
forces. We urge the Government to investigate all allegations and take preventive
action. However, achieving peace and stability requires not only accountability
but also reconciliation. I join other Council members in urging all political actors,
including both Government and opposition actors, to enter into constructive and
inclusive national dialogue. We look forward to the engagement of the guarantors of
the peace agreement in supporting these efforts.
We are deeply concerned by the humanitarian situation, with an estimated
2.3 million people now facing acute food insecurity. We urgently call on all
actors to respect the principles of humanitarian access, including the protection of
humanitarian workers, in line with resolution 2417 (2018).
We remain humbled by the resilience and courage of the women and men of
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic (MINUSCA), who are working to protect civilians and support
the ongoing electoral process. We thank the Secretary-General for his proposal to
strengthen the Mission. The Council has a responsibility to ensure that MINUSCA
is provided with the appropriate support to fulfil its mandate.
We also agree wholeheartedly with the Secretary-General, however, that
strengthening the Mission is no substitute for the authorities of the Central African
Republic living up to their own responsibilities to advance a political settlement.
This is the only route to a lasting peace.

21-0283029/33

S/2021/187

Annex XV
Statement by the Political Coordinator of the Permanent Mission of
the United States of America to the United Nations, Rodney Hunter
I thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix, Commissioner Chergui and Director
Laranjinha for their briefings today. I extend special thanks to Ms. Ekomo-Soignet
for adding a voice that has been too often missing since the inclusive dialogue of the
2015 Bangui Forum on National Reconciliation.
First, I would like to express my gratitude to the women and men of the
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic (MINUSCA), who serve at great personal risk to protect Central
Africans. I extend our deepest condolences to the families and the colleagues of
the peacekeepers who have been killed serving in the Mission. The United States
condemns attacks on peacekeepers in the strongest terms, and we stress that
these attacks may constitute war crimes under international law. Those involved
in planning, directing, sponsoring or conducting attacks against United Nations
missions will be held responsible. We also thank the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan for its inter-mission cooperation in support of its colleagues in the
Central African Republic during this period of heightened need.
The next round of legislative elections will be held on 14 March. Unfortunately,
there are those who still seek to disrupt the democratic process in the Central African
Republic and deprive the country’s citizens of the right to select their representatives.
We urge all actors in the Central African Republic to cease attacks and avoid a repeat
of the increase in violence from December.
As the Secretary-General noted in his report, “crisis in the country is
inextricably linked to the dynamics in the Central African region” (S/2021/146,
para. 103). The United States welcomes the decision of the Economic Community
of Central African States to appoint a mediator for the Central African Republic
and looks forward to the naming of this mediator as soon as possible. We note the
engagement of the leadership of the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region and welcome its support with regard to the future of the 2019 peace agreement.
The 2019 peace agreement is the only agreed-upon framework for peace in
the Central African Republic. We therefore urge the Central African Republic’s
neighbours to implement their commitments under the agreement to help secure
borders and limit the flow of weapons and fighters into the Central African Republic.
These initiatives will be most effective if partners build on the existing framework and
take into consideration the work that has been done so far. Discarding the agreement
for the sake of creating a new process will set the Central African Republic back
and keep both domestic and international actors in the current harmful cycle of
merely reacting to conflicts. The peace agreement provides a long-term framework
to help put the Central African Republic on a path to sustainable political and social
stability, while making clear that impunity is not acceptable.
The United States takes note of the Secretary-General’s request to increase
MINUSCA by 2,750 military and 940 police personnel so as to enhance the Mission’s
ability to perform its Security Council-mandated tasks. We appreciate the urgent
need to prevent and reverse a further deterioration in the security situation while
creating space for the political process to advance.
The United States remains concerned about operational coordination on the
ground, as Russian civilian military instructors and Rwandan troops are operating on
a bilateral basis with only minimal transparency with the MINUSCA peacekeeping
mission and humanitarian actors. We welcome efforts by the Central African
30/33

21-02830

S/2021/187

authorities and MINUSCA to establish a coordination mechanism, and we call on
all parties to participate fully. If it continues, the lack of coordination could severely
undermine MINUSCA’s ability to carry out its mandate, endangering United Nations
peacekeepers and humanitarian actors.
As we consider the Secretary-General’s request for more troops and police,
we urge the United Nations to ensure that any reinforcements are identified and
deployed according to the Organization’s own best practices. The Security Council
should be wary of any proposal to bypass the procedures for selecting peacekeeping
units that the United Nations itself has developed; the United Nations must use the
Peacekeeping Capabilities Readiness System, for which the rapid deployment level
was created for just this type of emergency scenario.
The United Nations must also continue to live up to its commitment to zero
tolerance for sexual exploitation and abuse. The United States is deeply troubled
by proposals to expand units with a pattern of sexual exploitation and abuse
allegations, which would be counter to the objective of keeping civilians safe. As
we consider increasing MINUSCA’s size and capabilities, we must invest in the
long-term operational effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping by promoting
performance, transparency and accountability. As the United States reiterated at last
week’s general debate in the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2436 (2018), drafted by the United States, made
it clear that performance and accountability in United Nations peacekeeping is a
priority of the Security Council.
Finally, the United States would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of MINUSCA, Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye, for his
untiring efforts and invaluable support in contributing to peace and stability in the
Central African Republic. The task has not been easy, and the road has been rough,
but through the good offices of the Special Representative, MINUSCA has sought
political solutions to the increased tensions and election-related violence while
maintaining its impartiality. Enabling political dialogue among national stakeholders
that reflects the needs and perspectives of the country must remain a priority.

21-0283031/33

S/2021/187

Annex XVI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Dang Dinh Quy
At the outset, I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, African Union Peace and Security Commissioner Smaїl Chergui, European
External Action Service Managing Director for Africa Rita Laranjinha and Ms.
Kessy Martine Ekomo-Soignet for their briefings. With regard to the situation in the
Central African Republic, allow me to highlight the following points.
First, on the political and security situation, it is regrettable to see that the
critical period in which the people of the Central African Republic cast their ballots
to decide their own future is marred by violence. It is also regrettable to see that
the country will continue to be under the current state of emergency for six months
owing to persistent insecurity.
We would like to take this opportunity to reiterate our strong condemnation of
attacks by armed elements against civilians, peacekeepers and humanitarian workers.
Obligations under international law, including international humanitarian law, must
be fully respected. It is also pivotal that the safety and security of peacekeepers and
humanitarian workers be ensured.
Our delegation therefore urges all political actors to resolve differences in the
most peaceful manner. This effort towards political stability and reconciliation has
to go hand in hand with the promotion of trust and confidence in order to pave the
way for a broad and inclusive political dialogue. The participation of women and
youth should be given high priority in this process.
The peace agreement is the most feasible way to achieve peace and stability for
the people of the Central African Republic. We welcome the fact that there has been
certain progress in terms of its implementation given the tremendous obstruction in
the past few months. We call on all signatories to respect the agreed understanding
in order to facilitate the political process.
My second point is on the humanitarian situation, which continues to deteriorate
owing to further election-related violence, the already dire socioeconomic situation
as well as the impacts of the coronavirus disease pandemic.
It is very troubling to see those related facts, including the 2.8 million people —
which is around 58 per cent of the population — who are in need of humanitarian
assistance, the 2.3 million — or 48 per cent of the population — experiencing acute
food insecurity, the hundreds of thousands of people who are displaced or have fled
the country owing to fresh violence relating to elections and the increasing trend in
attacks against humanitarians, which reached a record high number in January 2021.
We call on all parties to ensure that humanitarian assistance reaches all people
in need across the Central African Republic. Unimpeded, sustained and secure
humanitarian access must be maintained.
Last but not least, the current situation cannot be rectified without the
support of the international community. In that regard, Viet Nam will continue to
encourage the recent efforts of regional and subregional organizations, including the
African Union, the Economic Community of Central Africa States (ECCAS) and
the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR). We take note of
the recent high-level meetings of ECCAS and ICGLR to discuss their support to the
Central African Republic.
We welcome the support of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), as well as that of
32/33

21-02830

S/2021/187

other forces deployed under bilateral agreements with the Government. MINUSCA
has been providing exceptional assistance in the past years, and particularly during
the current critical juncture. We therefore support the discussion to further enhance
the ability of the Mission to discharge the mandates entrusted to it by the Security
Council.
The continued contribution of the international community is of great
importance to assist the Central African Republic and also, more significantly,
to bolster up its capability to extend State authority and protect civilians in the
longer term.

21-0283033/33
