S/PV.9074

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9074

th meeting
Wednesday, 22 June 2022, 10.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Dautllari. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Albania)

Members:

Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Ms. Tenkorang
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mrs. Toroitich
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Ms. Heimerback
Ms. Evstigneeva
Ms. Shaheen
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Mills

Agenda
The situation in the Central African Republic
Letter dated 1 June 2022 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2022/449)
Report of the Secretary-General on the Central African Republic (S/2022/491)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-39710 (E)
*2239710*

S/PV.9074

The situation in the Central African Republic

organizations and States in the region, as well as
international partners, for the revitalization of the
political process and the repositioning of the MINUSCA
force. In that regard, there are three strategic axes that
underpin the efforts of the Mission and deserve the
Council’s attention.

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Central African Republic
Letter dated 1 June 2022 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2022/449)
Report of the Secretary-General on the Central
African Republic (S/2022/491)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Central African Republic to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Valentine
Rugwabiza, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the Central African Republic and Head
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic;
and Ms. Lina Ekomo, President of the Network for
Women’s Leadership in the Central African Republic.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2022/449, which contains the text of a
letter dated 1 June 2022 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council, and
document S/2022/491, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the Central African Republic.
I now give the floor to Ms. Rugwabiza.
Ms. Rugwabiza (spoke in French): I would like
to begin by expressing on behalf of the SecretaryGeneral my gratitude for the Security Council’s
continued interest and attention to the developments,
challenges and progress relating to the implementation
of the mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA), which prompted this meeting.
In the three months covered by the report (S/2022/491)
submitted for the Council’s consideration, and since I
took office, I have been particularly engaged, together
with MINUSCA, in strengthening relations of trust
with the Central African Government and remobilizing
2/23

22/06/2022

There is no need to highlight the de facto
inaction into which the political process has plunged,
despite the importance that we all ascribe to it. That
strategic priority, based on our mandate, justifies all
the efforts that I have undertaken to remobilize the
region in the 10 weeks since I took office, together
with the Government of the Central African Republic
and in close cooperation with Angola and Rwanda,
mandated by the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region, the African Union and the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS). I am
pleased to be able to say that under the leadership of
the Central African Government and the auspices of
Angola and Rwanda, with MINUSCA’s support, those
efforts culminated in a strategic review meeting on the
political process held in Bangui on 4 June. The meeting
could well make 4 June both a reference date and a
critical turning point, and it should, as it involved highlevel participation, including the presence of the Head
of State, the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Angola and
Rwanda, the guarantors and facilitators of the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic of 6 February 2019 and international
partners, for a participatory assessment of the progress
and major challenges in the implementation of the joint
road map. Along with all partners, I would like to note
the following.
First, the strategic review meeting met all the goals
it was tasked with, in particular the remobilization of
the region, with the effective presence of Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of Angola and Rwanda on behalf of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
and the participation of ECCAS and the African Union.
Secondly, there is national ownership of the
political process by the relevant Government ministers
of the Central African Republic under the strategic
direction of President Touadera, with a delineation
of the roles and responsibilities of the key ministries
that are responsible for triggering the synergy required
for the implementation of the components of the joint
road map that fall under the scope of their respective
authorities, and under the effective coordination of the
22-39710

22/06/2022

The situation in the Central African Republic

Prime Minister and Head of Government and the direct
oversight of the President.
Thirdly, we saw a convergence of views on
the importance of continuing efforts to harmonize
the political commitments previously undertaken
separately under the auspices of the guarantors of the
6 February agreement and within the framework of the
joint road map, which should now be part of a single
platform, with full synergy, that can bring together the
representatives of the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region, Angola and Rwanda, the African
Union, the Economic Community of Central African
States and MINUSCA.
Fourthly, the necessary conditions have been created
for the re-engagement of the international partners,
who all share the Government’s view with regard to the
uniqueness of the political process articulated around
the Political Agreement, which the joint road map seeks
to revitalize around six key components.
Fifthly, the Central African authorities took a
sovereign decision to establish a permanent platform
for the strategic review of the political process, which
will be convened on a quarterly basis as of 4 June.
In view of those encouraging developments in the
collective efforts to revitalize the political process
through a revival of regional dynamics, I would like
to request Council members’ unanimous support in
carrying out the plan to monitor the strategic review of
4 June. This is the moment to underscore and commend
the decision taken by the President, with the Council of
Ministers, to be personally and directly involved in the
political commitments with armed group leaders and to
conduct inclusive and sectoral strategic reviews of the
process of disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and repatriation and of security-sector reform and
reconciliation within the framework of the thematic
commissions that will be established for that purpose
around the six components of the joint road map.
However, the hope that all the participants in the
strategic review have of reviving the peace process
does not detract from their strong desire to see the
Government implement the 217 recommendations of the
republican dialogue in order to promote the expansion
of the democratic space and a conducive political
atmosphere. I therefore encourage the Government to
expedite the implementation of the recommendations
of the republican dialogue, which falls under the sixth
component of the joint road map for peace in the Central

S/PV.9074

African Republic relating to the political process. I
intend to continue to support the Government’s efforts
in that respect, to call on partners for their contributions
and to request the Security Council’s political support,
in accordance with the provisions of resolution 2605
(2021), which calls for assistance to be provided to the
Central African authorities in the completion of a fully
inclusive republican dialogue as a prelude to peaceful
and inclusive local elections.
Finally, I would like to express the widely shared
concern about the persistent violations of the ceasefire
by all the parties to the conflict, whose operations
and belligerent acts have continued, thereby exposing
civilians to violence. The cessation of hostilities
throughout the country’s territory remains both an
immediate goal and a gauge of the credibility of the joint
road map for peace in the Central African Republic.
We must remain focused on that and encourage the
adoption of consensus measures aimed at discouraging
the parties who do not respect their commitments under
the joint road map, in accordance with the letter and the
spirit of the peace agreement, without prejudice to the
ongoing restoration of State authority and its exercise of
its sovereign powers to protect its territorial integrity.
We continue to hear about the legitimate fears
of the civilian population in the Central African
Republic, who are still enduring the harmful effects
of the persistent violations of the ceasefire, with
growing threats to their lives, property and activities,
particularly in the northern, central and eastern regions
of the Central African Republic. Considering the
damaging consequences of these adverse activities for
the people’s security and property and for humanitarian
assistance, an accurate assessment of the still fragile
progress being made in rebuilding the national defence
and security forces, and given MINUSCA’s mandate
and the additional resources that the Council has placed
at its disposal, MINUSCA has readjusted its concept of
operations to prioritize a preventive approach centred
on the civilian populations, who deserve to live in
peace and security and free from fear, regardless of
where they live within the vast territory of the Central
African Republic.
I am pleased that this readjustment of our concept
of operations was decisive in its positive impact on
the populations of Boyo, Mingala and Polubu, who
expressed their satisfaction with MINUSCA’s robust
and proactive posture in cooperation with the national
defence and security forces. I intend to continue to

22-397103/23

S/PV.9074

The situation in the Central African Republic

mobilize MINUSCA’s resources and work with local
populations and community leaders to take these
preventive measures to support the Central African
authorities in removing credible threats of violence
on civilian populations rather than reacting when the
violence has already occurred. This is the objective to
be achieved in perfect coordination with the defence
and security forces, which we will continue to support
in compliance with the policy of due diligence in terms
of human rights, as required by the mandate assigned
by the Security Council.
Beyond the protection of civilians and access to
humanitarian aid, the effectiveness of such a posture
by MINUSCA is all the more necessary as it is a
prerequisite for the creation and maintenance of a
security environment conducive to the peace process,
including respect for the ceasefire, the full restoration
of State authority and services, the continuation
of disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation in a climate of trust, and the implementation
of durable solutions for the voluntary and dignified
return of refugees and displaced persons with a view
to their participation in local elections that are credible,
peaceful and inclusive in all the territorial communities
of the Central African Republic.
In that regard, and despite the fuel crisis that
affects us, MINUSCA is planning for the immediate
implementation of operations in response to the new
posture of armed groups that are taking advantage of
the crisis context to reposition themselves tactically.
Accordingly, I call on the members of the Council to
mobilize all Member States, be they source or transit
States, to guarantee MINUSCA’s fuel supplies, for the
continuity and completeness of our operations, which
remain essential to the security and stability of the
Central African Republic.
To remain consistent, MINUSCA aims to maintain
this posture and increase its support and cooperation
with the Government. We are conscious, however, that
the ultimate solution to the Central African Republic’s
security problem lies in rebuilding the capacities
required for an efficient professional defence and
security force that can ensure the sustainability of efforts
to secure and stabilize the Central African Republic.
This is a collective effort that requires the support of
the Security Council and of all partners, as well as the
creation by the Government of conditions favourable
for the concerted and coordinated re-engagement of
all its bilateral and multilateral partners in the process
4/23

22/06/2022

of implementing the national strategy for security
sector reform, including the national defence plan. In
this regard, MINUSCA maintains a constructive and
frank dialogue with the Government on respecting
human rights.
The reports compiled and finalized by MINUSCA
will be published after consultation with the Government,
in accordance with the established procedure. We remain
committed to working with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to assist
the Government in adopting preventive measures and
mobilizing appropriate technical assistance, as well as
in efforts to combat impunity and rehabilitate victims
of human rights violations.
In the same vein, MINUSCA notes with the same
concern the persistence of stigmatization and public
incitement to violence against leaders of the democratic
opposition or against certain partners of the Central
African Republic. History and the recent past in the
Central African Republic, as in the Central African
region as a whole, show that this type of message
can quickly be translated into acts of violence with
unpredictable and uncontrollable consequences. They
are also likely to undermine living together, weaken the
national reconciliation process and slow down the efforts
undertaken. Consequently, it is the responsibility of the
Central African Government to respond appropriately
by taking all necessary measures to prevent, repress
and put an end to such reprehensible acts.
I would like to conclude by welcoming the
strengthening of confidence-building measures between
MINUSCA and the Central African Government,
which have allowed and seen the reduction of status-of
forces-agreement violations, the strengthening of our
cooperation, and a new impetus to the peace process.
It is only with such confidence that MINUSCA and
the Central African Republic will be able to derive
greater benefit from the full strength of MINUSCA’s
multidimensional mandate through its operational
effectiveness in the service of peace, security and
stability, towards lasting political solutions to the
Central African crisis.
The President: I thank Ms. Rugwabiza for
her briefing.
I give the floor to Ms. Ekomo.
Ms. Ekomo (spoke in French): It is an honour for
me to address this august gathering. First of all, I would
22-39710

22/06/2022

The situation in the Central African Republic

like to express my sincere gratitude for the opportunity
given to civil society to make its voice heard.
My country, the Central African Republic, is in
bad shape because a real culture of criminal violence
has taken hold. The population is caught between the
rebellion, the national army, mercenaries and militias
that sow terror and death. Massive killings target the
populations of the hinterlands, particularly certain
ethnic groups.
Armed groups of the Coalition des patriotes pour
le changement have killed people and burned homes.
The national army, along with its allies and the regime’s
militias, called sharks, do the same. The sharks use
the State media and social networks to openly issue
death threats and threats of physical abuse against
opposition leaders and the population at large. They
kidnap and murder their victims as well as the relatives
of their targets.
The deployment of the regime’s allies in the
provinces was welcomed by the population, who saw
in it the hope of end being put to the activities of armed
groups transformed into criminal thugs who have
subjected women, children and men of all ages to all
kinds of violence. But very quickly, this hope turned
into a serious concern. Young men are systematically
executed, thereby bring grief to many families.
Faced with this situation of massive human rights
violations and regular attacks on the aforementioned
civilian populations, civil society notes that the
collaboration of the United Nations and its partners
with our country on the peace process is proceeding
as if the Central African Republic were a normal State.
Civil society is indignant at the denial of the extremely
dangerous sociopolitical and security situation that
prevails in the country. In the name of this civil society,
I launch this cry of indignation for the many innocent
victims — women and children tied up and slaughtered
with their family members, and young people caught
in their small businesses, on mining sites, in their
fields, hunting or fishing, murdered after humiliating
treatment by death squads. I condemn those massacres,
and I beg the Council not to minimize the risks. The
danger is there and will very quickly plunge the
country into chaos unless robust and concrete measures
are taken urgently to help the people of the Central
African Republic.
Last March, civil society participated in the
republican dialogue in hope of being able to contribute

S/PV.9074

to easing sociopolitical tensions. However, the
non-inclusive nature of that dialogue did not foster
substantive discussions about the country’s real
problems through exchanges of differing views. But
civil society took that opportunity to denounce the
deterioration of the social, political and security context
and to propose some solutions.
Unfortunately, at the conclusion of that republican
dialogue, the political message that prevailed, as it still
does today, is the regime’s determination to revise the
Constitution with a view to extending the presidential
term. The republican dialogue was therefore a missed
opportunity to be able to bring together all the people
of the Central African Republic.
Today there is no dialogue between Governments,
opposition parties and civil society. It just does not
exist. It is violence and terror, maintained by the
regime and the armed opposition, that prevail. All
opposition politicians, their close relatives, supporters
and collaborators, as well as civil-society actors, are
under threat and reduced to silence. What that means is
that civil society cannot play its opposition role freely.
Several actors have left the country for their safety.
At the social level, all indicators are in the red.
Poverty has set in in the provinces, fields are no longer
being cultivated, and, as the Council is aware, more
than half of the population of the Central African
Republic is facing food insecurity. Access to primary
health care is difficult. Schools are not operating in
several regions. Humanitarian assistance is scarce in
those areas impacted by armed violence.
We regularly receive distress calls from women in
the hinterlands, but we cannot convey their messages,
because all requests to meet with the national authorities
have been ignored.
The National Assembly largely supports the current
political regime. Scandals involving corruption and
vote-buying of deputies have become a commonplace
practice, including as concerns the revision of the
Constitution. The Parliament is not playing its proper
role to protect the interests of the people.
All those political, socioeconomic and security
factors are combining to plunge my country back into
chaos, despite the existence of the Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic, and despite the many efforts undertaken by
the United Nations, the African Union, the Economic

22-397105/23

S/PV.9074

The situation in the Central African Republic

Community of Central African States, the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region and other
partners that support peace efforts in the Central
African Republic. In fact, most peace initiatives exclude
civil society in its entirety, including women and young
people, who make up the majority of the population.
The exclusively political approach focused on the
national authorities has shown its limits, and we must all
acknowledge the difficulties facing the peace process
in the Central African Republic. Some signatory armed
groups have withdrawn from the peace agreement and
have resumed hostilities, sowing fear in the hinterlands.
In addition, the non-inclusive nature of initiatives
is a real handicap in moving towards an effective
peace. Since the beginning of the peace initiative in
the Central African Republic, the practice has been
that civil-society actors and women in particular are
consulted only for long-distance exchanges or by
missions visiting the country. Civil society cannot
continue to be excluded from substantive discussions,
negotiating tables and high-level meetings that address
issues that impact their lives and those of their children,
their communities and their country.
With a view to revitalizing the peace process, I
would urge the Security Council to consider the Central
African Republic as a country in an emergency situation
for which emergency measures must be taken. Among
those measures, it would be important to challenge the
national authorities on the mode of governance, which
is characterized by widespread violence against the
people, political opposition actors and civil-society
leaders. I would urge it also to remind armed groups
of the need to respect the commitments they have
undertaken by signing the peace agreement and to be
able to implement the sanctions imposed by the Security
Council. In addition, I urge it to create a framework for
consultation between the active forces of the nation and
the rulers on the crisis situation in the Central African
Republic. That would be an emergency consultation
among the people of Central African Republic, on that
country’s territory, and with observers from the United
Nations and the African Union. That initiative would
enable the people of the country themselves to find
solutions in a democratic manner and to block the way
to ramped-up attempts to seize power by force.
It would also be important to give civil society
access to such a framework for consultation and offer
an opportunity for women to play a leading role in the
6/23

22/06/2022

interests of the people. Civil society’s contributions
must be taken into account, and it should be called upon
to participate in the peace process and in initiatives
supported by our partners in the context of that
peace process.
The President: I thank Ms. Ekomo for her briefing.
I would like to draw the attention of speakers to
paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in line
with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Ms. Lina Ekomo for their briefings.
We wish to congratulate the Special Representative
on her appointment and to wish her every success at
the head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA). She can count on the full
support of France. I welcome in particular her approach
aimed at shoring up MINUSCA’s territorial coverage to
assist the Central African Republic forces and to push
back armed groups, which continue to commit crimes,
in particular against women, children and medical and
humanitarian staff.
That robust posture is part of the mandate of
MINUSCA. I would like to thank its troops and staff,
who often risk their lives. Here I wish to convey my
condolences to Morocco following the deaths last week
of two of its Blue Helmets.
At the same time, some conditions need to be met
in order to enable the Central African Republic to
be stabilized.
First, concerning the peace process, the second
follow-up meeting on the Luanda road map, held on
4 June in Bangui, was an important step, with the
participation of the President of the Central African
Republic and the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the
Central African Republic, Angola and Rwanda. That
mobilization must continue and be translated into the
progress stipulated by the road map. There needs to be
a ceasefire respected by all parties, a dialogue between
the Government and armed groups, and a unique
22-39710

22/06/2022

The situation in the Central African Republic

disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process
conducted in full transparency jointly with the region
and MINUSCA.
France resolutely encourages the authorities of the
Central African Republic to put an end to the exclusively
military option and return to the Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic of 6 February 2019 by taking full ownership
of the measures provided for in that road map.
The second priority is the rule of law. I welcome
the adoption, on 27 May, by the parliamentarians of the
Central African Republic of a law abolishing the death
penalty. France calls on decision-makers in the Central
African Republic to ensure respect for international
humanitarian law and human rights, which constitutes
an essential condition for MINUSCA’s joint operations
with Central African forces, as well as their continued
logistical support. The Security Council will follow up
that point with extreme vigilance.
France is concerned by the alarming reports
regarding the conduct of the Central African forces. It
is clear that Wagner Group mercenaries are not only
applying brutal methods, which have been widely
documented, but are also instilling them in their
Central African partners. Any changes to the arms
embargo must therefore be considered against that
backdrop. I wish to recall, first and foremost, that
the Central African authorities can legally obtain the
equipment they need, and that no notification or request
for authorization has ever been refused by the Council.
The regime in place is one of control, not prohibition.
We encourage the progress made by the Central
African Republic; however, we believe that it has not yet
been able to provide sufficient guarantees in terms of
the peace process, arms control and the professionalism
of its armed forces, as highlighted in the report of
the Secretary-General regarding the application of
benchmarks (S/2022/489).
Finally, with regard to the political situation, France
has taken note of the holding of a republican dialogue,
in which some of the country’s active forces were not
able to participate. Only inclusive consultations and
consensus surrounding the rules of the democratic
process will enable the Central African Republic to
advance towards peace and reconciliation.
France calls on all political and security actors in
the Central African Republic to set their differences

S/PV.9074

aside in order to address the suffering of the population,
which faces an unprecedented humanitarian crisis
that has been aggravated by fuel shortages and price
increases caused by the war in Ukraine.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I have the
honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the three
African members of the Security Council, namely,
Kenya, Ghana and my own country, Gabon (A3).
We would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Valentine Rugwabiza,
for her briefing on the situation in the Central African
Republic and the activities of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA). We would
also like to thank Ms. Lina Ekomo for her briefing.
The recent history of the Central African Republic
has been marked by great political and security upheaval.
Repeatedly torn apart by the violence perpetrated by
armed groups and the often-conflicting postures taken
by external Powers, the Central African Republic
has endured a long period of grave instability. Today,
however, the prospects for lasting peace are visible
on the horizon, even though the country continues to
be plagued in a number of areas by the activities of
armed groups.
Given its particular interest in the situation, the
A3 is keen to once again underscore the need for the
Council to continue supporting the democratically
elected Central African authorities. Our efforts must be
further ramped up in order to find long-term solutions
and build on the political, security and humanitarian
gains already made.
In that regard, we would like to make the
following observations.
On the political front, the convening of the national
dialogue in March, in line with the joint road map
of the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, reflects the resolve of the Government of the
Central African Republic to respect the commitments
undertaken in 2019. The obvious enthusiasm of the
population at those meetings is also a testament to the
genuine desire of the people of the Central African
Republic to turn the page on political instability. The
Council is therefore duty-bound to support the hopes
and efforts of the Central African people in their quest
for peace.

22-397107/23

S/PV.9074

The situation in the Central African Republic

Consequently, maintaining the Security Council’s
consensus on providing multidimensional support to
the Central African Republic, including in the financial,
material, economic and political spheres, must be a
priority. We also call for awareness-raising among
all Central African stakeholders — political actors,
members of civil society, women, men, young people
and armed groups signatories to the Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic — concerning the need to prioritize dialogue
and mutual understanding in order to make progress on
the peace efforts launched by the Government with the
support of the international community.
The recommendations emanating from the national
dialogue must be implemented by all parties so as to
guarantee a lasting political solution that is led by the
Central African people for the Central African people.
The A3 also welcomes the adoption by the National
Assembly of a law abolishing the death penalty
and prohibiting the use of torture, which clearly
demonstrates the will of the Central African authorities
to combat human rights violations. We hope that will
enable any shortcomings in that area to be addressed
and bolster interest in the national reconciliation
process, in a context in which the perpetrators of war
crimes are currently being prosecuted and tried in the
Central African Republic.
The A3 is encouraged by all measures taken by the
Central African authorities to organize local elections in
2023 in a peaceful and inclusive political environment.
MINUSCA’s support to that end should be welcomed.
The training of women and young people on electoral
matters, which was initiated by the United Nations
force, could indeed allow for the greater involvement of
those strata of society in the first local elections to be
held in over 30 years.
We wish to recall that, in such a fragile security
environment, it is crucial to provide appropriate
financing to the National Electoral Authority. Therefore,
we believe there is an urgent need to see the pledges
made by the international community in November
2021 come to fruition in order to finance the elections
in the Central African Republic.
To conclude on the political front, the A3 commends
the personal engagement of Special Representative
Rugwabiza with the Central African people. We
encourage her to continue advocating with the African
Union, the Economic Community of Central African
8/23

22/06/2022

States and the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region in order to revitalize the peace process
in the Central African Republic. The role of regional
organizations in ensuring lasting stability in the
country is also absolutely crucial.
The A3 recalls that the Central African Republic
has been subjected to several successful and attempted
coups d’états. Such political crises are often used by
disruptive forces to justify violence and other abuses,
which causes the civilian population immense suffering.
The question of security is therefore an essential one
that we must help to resolve. The gains made in the
security sphere in recent months have led to significant
progress being made on the ground, which has been
characterized by a reduction in the number of violations
of the Political Agreement and the extension of State
authority throughout the country.
However, it is regrettable that attacks targeting
civilians persist and that the criminal activities of
armed groups are becoming increasingly frequent in
certain parts of the country. We are very concerned
by the recurring massacres of civilians. The A3
condemns the use of anti-personnel mines and other
explosive weapons against civilians by armed groups,
which spreads terror through the centre and west of the
country in particular.
In the light of the violence and the complex,
multidimensional security crisis that has been
aggravated by the coronavirus disease pandemic and
the current global economic situation, the Council
must take resolute action, which must focus primarily
on the sources and supply chains of rebel groups,
who, astonishingly, seem to have free access to
weapons — and increasingly sophisticated ones at that.
It is no secret to anyone, let alone Council members,
that the illegal exploitation of raw materials remains
a principal source of financing for those groups. It is
therefore urgent to ensure that stricter monitoring
mechanisms be put in place regarding the extraction and
destination of such materials. The A3 also underscores
the importance of punishing all persons and entities
involved in the illicit trade in resources who supply
armed group networks through that trade. It is vital to
cut all of the armed groups’ sources of supply.
Secondly, our action should be focused on building
the capacity of the Forces armées centrafricaines and
supporting the democratically elected Central African
authorities as part of the protection of civilians.
22-39710

22/06/2022

The situation in the Central African Republic

We reaffirm the ad hoc nature of the mandate of
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA). The Mission will not stay in the Central
African Republic forever. The State’s authority must
be re-established throughout the country by welltrained and -equipped Central African forces. That is
why we echo the statement of the African Union, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
(ICGLR) and the Government of the Central African
Republic concerning the importance of lifting the arms
embargo on the Central African Republic and of the
country’s commitment to strengthening its weapons and
ammunition management system. We also underscore
the need for international support for the Government of
the Central African Republic as it takes steps to ensure
effective control and management of the weapons in its
possession and that it fully meets all benchmarks. The
Central African Republic has demonstrated its firm
willingness to meet the benchmarks set.
Establishing security conditions that can lead
to a long-term reduction in the presence of armed
groups in the Central African Republic requires the
international community’s ongoing financial support
in implementing the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme. Improving the programme
means supporting it with economic opportunities for
former combatants, and the launch of quick-impact
projects constitutes progress in that regard.
According to the humanitarian response plan,
3.1 million people are in a precarious situation. We
are concerned about the increasing number of refugees
and displaced persons who need urgent humanitarian
assistance. In that regard, the A3 welcomed the Regional
Ministerial Conference on Central African Refugees
held on 27 April in Yaoundé, in partnership with the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, with the objective of finding concrete
solutions to the issue of forced displacement caused
by the crisis in the Central African Republic. The
meeting was a demonstration of regional solidarity
and of the involvement of neighbouring countries in
finding a solution to the crisis. We call for honouring
financial pledges to ensure the implementation of
the humanitarian response plan. The continuing
humanitarian distress caused by the activities of armed
groups is being exacerbated by the devastating impact
of climate change, which is also a source of insecurity
in the country and the region.

S/PV.9074

In conclusion, we thank Special Representative
Valentine Rugwabiza and her team at MINUSCA, the
humanitarian personnel and our partners in the ICGLR,
the Economic Community of Central African States
and the Central African Republic for their unfailing
efforts and support on the ground.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): My delegation
would like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Valentine Rugwabiza for her
briefing and to wish her the best of luck in her new
job. I also thank Ms. Lina Ekomo for her briefing. We
welcome the delegation of the Central African Republic
to today’s meeting.
The tasks before Ms. Rugwabiza are challenging,
as are the conditions in which the Panel of Experts on
the Central African Republic is doing its work. We
welcome the Panel’s final report and express our sincere
appreciation for its members’ effort to provide input
to the Committee established pursuant to resolution
2127 (2013) concerning the Central African Republic
in a very tight time frame, due to repeated delays in
their appointments. It is our hope that they can adhere
to reasonable timelines in future. With regard to the
most recent developments on the ground, my delegation
would like to raise some points that have a direct impact
on the peace process.
First, Brazil recognizes that the holding of the
republican dialogue is a relevant step in reaching
sustainable peace. In that regard, we take this opportunity
to reiterate the calls of the Central African Republic
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission to
ensure that this exercise, and its follow-up, is inclusive.
No durable solution can be found without bringing all
stakeholders to the table, including women.
Secondly, we would like to underscore the key
role played by the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) programmes in the implementation
of the 2019 Political Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic and
encourage the Central African authorities to persevere
in their work in that area. In order to complement those
DDR activities, the Government has also been working
with the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) to put in place violence reduction
programmes in local communities. We commend
that partnership.

22-397109/23

S/PV.9074

The situation in the Central African Republic

Thirdly, we believe it is crucial to strengthen
the rule of law, especially in the light of the various
reports of violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law, including the recruitment of child
soldiers. That is a matter of great concern to us that we
hope the recommendations of the Council’s Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict will help to
address. We would also like to show support, first to
the efforts of the local authorities to deliver justice,
particularly through the opening in April of the first trial
of the Special Criminal Court, and secondly to the work
of MINUSCA in helping to operationalize the Truth,
Justice, Reparations and Reconciliation Commission.
My fourth and last point relates to the contribution
of regional organizations to the peace process in the
Central African Republic. In that regard, it is particularly
encouraging to see the renewed engagement of the
International Conference of the Great Lakes Region in
favour of the implementation of its September 2021 joint
road map for peace in the Central African Republic.
We thank the Special Representative for her active
participation in that process and hope that the technical
support provided by Angola and Rwanda, as well as the
monitoring mechanisms agreed, will bear fruit.
In conclusion, I would like to welcome the
agreement reached by the Central African Republic
and Cameroon to work together on border demarcation.
That is a step forward in improving both security and
living standards for the local population.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Rugwabiza for her first briefing to the Council. I also
listened closely to the briefing by Ms. Lina Ekomo.
The political and security situation in the Central
African Republic is improving. The Government is
committed to national development and reconstruction.
In March it convened a republican dialogue in which
all parties focused on peace, security, democracy, the
rule of law, economic and social development and
foreign policy and made more than 200 suggestions,
making it a major milestone in the peace process in the
Central African Republic. All the parties should take
the opportunity that the dialogue presents to implement
its outcomes and consolidate the foundations of peace
and development. China welcomed the Government’s
holding of a strategic review meeting, together with
representatives of the countries of the region, in support
of the efforts of regional organizations to facilitate
10/23

22/06/2022

the implementation of the joint road map for peace in
the Central African Republic based on the country’s
actual needs and to advance the political process in the
right direction.
The general situation in the Central African
Republic remains stable, but armed groups are active
in some areas, threatening stability and the safety
of civilians.
The Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
should actively discharge its mandate and help the
Government of the Central African Republic address
risks and protect civilians. At the same time, MINUSCA
cannot be deployed indefinitely. Therefore, helping the
Central African Republic in security capacity-building
is the key approach to addressing the root causes of
conflict. The right of the Government of the Central
African Republic to conduct its own external security
cooperation must be upheld. Currently, the Central
African Republic is beginning the gradual process of
post-conflict reconstruction.
As it discharges its mandate, MINUSCA needs
to focus on helping the Government of the Central
African Republic to restore State authority, improve
security institution-building, support disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes and
promote local development, among other things,
in order to increase a public sense of progress and
eradicate the root causes of the conflict.
The economy and livelihoods are key to ensuring
peace and stability in the country. Recently, the Central
African Republic has been faced with a serious increase
in financial challenges. There is a shortage of crude
oil, water and electricity. The prices of imported goods
have increased, and the problem of food security is
significant. Those issues have led to grave consequences
that affect people’s lives and the implementation of the
MINUSCA mandate.
Countries and international organizations should
resume financial aid to the Central African Republic
as soon as possible and ensure adequate humanitarian
funding in order to alleviate its humanitarian situation.
There is a need to increase investment in food security,
infrastructure, education, health, vocational training
and other areas in order to help the Central African
Republic eradicate poverty, improve livelihoods
and transform its potential energy advantages into
22-39710

22/06/2022

The situation in the Central African Republic

development advantages, while eliminating the causes
of conflicts.
China thanks Special Representative of the
Secretary-Genera1 Ndiaye for his contribution to the
peace and stability of the Central African Republic over
the past three years and welcomes Ms. Rugwabiza in
her new role as his successor. Since assuming that role,
she has facilitated communication between MINUSCA
and the Government of the Central African Republic.
The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Francophonie and
the Diaspora has also established a coordination
mechanism with MINUSCA. Better communication
between the Mission and its host country helps the
Mission establish a conducive environment in which
it can discharge its mandate. We hope that Special
Representative Rugwabiza will continue to listen
to the opinions voiced by the host country, focus on
the core mandate conferred upon the Mission by the
Security Council, make its peacekeeping operations
more effective and contribute to peace and stability in
the Central African Republic. China will continue to
support her work.
In conclusion, I reiterate China’s position on the
lifting of the arms embargo on the Central African
Republic. In her letter of 8 June to the President of the
Council, the Foreign Minister of the Central African
Republic, Ms Baipo Temon, noted that the arms embargo
is having a significant impact on the maintenance of
the national security of the Central African Republic
and emphasized that her Government has made great
efforts to implement the relevant Council resolutions
in order to facilitate the lifting of the arms embargo.
China hopes that the Council will listen to the Central
African Republic’s appeal and lift the embargo as
soon as possible in order to help it address security
challenges and maintain national stability.
Ms. Shaheen (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-Genera1 for the Central African Republic,
Ms. Valentine Rugwabiza, for her first briefing before
the Security Council since assuming her post. We
reiterate our support for her endeavours and the efforts
of the Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA).
We also listened to Ms. Lina Ekomo’s briefing, and we
welcome the participation of the representative of the
Central African Republic in this meeting.

S/PV.9074

Despite the continuing difficult circumstances
and challenges in the Central African Republic, it
has recently seen developments that we hope will
pave the way towards achieving peace and stability in
the country.
At the political level, the strategic review of the
political process held in Bangui on 4 June, under the
auspices of His Excellency President Faustin Touadera,
was an important step towards revitalizing the 2019
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in
the Central African Republic through the Luanda
road map. We appreciate the continued cooperation
with the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region and other relevant regional and international
actors to achieve those goals. We commend the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for engaging
with all stakeholders to help move the political
process forward.
We also note the recommendations emanating from
the republican dialogue. We emphasize the importance
of ensuring inclusiveness in all peacebuilding efforts,
including through the meaningful participation
of women. In that regard, we appreciate President
Touadera’s recent appointment of five women among
the 12 members of the consultative framework on
the elections.
With regard to the alarming security situation,
which has been exacerbated by the continuing activities
of armed groups, we stress that committing fully to the
ceasefire and reaching a political solution remain key to
establishing stability in the Central African Republic.
At the same time, however, there is a need to assign
the highest priority to the protection of civilians, with a
particular focus on the protection of women and children
from sexual violence. According to the recent report of
the Secretary-General (S/2022/272) on conflict-related
sexual violence, that issue constitutes one of the grave
challenges that must be addressed. With regard to
the protection of children, we welcome the signing in
April of the national action plan to combat trafficking
in children.
In that context, we would like to express our
concern about the continued threat for both civilians
and peacekeepers posed by explosive ordnance. We
appreciate the ongoing cooperation between MINUSCA
and the Mine Action Service to overcome that challenge,
including by training and deploying specialized units,

22-3971011/23

S/PV.9074

The situation in the Central African Republic

as well as raising awareness among the population
concerning the safe disposal of explosive ordnance.
With regard to the serious security risks posed
by misinformation and disinformation, we appreciate
MINUSCA’s efforts to implement a strategy to address
that issue. We also commend MINUSCA for helping
the Central African Republic to achieve stability.
We express our sincere condolences to the Kingdom
of Morocco and to the families of the peacekeepers who
recently passed away in the line of duty.
We would also like to emphasize the need to address
the continuing deterioration of humanitarian and
economic conditions, which have been exacerbated by
high commodity prices. According to the World Food
Programme, 3 million people in the Central African
Republic are in need of humanitarian assistance, while
more than half of the country’s population suffers from
food insecurity.
That situation has been exacerbated by the fact that
the country continues to grapple with the coronavirus
(COVID-19) disease pandemic and other public health
challenges. In that regard, we underline the importance
of continued efforts to protect humanitarian workers,
and we commend the efforts of the COVID-19 Vaccine
Global Access Facility for facilitating access to
the vaccine.
In conclusion, we stress the importance of the
international community’s continued support for the
Central African Republic in order for it to achieve the
peace it has long awaited and for stability and prosperity
to be established in the region.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): Let me begin by thanking
the Special Representative of the Secretary-Genera1
for the Central African Republic, Ms. Valentine
Rugwabiza, for her briefing and once again wishing her
every success in her important mission. I also thank the
civil society briefer, Ms. Lina Ekomo, for her insights. I
also welcome the representative of the Central African
Republic at today’s meeting.
In the past four months, the significant political
developments in the Central African Republic have
been demonstrative of the resolve and commitment of
the leadership towards the peace process. The holding
of the republican dialogue with the participation of the
majority of the opposition has opened up the democratic
space for dialogue and participation. We reiterate
the importance of that process and the need to make
12/23

22/06/2022

it as inclusive as possible. Such a process will enable
taking on board the collective aspirations of the people
and, in turn, securing lasting peace and development
in the country. We also welcome the meeting of the
strategic review concerning the political process, held
earlier this month, and underscore the importance of its
follow-up.
State authority and the rule of law have also
strengthened, the presence of State officials has
increased, security forces have been deployed across
the country and Parliament has adopted important
legislation as well. Positive steps have been taken to
address impunity in the Central African Republic,
including crimes against civilians and peacekeepers.
One such development is the first trial of the Special
Criminal Court, held recently. The International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region road map
has also seen forward movement with the active
involvement of neighbours, particularly on internally
displaced persons and the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process.
We know that local elections have been
postponed due to paucity of funds. The importance
of putting democratic institutions in place cannot
be overemphasized. We hope that the hurdles to the
holding of local elections will be overcome soon. To
that end, we appreciate the role of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) in providing
support to the National Electoral Authority in order to
promote participation and the training of officials.
The security situation has remained fragile,
although the number of violations of the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic has decreased. The activities of
armed groups are negatively affecting the lives of
ordinary civilians, particularly women and children.
We strongly condemn the attacks by armed groups and
others on civilians. The discovery of anti-personnel
landmines and the increase in the use of improvised
explosive devices by armed groups are worrisome
signs. We reiterate our call for all opposition groups
and armed-group signatories to the peace agreement to
end hostilities and join the Central African Republic
authorities in finding a peaceful solution.
We note the constructive engagement between
MINUSCA and the Government of the Central African
Republic. We welcome the establishment of a new
22-39710

22/06/2022

The situation in the Central African Republic

coordination structure to oversee the implementation of
status-of-forces agreement and security coordination.
We hope that such mechanisms will help to resolve
outstanding issues and ensure adequate coordination on
the ground. We call on the Government of the Central
African Republic to ensure that the safety and security
of United Nations peacekeepers is not compromised in
any manner. We also expect MINUSCA to prioritize
the mandate tasks in line with the requirements
of the Central African Republic. We reiterate that
peacekeeping missions must consistently evaluate
the performance of all its components — uniformed,
civilian and mission leadership.
The humanitarian situation needs our collective and
sustained focus. We have consistently drawn attention
to the twin burden of rising prices and falling supplies
of petroleum and food grains on developing countries.
In the light of our error in the case of vaccines for the
coronavirus disease, we cannot again disregard the
principles of equity, affordability and accessibility
of essential commodities for the needy. We hope that
the international community will extend support
to the humanitarian response plan, which remains
poorly funded.
The Panel of Experts on the Central African
Republic recently reported that the official exports
of rough diamonds from western regions in nine
Kimberly-Process-compliant zones doubled in 2021.
That positive development underscores the potential of
the resource-rich Central African Republic to expand
its formal trade in commodities for its development.
In conclusion, the Central African Republic is on
a positive trajectory. The need now is to press ahead
and capitalize on the gains made so far. To that end, we
support the initiatives of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General. India will continue to support
the Central African Republic and its people in their
pursuit of peace, stability and economic development.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): Allow me to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Rugwabiza for her first briefing to the Security Council
on the Central African Republic. I also thank Ms. Ekomo
for her insightful remarks and all her work to support
women’s leadership in the Central African Republic.
Norway
commends
the
Central
African
Republic authorities for organizing the republican
dialogue in March. We hope that its conclusions and
recommendations will be used to renew the impetus

S/PV.9074

for advancing an even more inclusive peace process.
The core of that process must be the 2019 peace
agreement — and the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) road map remains
essential for its implementation. The Government, the
opposition and armed groups all share the responsibility
of getting the peace process back on track.
We commend the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for her personal commitment to
the peace agreement and for her efforts to engage the
authorities in the region, and we are encouraged by
the renewed engagement in the region, particularly
by Angola and Rwanda and the 4 June meeting in
Bangui. It is important that the ICGLR, the Economic
Community of Central African States and the African
Union remain actively involved.
For the peace and reconciliation process to be
successful, it is crucial that it be as inclusive as possible.
All segments of society should be engaged, including
the political opposition, the armed groups that have
renounced violence and civil society.
The full, equal and meaningful participation of
women is fundamental to building peace in the Central
African Republic. Local elections, underpinned by a
credible political process, provide a unique opportunity
to extend the democratic space and build peace. We
call on the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) to provide logistical support for the
preparations for those local elections and to promote
local dialogue and reconciliation.
Norway is concerned about the proposal to change
the Constitution to allow for a third presidential term.
Norway urges all parties to the armed conflict
to comply with their obligations under international
law, including international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. We strongly condemn
the reports of relentless gender-based and conflictrelated sexual violence, grave violations against
children and the targeting of humanitarian workers.
We also condemn the reported targeting of ethnic or
religious minorities, such as the Fulani and Muslims,
including the use of anti-balaka militias as proxy
forces. Protection from such violations must remain a
key priority for the Council.
Furthermore, in the latest quarterly report of
MINUSCA’s Human Rights Division, it is shocking to

22-3971013/23

S/PV.9074

The situation in the Central African Republic

see that actions by “other security personnel”, which
refers to the Russian Wagner Group, resulted in the
highest number of victims of human rights violations
and abuses during the reporting period, followed by the
Forces armées centrafricaines. We call on the Central
African Republic authorities to investigate all incidents
and hold perpetrators accountable.
Norway welcomes the final report (see S/2021/569)
of the Panel of Experts on the Central African
Republic. We hope that all members of the Council
will come together to ensure that next year’s Panel of
Experts will be able to do its work from the start with
a complete team.
We are encouraged by reports of improved relations
between the Central African Republic authorities and
the United Nations — not least thanks to the efforts
of Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Rugwabiza. We hope that this positive momentum
will continue and will improve the fate of the Central
African people.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I would
like to thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Rugwabiza for her informative briefing.
My delegation wants to start by congratulating her
on a productive beginning to her tenure at the helm
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) and to commend her for the leadership
she is demonstrating. I also want to particularly thank
Ms. Lina Ekomo for her very brave and compelling
briefing today. It is important that we get ground
truth from activists like her, and we thank her for
appearing today.
In the light of the briefings we just heard, my
remarks today will address three themes — first, the
contributions of MINUSCA towards peace and security
in the Central African Republic; secondly, the need
for continuing steps towards a political solution to the
country’s conflict; and lastly, the continued human
rights abuses and threat to regional stability from
Kremlin-backed Wagner Group forces.
First, thanks to the daily work of peacekeepers
and the commitment of their contributing countries,
MINUSCA has continued to make critical
contributions to protecting civilians and supporting
the implementation of the 2019 peace agreement. As
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2022/491) notes,
MINUSCA’s increasingly robust posture, coupled with
14/23

22/06/2022

joint operations with security forces of the Central
African Republic, has successfully ousted several
armed groups and safeguarded towns.
My delegation also applauds Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Rugwabiza’s initiative in
addressing the scourge of sexual exploitation and
abuse through enhanced training and accountability
mechanisms. We remain concerned, however, about
the fact that Central African armed forces, which in
many cases in our assessment were probably directed
by the Wagner Group, perpetrated 23 violations of
MINUSCA’s status-of-forces agreement over the past
four months. And like others, we further condemn the
disinformation campaigns targeting MINUSCA, which
impede mandate implementation and put peacekeepers’
lives in danger.
The second point I would like to make is that there
is no military-only solution to the crisis in the Central
African Republic. The only way forward is through
full implementation of the 2019 Political Agreement
and sustained State authority across the country that is
responsive to the needs of Central Africans and to the
issue of justice for victims. To that end, I echo Ms. Lina
Ekomo’s call for the Government of the Central African
Republic to continue to advance the peace process, and
I commend the leadership of Rwanda and Angola in
supporting it through the regional road map
The
recent
progress
on
disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation, such as
the demobilization of more than 700 former members
of the Lord’s Resistance Army, constitutes encouraging
steps. All actors in the country must respect formal
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation processes, which are as fundamental to
the success of the 2019 peace agreement as its other
core tenets, including honouring President Touadera’s
ceasefire and strengthening relations between the
Central African Republic and its neighbours.
My third and final point is about upholding
accountability for perpetrators of human rights
violations and abuses. Like others, we celebrate the
progress of the Special Criminal Court, which recently
opened its first trial. That is an important milestone in
ensuring truth and accountability for those afflicted by
conflict. Unfortunately, one of the worst offenders of
human rights abuses is the Wagner Group, whose forces,
which are referred to as “other security personnel” in
the Secretary-General’s report, perpetrated 42 incidents
22-39710

22/06/2022

The situation in the Central African Republic

of human rights abuses during the reporting period,
affecting 165 victims, often in the presence of national
defence forces. Independent investigations corroborate
that account, including a recent Human Rights Watch
report that confirmed that the Wagner Group has
“summarily executed, tortured, and beaten civilians”
across the country since 2019.
We call on the Russian Government and the
Government of the Central African Republic, through
its special commission of inquiry, to investigate all
allegations transparently and hold accountable those
responsible for those heinous acts. We are deeply
concerned about reports that the Wagner Group’s forces
have detained and killed peacebuilders and former
combatants who willingly participated in disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes. The
Wagner Group’s assassination of Zakaria Demane
in February shocked many Central Africans. As the
Secretary-General’s report highlights, the Wagner
Group’s forces have rearmed ex-combatants, creating
their own unaccountable proxy militias, and have
interfered with MINUSCA’s operations, hindering
the peacekeepers’ ability to implement mandated
tasks. The illicit extraction of the Central African
Republic’s mineral wealth remains a key driver of
the Wagner Group’s activities, in addition to those of
non-State armed groups and other actors. Promoting
the responsible management of natural resources and
combating related corruption are critical to peace and
prosperity in the country.
In conclusion, we once again call on all actors in the
Central African Republic to lay down their weapons.
The people of the Central African Republic deserve a
political solution that will end their suffering.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland) (spoke in French):
I would like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Ndiaye, for his leadership
over the past three years. I also welcome Special
Representative Valentine Rugwabiza. I thank her for
her very relevant briefing and for the excellent work
she has already done in such a short time in carrying
out her new functions. She can count on Ireland’s full
support. I would also like to thank Ms. Lina Ekomo for
her very enlightening and courageous statement.
Ireland is extremely concerned about the situation
in the Central African Republic. We welcome the
republican dialogue, which is an important step
in the peace process. The fact that many of the

S/PV.9074

recommendations are aligned with the 2019 Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic is particularly encouraging. We
support the Secretary-General’s call to the Government
to convey that spirit of dialogue to all the opposition
parties and armed groups that are signatories to the
Political Agreement and have renounced violence. We
welcome the stocktaking conference on the road map of
the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
(ICGLR) and the initiative of the Special Representative
and regional partners, including Angola, as well as
President Touadera’s support for the process. We hope
that will give the road map and the implementation of
the Political Agreement new momentum. In that regard,
we also welcome the commitment to holding quarterly
follow-up meetings.
We are disappointed by the postponement of local
elections, despite the people’s wishes. We encourage
the authorities to prioritize the preparation for those
elections, which are scheduled for January 2023,
including the full, fair and meaningful participation
of women as voters, candidates and elected officials.
Their safety must be guaranteed.
(spoke in English)
An urgent end to human rights abuses and
violations, and accountability for the atrocities that
have been committed, is necessary for a lasting peace.
Continued incidents of conflict-related sexual violence
are simply unacceptable. We welcome the work of
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) to investigate conflict-related sexual
violence perpetrated by the Front populaire pour la
renaissance de la Centrafrique and the Unité pour la paix
en Centrafrique, and encourage continued efforts on
the issue. Ending impunity is key to ending violations.
We are deeply concerned about the allegations
of abuses of civilians by the national security forces
and other security personnel, particularly the Wagner
Group, along with those committed by armed groups.
Recent reports of civilian casualties caused by attacks
on mines along the border between the Central African
Republic and the Sudan are of particular concern.
We urge the Government of the Central African
Republic to systematically investigate all allegations of
human rights violations and abuses and international
humanitarian law violations and to prosecute the
perpetrators regardless of nationality or affiliation. We

22-3971015/23

S/PV.9074

The situation in the Central African Republic

commend the launching of the first trial of the Special
Criminal Court, as well as the first criminal sessions
in the Bangui Court of Appeal since February 2020.
The work of those courts as accountability mechanisms
will help contribute to the fight against impunity
in the Central African Republic. We welcome the
National Assembly’s enactment of a law abolishing the
death penalty.
The effects of the worsening economic and fiscal
situation on civilians, particularly the most vulnerable,
are deeply worrying. A staggering 3.1 million people
in the Central African Republic — 63 per cent of the
population — are in need of humanitarian assistance
and protection. We condemn the continuing attacks on
humanitarian actors and obstructions to the delivery
of humanitarian assistance in the strongest possible
terms. The suffering of civilians is exacerbated when
aid is unable to reach them. Ireland was appalled by
the recent killing of a Médecins Sans Frontières staff
member in Ouham prefecture. We reiterate our call for
an independent investigation to be carried out and for
the perpetrators to be brought to justice.
Status-of-forces-agreement violations endanger
United Nations personnel, undermine mandate
implementation and place the protection of civilians in
jeopardy. MINUSCA’s dedicated uniformed and civilian
personnel continue to make a valuable contribution to
peace in the Central African Republic, and their work
deserves to and must be supported.
Ireland calls on the Government and all the parties
to facilitate all United Nations operations. We welcome
the coordination structure put in place by Foreign
Minister Baipo Temon, and we encourage all parties
to continue to engage constructively with MINUSCA.
Sanctions are an important tool to support the
restoration of peace and security in the Central African
Republic. I reiterate Ireland’s support for the Sanctions
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2127
(2013) and again call for an end to delays in the
appointment of the final expert to the Committee’s
Panel of Experts.
The path to peace requires will and effort wherever
and whenever that challenge is undertaken. I urge all
parties to capitalize on the renewed vigour to implement
the ICGLR road map and the Political Agreement in
order to create the future the people of the Central
African Republic so much desire and deserve.
16/23

22/06/2022

Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I would like to
welcome Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Rugwabiza to her role and wish her every
success in it. We are also grateful to her and to
Ms. Ekomo for their powerful testimony. Let me also
welcome the participation of the representative of the
Central African Republic in this meeting.
I would make four points in response to what we
have heard today.
First, with regard to the political situation, the
United Kingdom welcomes progress on the republican
dialogue process, as well as continued regional efforts
on the Luanda joint road map initiative in support of
the Political Agreement. The cessation of violence and
an inclusive credible process that includes civil society
and opposition groups, remains the key to long-term
success. We urge all parties to respect the ceasefire as
a key step towards peace.
Secondly, with regard to the humanitarian and
human rights situation, the United Kingdom welcomes
the National Assembly’s 30 May decision to abolish the
death penalty, which represents a positive step towards
improving human rights. However, we are gravely
concerned by continuing violations of international
humanitarian law and violations and abuses of human
rights by all parties to the conflict. Indiscriminate
killings of unarmed civilians by the Armed Forces of the
Central African Republic and the Russian mercenary
group, the Wagner Group, which continues to play a
destabilizing role in the country, have not stopped. We
call on the Government of the Central African Republic
to fully coordinate all security actors operating in the
country, ensure they abide by applicable international
humanitarian and human rights law and make certain
that all perpetrators of violations or abuses are held
to account.
The ripple effects of Russia’s illegal invasion
of Ukraine are having a profound impact on the
Central African Republic. Food and fuel shortages are
hampering the humanitarian response and impeding
the operations of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA). To help ease the impact, we call
on the Government of Cameroon to allow the export of
fuel and other humanitarian items from Douala to meet
urgent humanitarian needs.
Thirdly, with regard to obstructions to MINUSCA’s
operations, the increase in violations of the status-of22-39710

22/06/2022

The situation in the Central African Republic

forces agreement, including with the involvement socalled other security personnel, is unacceptable. We
urge the Government of the Central African Republic
to abide by the status-of-forces agreement and share
the outcome of its investigation into the attack by
presidential guard forces on a United Nations bus on
1 November 2021.
Finally, the United Kingdom once again emphasizes
that the arms embargo exists to prevent weapons
falling into the hands of armed groups and fuelling
violence. It does not exist to prevent the Government
from obtaining the equipment it needs for defence and
security sector reform. Indeed, to date, the Sanctions
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2127
(2013) has approved all exemption requests submitted
under the framework of the arms embargo. We welcome
any progress the Government has made with regard to
meeting the Security Council’s benchmarks, and we
look forward to the Panel of Experts reporting on this
in future.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Special Representative Valentine
Rugwabiza, whom I wish every success in her new
assignment, as well as Ms. Ekomo, the representative
of civil society, for their briefings. I also welcome
the delegation from the Central African Republic
this morning.
Having listened to the briefings, among which
various achievements and pending challenges for the
stabilization of the Central African Republic were
enumerated, I would like to focus on four specific
issues. First, Mexico appreciates the progress that has
been made in terms of coordination between the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
and the national authorities. We also welcome the
efforts of the new Special Representative and the
Central African Government to create a new dynamic
that will enable the Mission to carry out its mandate and
effectively support the State in key tasks for bringing
peace to the country, in particular the protection of the
civilian population.
We consider that the establishment of the
coordination mechanism in relation to implementing the
status-of-forces agreement should serve to guarantee
the free movement of MINUSCA and facilitate
communication between the Mission and the authorities.
Mexico reiterates that violations of the agreement are

S/PV.9074

unacceptable, as they limit the effectiveness of the
Mission and put its personnel at risk.
Secondly, we have listened to the position of the
Central African Government and the subregional bodies
on the arms embargo, and we express our openness to
discussing alternatives that would allow us to respond
effectively to illicit arms trafficking. As long as arms
are widely available, some actors will prefer the path of
violence to political dialogue. We are also concerned
about the detection of anti-personnel mines, a sign that
the flow of weapons into the Central African Republic
is continuing and diversifying, with increasingly lethal
and indiscriminate effects on the civilian population.
We believe that the cooperation of the international
community remains necessary for the authorities to
equip themselves with a weapons and ammunition
management system that meets security standards
commensurate with the challenge.
We welcome the support provided by MINUSCA
and United Nations agencies to that end, and we urge
the authorities to redouble their efforts in this regard.
We call for progress in the full operationalization of
the National Commission to Combat the Proliferation
of Small Arms and Light Weapons. It would also be
advisable to take advantage of the cooperation and
assistance mechanisms provided for in the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production
and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on
Their Destruction.
Thirdly,
Mexico
welcomes
the
regional
mobilization to facilitate the republican dialogue
and revitalize the Political Agreement, particularly
through the Luanda road map. We believe that the
region can play an important role in opening channels
of communication with the groups linked to the
Coalition des patriotes pour le changement to bring
them back to the negotiating table. Regional support
is also key to the implementation and monitoring of
the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation programme. We therefore urge the Central
African Republic’s regional partners to get active in
ensuring funding for this programme beyond 2023.
In this context, Mexico calls for regional initiatives to
be coordinated with the existing implementation and
monitoring bodies of the Political Agreement in order
to avoid duplication and achieve optimal results.
Fourthly, the military response is insufficient to
putting an end to the violence. In addition to political

22-3971017/23

S/PV.9074

The situation in the Central African Republic

dialogue, providing justice must play a central role in
ensuring that those guilty of atrocities are punished and
that the victims of the conflict obtain reparations. The
opening of the first trial of the Special Criminal Court
and the first session of the Bangui Court of Appeal
represent considerable progress in that area.
Mexico believes that the much-needed national
reconciliation requires effective and efficient
transitional justice mechanisms that would break the
cycle of violence.

22/06/2022

The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) must play an important role in providing
security in the country, given the functions conferred
upon peacekeepers, which involve, inter alia,
encountering illegal armed formations in the protection
of civilians.

Finally, Mexico welcomes the elimination of
the death penalty in the Central African Republic.
The death penalty is an irreparable breach of human
rights, and that is why we must work towards its
universal abolition.

We are pleased to note the positive changes in the
interaction between MINUSCA and Bangui. We have
unfailingly underscored that constructive relations
between a mission and host-country authorities are a
prerequisite for the success of the work of peacekeepers.
It is also important for the Blue Helmets to focus on their
main tasks, which include assisting the reconciliation
process, restoring State presence in the various regions
of the country and protecting civilians.

Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Valentine Rugwabiza, for
briefing the Security Council and congratulate her again
on her appointment to that post. We listened closely to
Ms. Lina Ekomo and also welcome the representative of
the Central African Republic to this meeting.

Russia is consistently trying to achieve an easing of
the current arms embargo against the Central African
Republic until its full lifting. Similar positions in the
Security Council have been put forward by African
representatives and representatives of the African
Union and the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region.

We believe that the situation in the Central African
Republic is relatively stable and largely under the
control of Government forces. Work is under way in
the country to ensure the presence of the State and
to strengthen administrative structures. The Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic — the Khartoum agreement — of 2019
remains the basis for achieving stability and security in
the Central African Republic. We advocate the parties
upholding the ceasefire announced in October 2021 by
President Touadera.

The most important thing is that the people of
the Central African Republic themselves constantly
discuss that issue, because those weapons are required
by the country’s security forces to fight illegal armed
formations, which, as we all can see, have regular
channels for the supply of arms. On the whole, we are
convinced that a sanctions regime should not hamper
the efforts of the Government to counter armed groups;
right now it is definitely doing so.

We welcome the holding in Bangui of another round
of the republican dialogue, which adds organically
to the Khartoum agreement. We urge those groups
that are not on board with the peace process to stop
the unnecessary bloodshed and to engage in genuine
dialogue with the authorities. We are convinced that
there is no option other than to settle the situation in
the country through political and diplomatic means.

From our side, we have been consistently assisting
Bangui to strengthen the military capabilities of its
official security structures. Having informed the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2127 (2013) concerning the Central African
Republic, we have provided to the Central African
Republic several batches of military-grade equipment.
Russian instructors are working successfully there
at the invitation of the legitimate authorities of the
country.

An important stage in further improving the
security situation in the country is the launch, on the
initiative of the Government of the Central African
Republic, of the coordination mechanism, with the
participation of the United Nations. Its first meeting
took place in Bangui on 14 April.

Russia strictly complies with the restrictions
imposed on it by the Security Council regarding the
Central African Republic. We underscore that the choice
of partner in any specific area, in particular in the area
of security, is the prerogative of national authorities.
We furthermore do not deem it appropriate that there

18/23

22-39710

22/06/2022

The situation in the Central African Republic

is a reference in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2022/491) to the events in Ukraine as the cause of the
food and energy crisis in the Central African Republic.
The negative trends of recent years in those areas are
linked primarily to blunders and systematic mistakes
in the macroeconomic, energy and food policies of
Western States. Undoubtedly the coronavirus disease
pandemic also played a part, disrupting food supply
chains. Furthermore, the situation has deteriorated
significantly because of the imposition in February and
March of illegal unilateral restrictions against Russia.
In the context of discussing the socioeconomic
situation in the Central African Republic, we are
concerned by the freezing of direct budget support from
external donors. That situation runs the real risk of
exacerbating the situation in the country and threatens
the achievements made over recent years in the area of
national reconciliation.
We would like to touch upon a number of statements
made by some Security Council colleagues who are
using absolutely any opportunity to talk about Russia.
In that regard, I should like to underscore that in recent
years, the Central African Republic has managed to
make significant progress in the area of stabilizing the
country and helping it to emerge from an ongoing cycle
of instability. That is a clear fact. The progress made is
such that the issue of lifting the arms embargo is now
more pertinent than ever. That request is made not just
by the Central African Republic; it is also supported
by the countries in the region, the African Union and
others. As the three African States that are members of
the Security Council noted, the African countries stand
in solidarity with Bangui.
The main role in achieving those results, of course,
was played by the inhabitants of the country themselves.
The leadership of the Central African Republic has
also shown determination and consistency. Moreover,
an important role was played by the assistance from
the United Nations and bilateral partners. Russian
assistance also made a significant contribution, and
our friends in Bangui recognized that. That is the
main point.
Many problems remain to be tackled, and we are
prepared to cooperate in that respect.
Against that backdrop, the smear campaign, in
particular as contained in the statement made by the
United States, shows what Washington’s focus and

S/PV.9074

main attention is on, and it is not the Central African
Republic. It is not on the settlement of the situation in
the country. It is not on improving the situation there,
and that is very saddening. Many people throughout the
world still expect the United States to have a responsible
policy, but, unfortunately, we just do not see this at all.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Albania.
I thank the Special Representative for the Central
African Republic and Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), Valentine
Rugwabiza, for her briefing and wish her all the best in
assuming her duties. We welcome Ms. Lina Ekomo and
deeply appreciate her presentation, and also welcome
to this meeting the representative of the Central
African Republic.
I will now turn to three main issues. First,
concerning the political situation, we take note of
the republican dialogue held last March. That was
a step in the right direction that will require further
inclusivity, guaranteeing the structured participation of
representatives from civil society and the opposition.
The 217 ensuing recommendations were encouraging,
as they reinforced the commitments made on key
provisions of the 2015 Bangui Forum on National
Reconciliation and of the 2019 Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic. We also note the postponement until January
2023 of the local elections scheduled for September
2022, owing, among other things, to a lack of funding.
We join the call of the Secretary-General to mobilize
the necessary financial means.
Secondly, with regard to the dire security situation,
despite a slight decrease in security violations
concerning the Political Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic, we are
alarmed by the spike in activities by armed groups and
by the national forces’ recruitment of anti-balaka and
dissident Unité pour la paix en Centrafrique combatants
as proxies.
Furthermore, the attacks against the Fulani
community, as well as the repeated human rights
violations and sexual violence committed by the armed
forces, the national defence forces and mercenaries,
namely, the Wagner Group, are appalling to witness,
and the perpetrators must be brought to justice. Albania
commends the launching of the first trial of the Special

22-3971019/23

S/PV.9074

The situation in the Central African Republic

Criminal Court, as well as the adoption by the National
Assembly of the law abolishing the death penalty.
With regard to the arms embargo, we encourage the
Government of the Central African Republic to meet
all benchmarks on its way towards establishing full
compliance and the reform of its security sector. It is
important for the authorities to have full control over
the tracking of weapons.
Thirdly, all of those challenges demand genuine
political will, which calls for a renewed commitment
to the Political Agreement through the joint road map
of the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region. Albania calls on the national authorities to
continue their engagement with armed groups under the
road map for the participation of the remaining 3,000
estimated combatants in the national disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme.
Finally, Albania is concerned about the ongoing
violations of the status-of-forces agreement,
which obstruct the work of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) on the
ground, as well as security incidents involving United
Nations personnel.
We express our deepest condolences and sympathies
to the families of the two peacekeepers killed last
week, as well as to the Moroccan authorities. Albania
welcomes the 27 ongoing investigations by national
judicial authorities into attacks against peacekeepers
and stresses the need to ensure their safety.
We fully support the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and MINUSCA in tackling those
challenges. As Ms. Ekomo implied, we must take care
of the people of the Central African Republic, who
also face food insecurity on top of the discouraging
humanitarian crisis.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Central
African Republic.
Mr. Nzessioue (Central African Republic) (spoke
in French): I speak today on behalf of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Francophonie and Central Africans
abroad of the Central African Republic, who could not
attend this important meeting in person, for which she
requests the understanding of the Security Council.
20/23

22/06/2022

The Minister reiterates her personal gratitude, as
well as that of the Government and the people of the
Central African Republic, for the steadfast interest
that the Security Council has shown in the Central
African Republic. She deeply regrets that her request
to speak via video-teleconference — a method that
was so popular at the height of the coronavirus
disease pandemic and that seems to be applied on a
discretionary basis — was rejected. Since exceptions to
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedures
are tolerated for some meetings, it seems, as a matter of
observation, that not all States Members of the United
Nations are treated equally. The Minister deplores the
Council’s practice of refusing to allow the participation
of Central African officials while favouring statements
by non-governmental organizations financed by
the United Nations itself and thereby adopting an ad
hoc approach.
Nonetheless, I would like to insist on the notion of
equity — a value that must be promoted unwaveringly
so that the Charter of the United Nations remain the
benchmark for the preservation of world peace in a
complex geopolitical context that has not adapted itself
to the evolution of the world.
It is difficult for me to make a plea about the
injustice of the sanctions imposed on the Central
African Republic, which deprive an entire people of
all its means of defence at a time when the world is
observing an avalanche of arms distribution spread
across a conflict zone and a media campaign calling for
respect for the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. My country has repeatedly invoked those
principles for years. It is therefore difficult for me to
plead my country’s cause today, because any statement
that could be made in the name of the values proclaimed
by the Charter would be in vain, simply because we are
not treated in the same way under that Charter.
Are Council members aware that my country, the
Central African Republic, holds the record for the
highest number of peacekeeping missions on African
soil? We have hosted a total of 13 missions, from the
Inter-African Mission to Monitor the Implementation
of the Bangui Agreements to the Central African
Economic and Monetary Community Multinational
Force, as well as the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic,
the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) Peace Consolidation Mission in the Central
African Republic, the Regional Cooperation Initiative
22-39710

22/06/2022

The situation in the Central African Republic

for the elimination of the Lord’s Resistance Army,
the African-led International Support Mission to the
Central African Republic and, most recently, the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA).
Are Council members aware that my country,
the Central African Republic, since its independence
in 1960 and the establishment of multiparty politics
and democracy in 1991, has experienced only three
democratic elections? The third and most recent of those
elections were held in 2020 and 2021, and their results
were preserved thanks to the determined resilience of a
population tired of conflicts and manipulative attempts
to seize power by force and violence.
Are Council members aware that my country, the
Central African Republic — more precisely, the Central
African territory — has endured, and continues to
endure, the weight of a turbulent history marked by the
epidemics of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries,
the Arab and subsequently the European slave trades
and the oppression and servitude of colonization in the
past, and now the tyranny and terror of armed groups?
Ours is a country that has been plagued by violence and
violations of human rights, as well as violations of its
territorial integrity, for centuries.
Given that history, which has been marked by
widespread violence and violations, the Central
African Republic is making every effort to emerge
from a bygone era, continuing its quest for goodwill to
help it rise from the ashes of the tyranny imposed by
other men.
I would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute
to all those souls who lost their lives while serving
the cause of bringing stability to the Central African
Republic. I would also like to express my sincere
thanks to all those well-intentioned parties that have
contributed their experience and resources to bring
peace to the Central African Republic, in particular
the international community through United Nations
peacekeeping operations such as MINUSCA, as well as
regional and subregional organizations of the African
continent such as the African Union, ECCAS and the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
(ICGLR).
Progress has notably been achieved through the
revitalization of the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic,
signed in February 2019, and consequently through

S/PV.9074

the political process for peace through the joint road
map of the ICGLR. I cannot neglect to mention the
Central African Republic’s technical, financial and
bilateral partners.
Numerous challenges still face the Central African
Republic; however, our priority remains the achievement
of stability by neutralizing the armed groups that spread
terror and continue to carry out deadly attacks against
the peaceful civilian population. The Central African
Republic would like to reassure Member States that it
is fully aware of its duties and responsibilities when
it comes to protecting its population and its territory.
Nevertheless, we must question the imbalance of
forces on the ground, where men in uniform without
appropriate equipment face heavily armed enemies due
to the immoral and counterproductive arms embargo.
The Central African Republic would also like
to reassure Member States of the many efforts it has
made, which have nevertheless been undermined by
misinformation. For the Council’s information, I would
like to share some of the advances that can be found
detailed in the country report made available by the
Central African Republic, including the implementation
of a law adopted on 7 August 2020 on a general regime
of conventional arms and their parts, components and
ammunition, as well as the establishment by decree of
a coordinating committee for the management of arms
and ammunition on 6 February 2021.
On 24 September 2021, the Government commenced
operations to address the entire weapons life
cycle — visits, joint functional verification, marking,
tracing, the eventual placement and the destruction
of weapons deemed to be obsolete, according to
technical standards.
The Central African Republic today has the right
equipment and the human and technical capacity,
along with the support of partners. Anti-landmine
operations by the United Nations Mine Action Service
and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime are
conducted in line with resolution 2127 (2013), on the
Central African Republic, and are based on reference
goals set for that purpose.
The mobilization of security sector reform
coordination mechanisms, in which the main
international actors participate, support the defence
and security forces of the Central African Republic,
with a view to providing collective support to the

22-3971021/23

S/PV.9074

The situation in the Central African Republic

Government of the Central African Republic, in line
with the reference goals.
The Central African Republic has requested
the expertise of the United Nations Institute for
Disarmament Research (UNIDIR) in conducting
an independent and impartial assessment, which
would evaluate progress in the area of weapons and
ammunition management and the nature of the various
challenges that hamper progress. The assessment will
enable the reference base to be updated. The reference
base was established during the previous assessment
that was conducted by UNIDIR in September 2017 and
will supply the information needed to assist security
sectors in defining a road map to facilitate meeting the
reference goals.
With regard to mining, between 2020 and 2021,
with the support of partners — including the United
States Agency for International Development and the
European Union’s project on strengthening governance
in the artisanal diamond and gold mining sectors
in the Central African Republic — along with the
participation of MINUSCA, the National Follow-Up
Committee on the Kimberley Process in the Central
African Republic conducted several missions to
ensure that those areas are under the full control of
the Central African Government, that there is no rebel
activity and that the security situation enables the
free movement of goods and persons. The decision to
resume reconstruction in the Central African Republic
will be taken following an assessment undertaken by
experts now being deployed to the subprefectures of
Abba, Sosso-Nakombo, Bouar and Baoro.
In the area of justice and the fight against impunity,
the Special Criminal Court, which is gradually becoming
operational, commenced trial proceedings this year.
Hearings are continuing, including criminal hearings.
A communication and consultation framework for
the Special Prosecutor of the Special Criminal Court
and the Ministry of Justice is now being finalized. It
will help to address challenges in executing warrants
and determine appropriate measures to be taken to
facilitate the prosecution of those who have been
served with arrest warrants, be they politicians or
military personnel.
The bodies in charge of oversight and accountability
in the judicial system and the army are working hard to
identify shortcomings and to establish responsibility
when a member of the military or a politician has
22/23

22/06/2022

been served with an arrest warrant. The Commission
for Truth, Justice, Reparation and Reconciliation is
now operational.
Lastly, on 4 June a joint strategic review meeting
for the peace process in the Central African Republic
was held in Bangui. The meeting brought together with
the Government of the Central African Republic all
partners engaged in the process, including the Foreign
Ministers of Angola and Rwanda, the guarantors,
facilitators and technical and financial partners of
the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic, as well as diplomats
accredited to the Central African Republic.
On the basis of a review of the Government’s
efforts on the six components, the meeting enabled
remaining challenges, prospects for the future and
other considerations to be assessed through a series
of technical workshops. At the meeting, partners of
the Central African Republic reaffirmed their support
and the commitment of the subregion to the process,
through representatives of the subregion appointed
at the Summit of the International Conference of the
Great Lakes Region.
Furthermore, the President and Head of State of
the Central African Republic, Mr. Faustin Archange
Touadera, reaffirmed his commitment to the political
process for peace in the country and for various sectors
of the Government taking ownership of the political
process, through the joint road map for peace in the
Central African Republic, known as the Luanda road
map, which completes and strengthens a process that
was started as part of the peace agreement. Technical
workshops were organized following the high-level
strategic review, which will be held quarterly.
Despite the considerable progress that has been
made and recognized by the Panel of Experts on
the Central African Republic, challenges remain.
Concerning weapons and ammunition management
and existing procedures, we must identify areas that
require capacity-building and submit recommendations
on finding political and programmatic responses to
develop a proper weapons and ammunition framework.
That will deepen knowledge and dialogue among
States and regional organizations, the United Nations
and non-governmental organizations that specialize in
good practices and lessons learned, as well as in the
ways and means of strengthening national and regional
approaches to weapons and ammunition management.
22-39710

22/06/2022

The situation in the Central African Republic

I take this opportunity to welcome and encourage
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
the Central African Republic and Head of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic, Ms. Valentine
Rugwabiza, for the excellent work that she has done
in so little time and for her briefing today. I would
not only like to encourage her, but also to reiterate
my willingness and readiness to support the mandate
of the Mission she is charged with the difficult task
of heading.
Despite the efforts made by MINUSCA, it
continues to face certain challenges on the ground due
to the complex nature of the situation. That is why the
armed forces of the Central African Republic should
rightfully be at the forefront so as to be able to conduct
its sovereign mission despite the paltry resources it has
to fight the armed groups.
I would like to conclude by urging all partners of
the Central African Republic — those that wish to help
restore peace and stability in the country, in particular,
France, Russia, the United States, China, Angola,
Rwanda, Morocco, the United Nations, the European
Union and so on — to continue their efforts to build

S/PV.9074

peace and promote a culture of dialogue and universal
peace, which is the key to development.
Before the next open debate on the working methods
of the Security Council and in line with paragraphs 78
and 79 of presidential note S/2017/507, I would like to
submit for the Council’s consideration an issue relating
to the penholder through the subsidiarity principle. To
better address priorities and situations in Africa, in
particular concerning the Central African Republic and
the subregion, in general, would it not be advisable for
the penholder to be one of the three African members of
the Security Council — Gabon, Ghana and Kenya — or
the country concerned?
I hope that the update on the situation in my country
was of interest to Council members and that they have a
better understanding of the positions and postures that
we have adopted.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I will now adjourn the meeting
so that the Council can continue its discussion on the
subject in closed consultations.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

22-3971023/23
