S/PV.8331

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8331st meeting

Monday, 27 August 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Pierce . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Cordova Soria
Mr. Lie Cheng
Mr. Adom
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Ms. Guadey
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Volgarev
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Mrs. Haley

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Letter dated 7 August 2018 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2018/762)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-26814 (E)
*1826814*

S/PV.8331

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Letter dated 7 August 2018 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2018/762)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo;
Monseigneur Marcel Utembi, President of the
Conférence épiscopale nationale du Congo; and
Ms. Solange Lwashiga Furaha, spokesperson for Rien
Sans Les Femmes.
Ms. Zerrougui and Ms. Furaha join today’s
meeting via video-teleconference from Kinshasa and
Monseigneur Utembi joins it via video-teleconference
from Kisangani.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/762, which contains a letter dated
7 August 2018 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council.
I would like to remind our briefers that while we
are delighted to hear from them today, we would be
very grateful if they could keep to the given time limits.
I now give the floor to Ms. Zerrougui.
Ms. Zerrougui (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Security Council for affording
me the opportunity to brief it on the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, particularly the
latest developments in the electoral process under way
in the country.
2/20

27/08/2018

As I have already reported to the Council (see
S/PV.8318), while preparations are ongoing for the
upcoming presidential and national and provincial
legislative elections, tangible progress has been seen
in adhering to the critical stages of the calendar of
the Independent National Electoral Commission.
All political parties and groupings of the Majorité
présidentielle and the opposition have put forward
candidates for the three ballots within the timetable
foreseen by the calendar, which is an important step
towards holding the elections on 23 December. That
phase of filing candidacies for the presidential and
legislative elections has been marked by several events
that warrant underlining.
First, President Kabila Kabange honoured his
commitment not to stand for a third term. Emmanuel
Ramazani Shadary was nominated as the sole candidate
of the Majorité présidentielle under the banner of the
Front commun pour le Congo.
Secondly, the President of the Ensemble pour le
changement platform, Moïse Katumbi, was not able to
submit his candidacy as he wished, since he was not
able to return to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
before the deadline of 8 August. Various reactions
followed, ranging from the request by Mr. Katumbi’s
lawyers that the issue be referred to the Conseil d’État
to the demand by opposition leaders, the Conférence
épiscopale nationale du Congo and the President of the
Senate for his candidacy to be allowed to go forward.
Thirdly, according to the provisional list published
by the Independent National Electoral Commission on
24 August, six of the 25 candidates for the presidential
election were disqualified on various grounds,
including the loss of nationality of origin, conflict of
interest and a conviction for witness interference. They
are Senator Jean-Pierre Bemba, three former prime
ministers — Adolphe Muzito, Antoine Gizenga and
Samy Badibanga — as well as Jean-Paul Moka-Ngolo
and Marie Josée Ifoku.
Finally, it should be noted that, despite criteria
within the revised electoral law that are deemed to be
more restrictive, a large number of candidacies were
registered. According to the final list submitted by the
Independent National Electoral Commission, 19,640
candidates were registered for the provincial elections,
while the provisional lists show 19 candidates for the
presidential election and 15,222 candidates declared
18-26814

27/08/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

S/PV. 8331

admissible out of the 15,505 candidates for the national
legislative elections.

to find solutions that build the confidence necessary for
peaceful and inclusive elections.

The proportion of women candidacies has not
changed since 2011, remaining at approximately 12 per
cent of the total, or 2,318 for the provincial elections,
1,784 for the national legislative elections and none for
the presidential election following the disqualification
by the Independent National Electoral Commission of
the only woman candidate.

(spoke in English)

In accordance with its mandate, the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) continues to
provide technical assistance to the Independent National
Electoral Commission in the organization of elections.
The Mission also stands ready to provide logistical
support to the process, should the Commission request it.
As I have informed the Council in previous statements,
the Independent National Electoral Commission and
the Congolese authorities have repeatedly indicated
that such logistical support would not be sought and
that the Democratic Republic of the Congo wished to
organize its elections without external logistical or
financial support.
Despite the progress made and the assurances of
the Government and the Independent National Electoral
Commission that elections will be held on 23 December,
the period ahead will be marked by challenges and
intense political consultations. The publication of the
provisional list of candidates for the presidential and
legislative elections has raised challenges and questions
within the Congolese political class and society. The
Independent National Electoral Commission is accused
of having overstepped its boundaries by excluding
candidates on the basis of interpretations of electoral
law, which, according to those concerned, falls within
the exclusive competence of the Constitutional Court.
The contestation process is under way and the final
lists of candidates are expected to be published on
19 September after appeals are considered by the
Constitutional Court.
The lack of consensus on the use of voting machines
and the failure to publish the final list of voters also
remain two areas of major contention among the various
stakeholders. I can only encourage those stakeholders
to build on the constructive approach they took during
the nomination period in order to pursue dialogue on
those issues and resolve their differences. Of course, I
remain determined to continue using my good offices

The perceived credibility of the electoral process
remains a key concern. The ongoing process of
review and contestation, in particular of presidential
candidates, by the Constitutional Court will be key to
the legitimacy of the electoral process going forward. A
lack of confidence or a perceived lack of credibility in
the Independent National Electoral Commission or in
the decisions of the Constitutional Court would serve
only to heighten tensions in the process. Any impression
that the Independent National Electoral Commission
may have gone beyond its remit in the interpretation
of the electoral law in determining the eligibility
of candidates to stand in the elections would only
undermine confidence in the process as a whole. It is
hoped that the decisions of the Constitutional Court will
help to resolve any ambiguities and instil confidence.
The scrupulous applicability of the Constitution and
electoral law is therefore key to moving forward.
The meaningful inclusion of a greater number of
women in the electoral process is a priority if the spirit
of resolution 1325 (2000) is to find meaning in the
current political context of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and if women are to play a role in the newly
elected Government and legislatures, which resolution
1325 (2000) foresees. In that regard, supporting women
candidates who will run in the elections and ensuring
that women can vote freely and safely on election day
is key.
The continued instances of targeted repression
and intimidation of political activists and human
rights defenders in certain provinces, as well as other
restrictions on political space, do not instil confidence.
Therefore, I continue to call for the lifting of the
general ban on public demonstrations and upholding
the freedom of expression and peaceful assembly,
which are crucial to making meaningful progress as
elections draw nearer.
As elections approach, the deteriorating security
situation in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
is also of concern. The activities of armed groups, the
Mai Mai and militia could have an impact both on the
final preparations for elections and on election day
itself. While ensuring that the security of the elections
remains the primary responsibility of the Government,
MONUSCO will remain fully engaged in all areas of its

18-268143/20

S/PV.8331

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

operations to support activities of the authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in preventing and
mitigating the activities of such groups.
With fewer than four months to go before elections
are held, it is clear that the required levels of confidence
and consensus around key issues must still be built. It
is also imperative that respect for fundamental rights
and freedoms be assured throughout the territory of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo in a consistent
manner, so that, moving forward, all Congolese
citizens can participate freely and fairly in all stages
of the electoral process. Failure to allow for political
engagement and participation, as foreseen by the
Congolese Constitution, could jeopardize the peaceful
nature and the credibility of the polls.
(spoke in French)
It is in that context that I reiterate my call on all
stakeholders, in particular the Congolese authorities, to
ensure that the elections on 23 December are credible
and peaceful in order to allow for the first peaceable
transition of power in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which is an essential step on the path to stability
and development in the country.
In conclusion, I take this opportunity to reiterate
that MONUSCO stands ready to provide support for the
elections, if need be.
The President: I thank Ms. Zerrougui for her
briefing and offer of support from the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
I now give the floor to Monseigneur Utembi.
Monseigneur Utembi (spoke in French): The
Conférence épiscopale nationale du Congo (CENCO)
sincerely thanks you, Madam President, for having
invited it to brief Council members on developments
in the electoral process in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. This demonstrates the confidence of
the Security Council in the Conférence épiscopale
nationale du Congo. CENCO welcomed the invitation to
participate in today’s meeting, which is very important
to the country in its quest for a peaceful solution to
the sociopolitical crisis that began in 2016. That is why
CENCO eagerly seized the opportunity to brief the
members of the Security Council on developments in
the electoral process under way in our country.
4/20

27/08/2018

CENCO has duly noted the significant steps taken
in the electoral process, such as the filing of candidacies
for the presidential and legislative elections. Overall,
the candidate nominations took place in a peaceful
climate and a patriotic spirit, with the exception of the
nomination of Mr. Moïse Katumbi. With regard to his
nomination, we encourage the Government to respect
the New Year’s Eve agreement.
The appointment of candidates for the presidential
election by the Majorité présidentielle was another
positive step. CENCO commends the President of
the Republic, the Independent National Electoral
Commission, the political stakeholders and the people
of the country as a whole for having contributed to the
successful completion of that step, which facilitates
peaceful dynamics at the highest level of the State.
The Government is committed to financing the
electoral process. CENCO encourages the Government
to continue financing to the end of the process within
a time frame that will guarantee the effective holding
of the elections on 23 December. Nonetheless, our
current joy will have been illusory and fleeting if the
ongoing electoral process does not lead to the holding of
credible, transparent, inclusive and peaceful elections,
because if the elections are biased we will remain mired
in crisis. We run the risk of such an outcome if we do
not take into account the following concerns: first, the
lack of clarification of the situation of the millions of
people who have been registered without fingerprints;
secondly, the lack of consensus concerning the use of
voting machines; and thirdly, the failure to implement
the important political de-escalation measures
stipulated within the New Year’s Eve agreement.
In view of the aforementioned facts, CENCO
reiterates the following recommendations to the
Independent National Electoral Commission and to
the Government.
First, the provisional list of registered individuals
should be published as soon as possible so that the
Congolese people can be assured of the validity of
individuals genuinely registered without fingerprints.
Secondly, consensus on the use of voting machines
should be sought in order to promote the holding of
tripartite talks between the Independent National
Electoral Commission; the Majorité présidentielle,
which is now called the Front commun pour le
Congo; and the opposition, including national and
international experts.
18-26814

27/08/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Thirdly, the New Year’s Eve agreement should be
fulfilled, inter alia, through the implementation of the
remaining de-escalation measures aimed at preventing
the misinterpretation of the law and the manipulation
of justice to arbitrarily exclude certain candidates from
running in the elections. Non-inclusive elections would
be an obstacle to the process of achieving peace in
the country.
Fourthly, the observation of the elections by national
and international organizations that have relevant
experience and express their wish to participate in the
electoral process on 23 December should be facilitated.
That would demonstrate that we have nothing to hide
throughout the electoral process. The credibility of the
elections depends to a great extent on the observation
of those elections by national and international groups
that are interested in doing so.
CENCO intends to contribute to the observation
of the coming elections and hoprd to deploy 1,026
observers over the long term and 40,000 observers
over the short term. It is counting on the support of the
Independent National Electoral Commission to accredit
all of those observers, who will be well trained, and to
facilitate their important work, which will undoubtedly
contribute to reducing tensions following the elections.
CENCO is very much counting on the involvement
and commitment of the international community,
in particular the Southern African Development
Community and the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region, to help the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to peacefully overcome the
crisis by respecting the stipulations of the New Year’s
Eve agreement.
The President: I thank Monseigneur Utembi for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Furaha.
Ms. Furaha (spoke in French): At the outset, we
would like to thank the Council for the opportunity it
has given to the women of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, which bears witness to the extent to
which the Security Council attaches importance
to women’s role and their participation in public
affairs. We also thank the various partners, including
the Department for International Development, the
National Democratic Institute and the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), which has always

S/PV. 8331

supported our involvement to ensure that we are able to
carry out our work.
We are here today to speak about the participation
of Congolese women in the electoral process and their
role in it. First of all, we note that, during the 2006
elections, Congolese women were widely mobilized as
voters, candidates, observers and witnesses in the hope
of achieving a peaceful and developed Democratic
Republic of the Congo with inclusive and participatory
governance. Furthermore, we note that 52 per cent of
women were registered to vote. In spite of the fact that
less than 15 per cent of the candidates were women and
their weak election results at the same rate, it should
be noted that there was an important awarenessraising among women’s awareness, who had a great
opportunity to exercise their civil rights as voters,
candidates, observers and witnesses.
The national and international stakeholders played a
key role in that mobilization of women. The international
community, through MONUSCO, played a lead role in
the organization and holding of those elections. The
fact that local and municipal elections, which had been
expected to be an opportunity for women, were not
held became a source of discouragement. Women voted
more for men and their illiteracy negatively affected
their choice.
From 2011 to 2018, we noticed a genuine decline in
the motivation of citizens, in particular among women
politicians and potential candidates. The reason for
that discouragement can be found in various issues,
including age-old customs, the lack of financial
resources, political reasons and so forth. As voting
cards served as identity cards, some women registered
to vote in order to obtain an identity card, but not in
order to actually vote, which had some consequences
for female candidates.
The 2010 review of the Constitution and the fact
that elections were not held in 2016 led to an impasse
and political crisis and to debates about the legitimacy
of President Joseph Kabila Kabange, the National
Assembly and the Senate. That led to peace initiatives
to defuse the crisis, including the New Year’s Eve
agreement. Unfortunately, however, we noted a weak
representation of women, with only 18 per cent in the
dialogues organized by the African Union and three
women out of 32 participating in the Conférence
épiscopale nationale du Congo. We note that during

18-268145/20

S/PV.8331

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

those processes, the number of women candidates
remained below than 15 per cent.
The objective of the Rien Sans Les Femmes movement
is to achieve gender equality in decision-making
roles at all levels within the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. One of the first endeavours undertaken
by the movement was to draw up a petition with over
207,315 signatures to the national Parliament to urge
that the hurdles preventing women to participate as
candidates in the elections be removed, in accordance
with article 14 of the Constitution, on gender parity.
Unfortunately, the response of the National Assembly
was not encouraging and consequently, we saw a low
percentage of women registered on the electoral lists
and their last-minute adhesion to join other political
parties that would accept them but woul.d not guarantee
their election.
We are also seeing the weak democratization of some
political parties and their inability to form a political
elite that can assume the challenges of participative and
inclusive governance, the non-implementation of the law
on funding political parties, and provincial and national
assemblies with a representation of less than 15 per cent
of women since 2006. Despite the competence of some
women politicians and candidates, the majority of the
Congolese people remains hesitant to vote for women
being able to vote. There is little funding for electoral
expenses and campaigns, a lack of encouragement
for voters to go out and vote for women, and an
unfamiliarity with the voting machines among women.
In that context, there are also other challenges and fears
linked to the holding of democratic, transparent, free
and peaceful elections in 2018.
We also note, in the context of the partnership
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the international community, that the Government has
stated that it does not want to relive the experiences of
the past, when funding was given with the intention of
influencing the elections. That comment is concerning
to the Congolese people since refusing external
funding for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
is not encouraging. It is also worrying that there is a
risk of accreditation being refused to international
and even national observers, in some cases, as well as
the mobilization of international partners to monitor
the elections.
With respect to the challenges related to peace
and security, there are fears about the willingness of
6/20

27/08/2018

the Democratic Republic of the Congo to guarantee the
nationwide security of the elections and the prevention
of gender-based violence before, during and after the
elections, as well as concerns about the need to ensure
free, transparent and peaceful elections so that the
results will be accepted. We also note that the lack of
consensus about the use of voting machines and the
debates about voter registration remain disruptive.
We must also underline that specific support for
female candidates is particularly needed. Against
that backdrop, we would like to make the following
recommendations to our partners, the Security Council
and the international community.
We recommend that the Congolese Government
be encouraged to ensure the effective holding of
free, transparent, democratic, inclusive and peaceful
elections, in accordance with resolution 1325 (2000),
and urged to understand the importance of the
international community’s support in the organization
of the elections so as to ensure that they are fully
credible, as well as to prevent any electoral violence.
We also recommend that it reactivate the logistical and
security role of MONUSCO and persuade the majority
and opposition political parties of the need for the
elections to be effectively held.
We ask our international partners to support
women and other civil society organizations in order to
energize mobilization in favour of the participation of
women in decision-making roles, and especially their
election as candidates. We also support awarenessraising among voters, as well as training for male and
female observers for the forthcoming elections.
To the Congolese Government, we recommend that
it reassure the Congolese people about the effectiveness
of the December elections, as well as the forthcoming
local and municipal elections. We further recommend
that it make the most of external partnerships to
overcome the logistical and security challenges; ensure
the safety and security of women before, during and
after the elections so as to avoid the country falling into
chaos; implement the law on funding given to political
parties; and establish an interministerial committee
and a national council on gender equality.
The President: I thank Ms. Furaha her for her very
helpful briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
18-26814

27/08/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank my
friends from the French delegation for allowing me to
speak, as I have to leave early. I thank the briefers for
updating the Security Council on elections planning in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In particular, I
would like to thank you, Madam President, for calling
this very important and timely meeting because we are,
in fact, running out of time.
Today, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
is 118 days away from election day. That is less than
four months for the Government to finish organizing
free, fair and credible elections. Fortunately, we have
already reached an important milestone. President
Kabila did not register as a presidential candidate before
the deadline, which guarantees that he cannot legally
stand for re-election or legitimately serve as President
past January 2019. The United States welcomes
reports of President Kabila’s intent not to seek a third
term. That is an important step towards the peaceful
transition of power. History will look favourably on
President Kabila’s decision if it culminates in free,
fair and credible elections that translate into a lasting
democracy for the Congolese people — a legacy that we
hope he earns in the coming months.
While we recognize progress, we cannot deny the
red flags and unanswered questions that remain. With
less than four months to go, how will the Independent
National Electoral Commission transport elections
materials to more than 90,000 polling places? Will there
be enough voting machines or will authorities extend
voting by days, or even weeks? Can the authorities
recharge voting machines with only a 12-hour battery
life? Have election organizers widely tested the
machines? Will voters, many of whom have never used
a touch screen, know how to use them? Are organizers
preparing paper ballots as a backup if the electronic
voting machines fail? Those questions raise problems,
but there are solutions.
The Congolese authorities should permit the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
to provide logistical and transportation support.
MONUSCO has the available assets that the Mission is
ready and willing to deploy. The Congolese authorities
should also let voters use paper ballots. That is a trusted,
tested, transparent and easy-to-use voting method. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo can and should use
the same operations that it successfully implemented
in 2006 and 2011, including with support from the

S/PV. 8331

United Nations. Paper ballots were good enough to
get President Kabila elected, and they should be good
enough as a fail-safe means to elect his successor.
I had the opportunity to meet with President Kabila
last year. If he were here today, I would tell him that
it is admirable that the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo wants to self-finance and selfsupport its elections. But is it doable? Is it realistic? Is
it even necessary? It does not insult the Democratic
Republic of the Congo’s sovereignty for the Independent
National Electoral Commission to accept logistical
support from MONUSCO. Instead, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is wasting precious resources to
buy capabilities that are already available to it.
Meanwhile, my Government and others are devoting
tens of millions of dollars to life-saving humanitarian
assistance for the country. It is troubling that President
Kabila and the Independent National Electoral
Commission refused the assistance. We respect the
Democratic Republic of the Congo as a sovereign
State Member of the United Nations, but it cannot help
but raise suspicion when the Congolese Government
refuses the assistance that would help make free, fair
and credible elections a reality, while at the same time
it continues to accept the humanitarian assistance that
so many of us continue to provide it with.
Other red flags add to our suspicions. We are deeply
concerned about the Independent National Electoral
Commission’s decision on 24 August to disqualify
some opposition presidential candidates for what appear
to be political reasons. This is not how an electoral
process or any independent electoral commission
should function. We also praise those candidates who
feel that they have been unjustly disqualified for using
the appeals process that was open to them. By abiding
by the rules of the domestic process, opposition and
civil society organizations further reinforced just how
much independence the Independent National Electoral
Commission has lost during Mr. Nangaa’s tenure.
The National Assembly President also continues
to deny the wish of an opposition party to replace
its candidate for the Independent National Electoral
Commission, in violation of the 31 December 2016
agreement. The Minister of Justice continues to
detain dozens of opposition members and civil society
activists, again in violation of the agreement. There
must be a political space for candidates to campaign,
citizens to assemble and opposition members to speak

18-268147/20

S/PV.8331

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

freely and without fear. There can be no violence,
intimidation, harassment or silencing of the opposition.
Political parties must be able to compete on a level
playing field.
We will never know the will of the Congolese
people without an environment conducive to elections.
We have 118 days. These problems are fixable.
There is still enough time. The suspicions we have
may amount to nothing. Ultimately, however, the
Congolese Government must choose. The hopes for
self-determination of more than 80 million Congolese
citizens are riding on the decisions that President Kabila
and the Independent National Electoral Commission
will make in the days and weeks ahead. Now is the
time for choosing. We ask them to choose support from
MONUSCO, choose free fair and credible elections on
23 December, and choose a peaceful transition of power
in January 2019, and in so doing choose a better future
for generations of Congolese people to come.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, for her excellent briefing and
more generally for her exemplary commitment to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I also thank
the President of the Conférence épiscopale nationale
du Congo, Monseigneur Marcel Utembi, whose
involvement is essential to the success of the electoral
process, for his extremely clear briefing. Lastly, I thank
Ms. Solange Lwashiga Furaha, spokesperson for Rien
Sans Les Femmes, for her role in fighting for women
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and their
participation in the political and electoral processes.
The 23 December elections will be a historic
moment for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in that they will ensure a peaceful transfer of power
for the first time in the country’s history. For the
country, it offers a unique opportunity to make a
lasting commitment to achieving peace and stability.
Those elections belong to the Congolese people. France
reaffirms its full respect for the sovereignty of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and encourages the
Government to take all measures necessary to ensure
a smooth electoral process and the holding of free,
inclusive and transparent elections, in accordance with
the set timetable and the Constitution. The success
of that crucial step in the political history of the
country is the shared responsibility and commitment
of all. It is therefore up to all stakeholders to maintain
the spirit of dialogue and consensus resulting from
8/20

27/08/2018

the 31 December 2016 agreement. I will emphasize
two essential conditions on which the success of the
electoral process depends.
The first concerns the fact that it must take place
in an environment of trust. The opening of political and
democratic space, as well as respect for fundamental
freedoms — beginning with the freedom of expression
and demonstration — are essential. France calls on
the Congolese Government to lift the general ban on
demonstrations and to release political prisoners as
soon as possible, in accordance with the de-escalation
measures provided for in the New Year’s Eve agreement,
as Monseigneur Utembi recalled earlier. In that regard,
respect for human rights and the commitments made by
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the Human
Rights Council in Geneva are of the utmost importance.
France also encourages the Congolese authorities to
ensure the participation of women in the political
process, from which they continue to be excluded
too often, as the statistics cited by Ms. Zerrougui
earlier highlight.
Respect for the electoral calendar is essential. The
trust of the Congolese people depends largely on that
factor. Elections must be held on the scheduled date in
accordance with the commitment of all parties. France
welcomes the legislative and technical progress reflected
in the publication of the provisional list of candidates by
the Independent National Electoral Commission on the
evening of 24 August. Furthermore, we welcome once
again President Kabila’s decision not to run again in
accordance with the Constitution. In order to maintain
this positive dynamic, any consideration of altering the
electoral calendar must be avoided at all costs.
The next step will be for the Constitutional
Court to consider appeals concerning candidatures
invalidated by the Independent National Electoral
Commission, which must be submitted in the coming
days before the publication of the definitive list on
19 September. The decisions of the Court must allow
an environment of trust in the electoral process to be
preserved, while inclusiveness will be an important
factor in the success of the elections. Moreover, France
fully respects the sovereign decision of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to assume the responsibility
of financing and logistical support for the holding of
elections. It nevertheless recalls that the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) is ready to
provide the Democratic Republic of the Congo with
18-26814

27/08/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

logistical support if needed. To that end, it is essential
that the competent authorities provide MONUSCO
with the information it needs to provide timely support
as appropriate.
Technical issues have yet to be resolved. France
calls once again on the Independent National Electoral
Commission to establish a wider consensus on the use
of voting machines by helping all citizens to access and
grow comfortable with them. Moreover, we encourage
the Independent National Electoral Commission
to implement the recommendations made by the
International Organization of la Francophonie in its
June audit, beginning with the publication of the voter
register, on which 6.6 million people are registered
without finger prints. Far from being anecdotal, that
technical point raises an issue relating to the credibility
of the entire process.
The second condition concerns the fact that elections
must take place within a peaceful environment. France
remains concerned about the security and humanitarian
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In
some regions, the situation is likely to call into question
the electoral process. Tensions in the Kasai have claimed
many lives, while experts commissioned by the Human
Rights Council have reported allegations of war crimes
and crimes against humanity. The situation in the east
of the country, particularly in North and South Kivu,
remains extremely worrying and all the more sensitive
since the new Ebola epidemic, which was declared
on 1 August in the Beni area. In that connection,
France welcomes MONUSCO deployments in areas of
violence, especially in the eastern part of the country.
It is essential to continue to reconfigure MONUSCO
so as to strengthen the protection of civilians. Securing
future elections and providing logistical support for
them, if the authorities so desire, must be MONUSCO’s
short-term priority.
France stands shoulder to shoulder with the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. With its partners
in the Security Council, the African Union and in
the region as a whole, it will remain committed to
ensuring that the electoral process leads to the holding
of elections that are free, credible, transparent and
inclusive. Beyond the deadlines in December, it is the
very future of the country that is at stake in the months
to come — a future, we hope, of stability, development
and peace.

S/PV. 8331

Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the convening of this meeting and
the noteworthy briefings by Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
Monseigneur Marcel Utembi and Ms. Solange
Lwashiga Furaha. We would also like to express our
gratitude for the important work they undertake in their
respective domains.
Peru is closely monitoring progress against the
electoral calendar in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo under the leadership of the Government and
the Independent National Electoral Commission. We
underscore the need to ensure that December’s electoral
process is legitimate, democratic, credible, inclusive
and peaceful. In this regard, we welcome the decision
of President Joseph Kabila not to seek re-election. We
believe that it is vital that the international community,
and the Security Council in particular, be kept informed
about the process so as to support the Congolese
Government and citizens in their efforts to ensure that
the process is a success and to build sustainable peace.
The process clearly involves a number of
significant challenges that must be overcome. In our
view, a deadline must urgently be set for an audit of
the voting machines and to devise alternative plans
developed in case the machines do not function
correctly or difficulties arise in their use. To that
end, we appreciate the proposal put forward by the
Conférence épiscopale nationale du Congo that a team
of independent technical experts could ensure that the
machines work correctly. Likewise, the Government
could detail the logistical support it may require from
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
for the timely transfer of electoral material. We also
view as valid the recommendation of the International
Organization of la Francophonie regarding the need for
the prompt publication of the list of voters so as to allow
for its verification and amendment if necessary, thereby
ensuring the necessary climate of trust in the process.
All of this should take place in the context of strict
respect by the Government for the free exercise of the
political rights of all political groups and citizens in
general, and pursuant to the electoral code of conduct.
In this regard, we are particularly concerned about
the fact that draft legislation on confidence-building
measures has not been considered, including the draft
amendments to the 2015 law on public demonstrations.
In this regard, we encourage the Congolese authorities
and all political actors to step up efforts to promote the

18-268149/20

S/PV.8331

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

broad participation of women in the electoral process
as candidates and as voters, and in the political life
of the country in general. Evidence shows that the
participation of women and young people makes a
decisive contribution to building sustainable peace
based on a shared vision of the future.
I conclude by highlighting the important support
role played by MONUSCO, the African Union,
subregional organizations and neighbouring countries
in ensuring that the electoral process can be a turning
point towards peace, progress and development in
this country.
Mr. Volgarev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Zerrougui, for the updated
information on the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the implementation of the December
political agreement and the election preparations. We
also note the briefings delivered by the President of
the Conférence épiscopale nationale du Congo and
the representative of civil society. We regret that we
were not able to hear from the head of the Congolese
Independent National Electoral Commission.
We agree that timely elections on 23 December
would allow for a reduction of political tensions in the
country. We understand that the technical and legislative
preparations for the voting in December are consistent
with the Independent National Electoral Commission
calendar. We note the measures taken by Kinshasa,
including the timely adoption of laws distributing seats
in provincial legislative bodies and local councils, as
well as the publication of a list of parties permitted to
run in the elections and other associations.
We welcome the audit of the electoral list conducted
under the auspices of the International Organization of
la Francophonie and the fact that half of the political
parties in the country have signed up to an electoral
code of conduct. We note President Kabila’s statement
before the National Assembly in July, at which the
Congolese leader once again restated his commitment
to respecting the national Constitution.
Finally, the registration process for presidential
candidates has very recently come to a close. As
Council members will be aware, the Front commun pour
le Congo has put forward one candidate: Emmanuel
Ramazani Shadary. We believe that these signals are
appropriate and timely, and encourage opposition
parties to refrain from pushing a negative agenda. We
10/20

27/08/2018

call on colleagues not to demonize the decision of the
Congolese Independent National Electoral Commission
to use electronic voting machines. We agree that in
order to avoid any problems in the electoral process,
Kinshasa must guarantee its sustainable financing.
We respect the decision of the Congolese
Government to support this process mainly on its own
resources, while we also draw attention to the potential
logistical support that the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo could offer.
We do not rule out the need for the Congolese
authorities to update their implementation of
confidence-building measures, including on the
significant aspects of the political agreement regarding
high-profile cases against political actors abroad.
However, we encourage all opposition parties in the
Republic to work with Kinshasa and the Independent
National Electoral Commission to avoid any outbreak
of violence. It is, moreover, imperative in our view
that the national sovereignty and legislation of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo be respected.
It is our understanding that the role of the United
Nations Mission in organizing and holding elections
should not go beyond the mandate anchored in resolution
2409 (2017). The protection of civilians in the electoral
context should be carried out with full observance of
basic peacekeeping principles and without interference
in the domestic affairs of Kinshasa. We believe that it
is up to the Congolese people themselves decide their
own fate, and that the objective of the international
community should be to provide assistance in those
areas where it is genuinely necessary.
Elections alone are no panacea. We must focus on
addressing the root causes of the crisis, and on the need
to continue the fight against illegal armed groups in the
east of the country, which continue to pose a threat to
the civilian population.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I thank you, Madam President, for having
convened this meeting at the request of several Council
members, including the Kingdom of the Netherlands. I
thank the briefers for the enlightening information they
have provided on the election preparations. I reiterate
our support for Special Representative Leila Zerrougui.
Today, I will address three main points:
electoral preparations; the implementation of the
18-26814

27/08/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

New Year’s Eve agreement; and the support of the
international community.
My first point relates to the electoral preparations.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands welcomes President
Kabila’s decision not to seek a third term, in accordance
with the Congolese Constitution. This represents
a crucial step in preparing for elections. We also
welcome the recent increased engagement on the part
of the Independent National Electoral Commission
and political parties, and we welcome the creation of
additional provincial courts of appeal.
Nonetheless, much remains to be done to ensure
that the elections are free, credible, transparent and
peaceful. It is essential that all parties have confidence
in the Commission and in the electoral preparations.
A number of political parties have expressed concerns
regarding key steps, including the timely delivery,
storage and distribution of voting machines, as well as
their use. Furthermore, the means for a citizens’ audit of
the electoral list are still not clearly established. Those
are all significant challenges for the Commission, and
we encourage all parties to commit to dialogue in order
to resolve them. We note with satisfaction that the
Congolese Government has funded a part of the electoral
budget. However, it is essential that the remaining
funds be transferred on time. We would like to know
whether Mr. Nangaa believes the electoral budget
will be covered. We emphasize the willingness of the
international community to provide logistical support.
We encourage Commission and the Government to
make the relevant requests by the deadlines. We regret
that the head of the Commission, Mr. Nangaa, had to
cancel his participation in this briefing.
My second point has to do with the importance of
the implementation of the 31 December 2016 political
agreement, which is incumbent upon all signatory
Congolese parties. That agreement is the only possible
way for the elections to be accepted by the entire
Congolese population. Consequently, the continued
lack of significant progress in the implementation of
de-escalation measures is a cause for serious concern.
All candidates must be able to participate under equal
conditions of competition. The electoral process
must be inclusive. CENI has deemed six candidates
ineligible. We call on all stakeholders to continue to
show maximum restraint pending the results of any
appeals. We urge the authorities to ensure that the
process is inclusive.

S/PV. 8331

Another critical step is the liberation of all political
prisoners, including emblematic cases. I would like to
note that prisoners of conscience, including the five
members of Filimbi, have been denied their right to a
fair trial.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands is also gravely
concerned by the low level of women’s participation,
as was underscored by Ms. Zerrougui and Ms. Solange
LwashigaFuraha. Women comprise 12 per cent of
candidates in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, a
setback for the region. Certain political parties have no
female candidates. Ms. Lwashiga Furaha is evidence,
however, that the country does not lack female leaders.
We call on all parties to intensify their efforts to include
Congolese women in the electoral process.
My third and final point is on the will of the
international community to support the Congolese
people. In addition to the electoral process, the fight
against the new Ebola epidemic in the east of the country
also requires international support. Combined with the
serious security risks, this new epidemic could easily
devolve into a new humanitarian disaster. All Member
States must do all they can to prevent an escalation of
the crisis. We welcome that the Council will have an
opportunity to discuss the situation tomorrow morning.
In conclusion, the Council’s upcoming visit to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo next October will
be one of solidarity with the Congolese people. It will
take place at a key moment. With the African Union,
the Southern African Development Community, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
and other relevant stakeholders, the Council will
continue to work alongside the Democratic Republic
of the Congo throughout this crucial year. We cannot
simply look away.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We join others in
thanking Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Zerrougui for her insightful briefing. I
also extend our appreciation to the President of the
Conférence épiscopale nationale du Congo, Monsignor
Marcel Utembi, and the representative of Rien Sans
Les Femmes, Ms. Solange Lwashiga Furaha, for their
highly informative updates.
We reiterate the importance of implementing the
31 December 2016 political agreement by all parties.
In that regard, we welcome the recent announcement
by President Joseph Kabila not to run for re-election,

18-2681411/20

S/PV.8331

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

which is an important step towards a peaceful transition
of power.
We also note the importance of organizing fair,
transparent and inclusive elections as scheduled. This
nation-owned process should be held with respect for
the sovereignty, political independence, territorial
integrity and unity of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
We welcome the efforts of the national authorities
and the Independent National Electoral Commission to
prepare the elections in accordance with the electoral
calendar, including the finalization of the voter register,
as well as the list of candidates for presidential and
legislative elections. We positively note and encourage
further interaction of the Commission to settle disputes
with all the participants in the political process.
We call on the Congolese authorities to continue
implementing measures to create conditions conducive
to holding credible elections, including the meaningful
participation of women. Further efforts must be made to
establish a constructive and inclusive inter-Congolese
dialogue, to achieve political progress and to build
confidence in the electoral process, including its
technical elements. We welcome the committed
determination of the Government to assume full
responsibility for funding the elections. We encourage
national authorities to continue cooperating with the
Commission to provide the necessary resources.
At the same time, we note the readiness of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
to provide logistical assistance in preparing for the
elections, and we call for increased cooperation between
the Independent National Electoral Commission and
MONUSCO. It is very important to eliminate in good
time the potential procedural, technical and logistic
difficulties, which can jeopardize the results of both
the political and electoral processes. We commend
MONUSCO for providing considerable assistance in
preparation for the elections. It is also important for
the Congolese authorities to take all the necessary
measures to ensure security during the elections, with
the support of MONUSCO.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo is entering
a decisive phase that will determine its future. In
that regard, we call on all regional and subregional
organizations, as well as neighbouring States, to
continue to promote the political and electoral process
12/20

27/08/2018

to ensure favourable conditions for holding timely
and peaceful elections, which will have positive
consequences for stability throughout the region.
Mr. Lie Cheng (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Zarrougui and the President of the Conférence
épiscopale nationale du Congo, Monseigneur Utembi,
for their briefings. We also listened carefully to the
statement of Ms. Furaha on behalf of civil society.
Peace, stability and the political process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has attracted the
attention of the international community, particularly
that of the countries of the region. Lately, the situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo has been
generally stable, and the preparations for the general
elections are progressing steadily. The Security Council
should fully recognize and support the elections and
provide constructive assistance to the country. The
forthcoming general elections constitute a critical step
in the political process of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The electoral support provided by the
international community should respect the genuine
needs of the country and correspond to the real situation
on the ground.
China has always believed that a political solution
is the only way to resolve the issues of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The Security Council should
continue to support the African Union, the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region and other
regional and subregional organizations, as well as
countries in the region, by playing a leading role in
mediation and by encouraging those organizations and
countries to enhance communication and engagement
with Congolese parties through their respective
channels. In particular, the focus should be on listening
to the views of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and respecting its ownership of
the political process, while also encouraging all parties
to take concrete actions to return to a path of political
settlement through dialogue and consultations and on
effectively implementing the political agreement of
31 December 2016.
While providing assistance to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the international community
should ensure that its sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity are fully respected. We should help
the country to strengthen its own security capabilities
so that it can achieve peace and stability independently.
18-26814

27/08/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
should function strictly in accordance with its mandate
and strengthen consultations with the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
China has always played an active and constructive
role with regard to matters concerning peace and
security in Africa and has always supported African
countries in seeking African solutions to African
issues. The 2018 Forum on China-Africa Cooperation
summit will be held in Beijing on 3 and 4 September
under the theme “Towards an even stronger community
with a shared future through win-win cooperation”.
Leaders from China and African countries will meet
in Beijing to discuss plans for future cooperation and
to propose new measures to strengthen comprehensive
cooperation between China and Africa.
China has always supported the peace process in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and has actively
participated in peacekeeping operations there. We
have also provided humanitarian assistance, including
medicine and food, to the country and have actively
participated in its socioeconomic development. China
stands ready to work with the international community
to continue to play a constructive role in achieving
peace, stability and development in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to begin
by extending my thanks to the briefers: the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Leila
Zerrougui; Monseigneur Marcel Utembi, President of
the Conférence épiscopale nationale du Congo; and
Ms. Solange Lwashiga Furaha, spokesperson for Rien
Sans Les Femmes, for their informative briefings.

S/PV. 8331

the electoral process are crucial to ensuring equal the
representation of women and men in decision-taking
at all levels in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In that regard, we commend the efforts of Rien Sans
Les Femme aimed at ensuring the broadest possible
participation of women in the upcoming elections and
at supporting female candidates.
Poland also reiterates its call for the peaceful and
timely transfer of power in January 2019, as set out
in the electoral calendar and in accordance with the
Congolese Constitution.
We strongly believe that the effective
implementation of the December agreement, including
confidence-building measures, as well as compliance
with the electoral timeline, is essential to a peaceful
and credible electoral process. Respect for fundamental
human rights, including freedom of expression and
freedom of peaceful assembly, is crucial to a democratic
transition of power and the peace and stability of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It goes without
saying that the political situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has a significant impact on the
stability of Central and sub-Saharan Africa. A peaceful
and developing Congo could provide a huge boost to the
whole continent.
Finally, let me reiterate our full support to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as to the
men and women of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

The election process in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is entering its final phase. In that regard, we
welcome President Joseph Kabila Kabange’s decision
to respect the Constitution of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and to step down at the end of the year.

Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): Allow me to begin
by thanking the briefers for their comprehensive
update on the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We commend their tireless efforts, and
we express our full support for their challenging and
important tasks ahead of the 23 December presidential,
legislative and provincial elections.

The timely holding of the elections is crucial to
ensuring the stabilization of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We therefore call on the Government,
the Independent National Electoral Commission and
all stakeholders to work together towards the holding
of elections in December, with full respect for the
Constitution and the 31 December 2016 agreement.
Close cooperation with civil society, in particular
women’s representatives, and women’s involvement in

We welcome the progress made in the technical
preparations of those elections. The registration of
candidates was an important milestone, and we note
the list of approved presidential and parliamentary
candidates presented by the Independent National
Electoral Commission over the weekend. The
announcement by President Kabila Kabange that he
intends to abide by the Constitution and not to seek
another term is particularly welcome.

18-2681413/20

S/PV.8331

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The remaining technical challenges must now be
addressed in a timely manner. In that regard, efforts
to ensure women’s full and equal participation in
the political processes must be stepped up. It was
disappointing that only a small number of women
were registered as candidates for the provincial and
legislative elections. While lessons for the future
should be drawn from that failure, we now need to
focus on supporting the candidates who are registered
and on providing conditions that allow for women to
actively participate in the process ahead and to cast
their votes in a free and secure manner on election
day. Such efforts should include support, encourage
women in the voter registration process and guarantee
voting free from pressure, such as ensuring individual
access to voting cards, informing individuals of their
voting rights and guaranteeing safe access to polling
stations. With regard to supporting women candidates,
initiatives should be supported so as to prevent sexual
attacks, sexual harassment and gender-based sabotage
of the campaigns of women candidates. To that end,
we encourage the authorities and the United Nations
to coordinate closely with the relevant civil society
organizations, including in order to better understand
the issues as they arise and to make sure that citizens
are well informed.
Technical preparations are not enough to secure
free, fair and credible elections. The current security
situation, with the continued high levels of violence,
including sexual and gender-based violence, and other
human rights violations and abuses, must also be
addressed. There is an urgent need to ensure the opening
of political space for parties and civil society and to
respect freedom of speech and peaceful assembly. In
that regard, the implementation of confidence-building
measures, as per the December 2016 agreement, remains
of critical importance. Trust in the electoral process
among all stakeholders will be key to the credibility of
the elections.
The joint communiqué of the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union (AU) and the United
Nations Security Council of July (SC/13430), as well
as the joint communiqué of the AU, the Southern
African Development Community, the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region of Africa and the
United Nations on the Peace and Security Cooperation
Framework, demonstrates the firm international
consensus on the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The message is clear: the world expects the holding of
14/20

27/08/2018

credible and inclusive elections in December, leading to
a democratic and peaceful transfer of power. It is now
important that the Council continue to work closely
and actively with the region to ensure that that common
objective is achieved.
United Nations support to the electoral process is
critical. The continued active engagement of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Zerrougui,
making full use of her good offices, will be essential,
and we should give the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General our full support. We note the
ambitious intentions of the Independent National
Electoral Commission to provide logistics, and
we encourage the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to continue to prepare for assisting the
authorities in that massive undertaking, if needed.
Support from the United Nations should, however,
always be dependent on national efforts so as to ensure
the credibility of the process.
Finally, the Ebola virus outbreak in North Kivu
last week is deeply concerning. As we know, the
security situation in that region is dire, providing a
very complex operating environment for the needed
response. Given that it is also a populous region,
hosting more than 1 million internally displaced
persons, with international borders, it is a situation
that deserves our full attention. We painfully learned
from the outbreak in West Africa in 2014 that such
epidemics can also risk having implications for peace
and security. Sweden has therefore requested an update
by the World Health Organization on the situation in
the Security Council tomorrow, and will continue to
follow the situation closely.
Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): The Plurinational State of Bolivia
is grateful for the briefings by Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), Monsignor Marcel Utembi, President
of the Conférence épiscopale nationale du Congo, and
Ms. Solange Lwashiga Furaha, spokesperson of the civil
society organization Rien Sans Les Femmes, whom we
commend for her work and that of her organization
to ensure the participation of Congolese women at
all levels, in particular their work to ensure women’s
participation in the upcoming elections.
18-26814

27/08/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

We highlight the continued progress and
commitment shown by the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to meeting the deadlines set by the electoral
calendar, in particular with regard to its inclusive work on
candidate registration by formally inviting all political
parties and, subsequently, by opening offices for the
reception and management of candidatures. In that
regard, we hope that all legally qualified candidates can
participate in the upcoming elections in a transparent,
credible, inclusive and timely environment conducive
to a peaceful transfer of power.
We commend the Government on providing
additional funds to the Commission électorale nationale
indépendante to enable it to conduct its duties. We also
commend the Commission on coordinating logistical
and operational matters with the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and encourage it
to continue such coordination and training on the use of
voting machines, in particular in remote areas.
The international community must continue
working to strengthen the capacities of the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in order to meet
coordination and logistics challenges in the upcoming
elections, while respecting the country’s sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity. We reiterate
that, for elections to bring about a peaceful transfer
of Government and political tensions to be defused,
parties must implement the confidence-building
measures stipulated in the 2016 New Year’s Eve political
agreement, whose full and effective implementation
we once again advocate. Both the Government and
the opposition must work together in order to make
progress on such measures.
We call on all parties to work together ahead of the
elections, in which the full participation of women and
young people is essential. We must step up our efforts
to ensure that women have a meaningful place in all
political processes, including in the areas of prevention,
negotiation, mediation and peacebuilding. Building
societies that promote gender equality makes peace
processes inclusive and leads to sustainable peace. If
women are not the main actors in such processes, we
will not achieve genuine peace.
We welcome the support of regional organizations,
such as the Economic Community of Central African
States, the African Union and the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa, and of the Special

S/PV. 8331

Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes
Region in preparing for the elections. We encourage
them to continue working together, in close coordination
with the Government. Similarly, we commend the work
of the Southern African Development Community and
MONUSCO, which provide positive support for the
holding of elections. We encourage them to continue
their cooperation with the Commission électorale
nationale indépendante.
We are convinced that the Congolese people and
institutions must make the decisions on the future
of their country. We see that as a decisive factor in
promoting peace, stability and development in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Similarly, we
believe that, in order to achieve structural change,
leading to stability and the strengthening of the rule of
law in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the root
causes of the conflict must be addressed, one of which
is the country’s lack of control over its own natural
resources. The sovereign administration of national
wealth is paramount in order to ensure stability and the
rule of law.
Lastly, we express our solidarity with the victims
of the Ebola outbreak and commend the Congolese
authorities, the international community and the World
Health Organization for their swift response to the
health crisis.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, we would like to thank all today’s
briefers — Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Monseigneur Utembi
and Ms. Furaha — for their valuable briefings.
Today’s meeting follows the announcement of
President Joseph Kabila Kabange of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo that he will not run for
the presidential elections scheduled to be held on
23 December. We welcome that important step and
the other positive steps that were recently made in the
political process, including the registration of candidates
for presidential and legislative elections and the respect
shown by President Kabila for the Constitution and the
New Year’s Eve political agreement.
Given the recent positive steps taken in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo during this month,
and nearly four months ahead of the presidential
elections, which we hope will be held on time and
without delay, we would like to take the opportunity
of today’s meeting to reiterate the content of the press
statement issued by the Security Council (SC/13455)

18-2681415/20

S/PV.8331

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

on 13 August. The press statement underscored the
importance of a commitment by all the Congolese
political actors and the institutions responsible for
organizing the elections to prepare for the success of
the electoral process, leading to a peaceful transfer
of power, in accordance with the Constitution and the
New Year’s Eve political agreement. The statement also
called on Congolese stakeholders to create the necessary
conditions in order to ensure an environment conducive
to peaceful and inclusive political activities, and to hold
free, fair, transparent and conclusive elections with the
participation of all Congolese during every stage of the
elections. The statement reiterated the importance of
taking measures to help confidence-building and respect
for the fundamental rights and the elections timetable.
In the light of such preparations by the Congolese
Government and the Commission électorale nationale
indépendante, we encourage them to request the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to provide logistical
and technical support, especially since the Government
intends to use electronic voting on the election day for
the first time.
I would like to underscore the importance of the
commitment to the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. It is a large country with a large population
and very rich in natural resources. It is the heart of
the African continent and the neighbouring countries.
Its security and political stability has undoubtedly an
impact on that of the neighbouring countries and the
whole region.
Finally, working closely with the African Union, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
the Southern African Development Community and
other main organizations and regional stakeholders
would contribute to the implementation of the New
Year’s Eve political agreement and the success of the
upcoming electoral process.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea)
(spoke in Spanish): We thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Leila Zerrougui for her
comprehensive briefing and ongoing efforts as Head
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We also thank
Monseigneur Marcel Utembi, President of the National
Episcopal Conference of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, and Ms. Solange Furaha, Spokesperson of
16/20

27/08/2018

civil society organization Rien Sans les Femmes, for
their respective updates on the current situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in particular
preparations for the December elections.
I am honoured to make this statement on behalf
of the three African countries represented on the
Security Council, whose group Equatorial Guinea is
currently coordinating.
We all agree that the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is at a critical juncture. While reaffirming the
sovereignty of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, its institutions, leadership of
the electoral process and ultimate responsibility to
conduct the process effectively, the Security Council
must closely follow developments in the country with a
view to preparing for successful elections in December.
We welcome the recent milestones and successes,
including the peaceful completion of voter registration,
the appointment of members of the Constitutional
Court and the establishment of additional provincial
appellate courts where they did not previously exist.
The finalization of the registration of candidates for
the next presidential elections is already a historic
achievement. In that regard, we would like to express
our appreciation to President Joseph Kabila Kabange
for his contribution to the successful conclusion of
the registration of candidates for the presidential
elections in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We recommend that the remaining challenges related
to confidence-building measures be addressed by the
relevant institutions and authorities of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo as soon as possible.
We note with concern the small number of registered
female candidates — only 12 per cent — and hope that
they will receive the necessary support in the run-up
to the elections to ensure meaningful participation by
women in the country’s political system. As we all know,
the success of the elections in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo will depend upon the inclusiveness of the
electoral process and on the commitment of all political
stakeholders, whom we urge to reject all forms of
violence and exercise the utmost restraint and refrain
from provocative actions to avoid escalating tensions.
We therefore recommend that the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and all relevant
actors work in a spirit of cooperation and commitment
to ensure a historic moment that leads to the first
peaceful transfer of political power in the country.
18-26814

27/08/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Congolese actors must set common and well-deserved
goals to move the country forward.
In that spirit, the ability of the Independent
National Electoral Commission to meet the electoral
calendar will remain a priority to ensure a peaceful,
credible and transparent electoral process. That is a
critical and determining factor in ensuring positive
results that will lead to a democratic transfer of political
power in the Democratic Republic of Congo, and no
efforts should be spared in implementing the electoral
calendar. Measures, including by the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), will need to be
taken against all spoilers or negative forces whose
actions threaten the implementation of the New Year’s
Eve agreement and the holding of elections. In the
meantime, the most important factor in preparing for
the elections is the implementation of the agreement,
which is the only viable means of easing tensions.
We therefore once again call on the Government,
stakeholders and national actors to continue their
efforts to create conditions conducive to the holding
of credible and peaceful elections on the basis of the
Constitution of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the New Year’s Eve agreement.
With regard to funding and logistical and technical
support for the elections, all needs must be met through
actions by the institutions of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. In that regard, the doubts about the use
of the voting machines and all related issues, including
transport, staff training and energy supplies, must be
laid to rest at the appropriate time. We hope that will
include the timely use of logistical support available
from MONUSCO scheduled for 26 July 2018. We hope
that the Congolese authorities will make use of the
appropriate facilities that can contribute to the successful
organization of credible and transparent elections.
We emphasize that an appropriate environment
must be in place in order for the elections to be
held successfully. Therefore, the adoption and
implementation of confidence-building measures are
essential. In that regard, we are concerned about the
continuing discrepancies with regard to the operation
and use of voting machines and electoral lists. Those
and other differences could undermine and seriously
damage the credibility of the whole electoral process,
if those issues are not addressed properly with due
seriousness during the pre-election period. The
consequences could be catastrophic given the possible

S/PV. 8331

post-electoral scenarios. It is therefore imperative to
adopt preventive and support measures to ensure the
building and strengthening of lasting peace in the
country. The Commission must carry out awarenessraising campaigns aimed at all stakeholders and public
opinion in order to build confidence with regard to
those machines.
Addressing the problem of the a lack of tangible
progress in the implementation of confidence-building
measures, as reflected in the Secretary-General’s
update (S/2018/762, annex), is a necessary condition for
the success of the elections. There is already a precedent
in which the Commission and the political parties have
engaged in a constructive dialogue. While we commend
those initiatives, we would like to encourage all actors
to follow the same path in addressing future challenges.
Activities in the coming months will be of crucial
importance for the final preparations for the 2018
elections. It is essential that all Congolese parties make
the necessary commitments to preserve the ongoing
dialogue and consensus to facilitate the peaceful
holding of elections. In that regard, it is important that
the Council send a clear and unified message to all
Congolese political actors.
It is also imperative that we emphasize the need
for better coordination among the United Nations, the
African Union, the Southern African Development
Community, the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region and other international and regional
partners to ensure more coherent and effective support
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Council’s
next visit to the country, which is scheduled for October
is a very welcome initiative. We trust that the African
Union Peace and Security Council will participate in
that visit.
Peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
will not be possible if we do not examine the reasons
that have led to this situation, such as the thorny issue
of the financing of different armed groups active in the
country, which has led this immense, beautiful and rich
country to go through very difficult situations. The
country’s resources must be used for the development
of its immense potential and for the benefit of its people.
With regard to Ebola, approximately six weeks ago,
we were relieved to hear that the most recent pandemic
had been brought under control. A new outbreak has
just been announced, and we therefore express our
concern and wish that it will be quickly and effectively

18-2681417/20

S/PV.8331

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

brought under control and that this situation does
not have an impact on either the preparations or the
elections themselves.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity.
I too would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Zerrougui, Monseigneur
Utembi and Ms. Furaha for their really helpful
briefings. I think the whole Council has benefited from
being able to hear from them. I also thank the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) for all
the work it does to try to bring peace and stability to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
I just wanted to say that I think that, at this crucial
time, it is important that the Security Council receive
information from key players. We are therefore, like
others, disappointed that the Independent National
Electoral Commission of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo was unable to join this briefing.
We very much share the concern about women’s
participation, which the representatives of Bolivia and
Equatorial Guinea, in particular, set out so clearly after
Ms. Furaha’s briefing. We have noted the continuing
progress on the electoral calendar, the closure of the
application process for presidential candidates and the
confirmation that President Kabila Kabange will not
run for a third term. As others have said, that is a critical
step forward, and it will help ensure that credible and
inclusive elections in December lead to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo’s first-ever democratic and
peaceful transition of power. That is an immense prize,
but it is still a vulnerable one.
Ambassador Haley set out forcibly how we are still
four months from elections and there is a long way
to go. This about more than the timeline; it is about
creating the conditions for free and fair elections. We
join others in calling on the Government to implement
the New Year’s Eve agreement in full, and that includes
the confidence-building measures, to demonstrate its
credibility and potential for government. We also look
to the opposition to engage constructively. The electoral
process should be transparent and proactively address
the concerns of Congolese civil society. I would like to
make three points in that regard.
First, we call on the Independent National Electoral
Commission to clarify election protocols to enable
18/20

27/08/2018

effective observation and to address concerns around
the electoral register and the voting machines. Many
representatives today have set out those difficulties in
full and we endorse their concerns.
Secondly, we note that the Commission has
refused logistical assistance from the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) to organize the
elections, and we therefore urge the Commission to
clarify its logistical plan or to accept MONUSCO’s
assistance urgently.
Thirdly, inclusivity is a vital element in building
trust in elections. We note with concern the lack of
confidence of several opposition parties in the electoral
process following the release of the provisional list
of presidential candidates. Elections need to be fully
inclusive and they need to see the engagement of all the
Congolese people.
It is clear that the Democratic Republic of the Congo
faces many challenges and those have had a devastating
effect upon the population. A number of speakers today
referred to the violations of human rights across the
country, the link between political uncertainty and
instability and the other drivers of violence, which
the ongoing Ebola crisis risks exacerbating. We share
those concerns and hope that they can be addressed.
I call again for the New Year’s Eve agreement to be
implemented fully. Delays in elections and a lack of
public trust only risk further violence. That will have
an effect not just on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo but risks destabilizing the wider region too.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Gata Mavita Wa Lufuta (Democratic
Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): As your
presidency of the Security Council comes to an end,
Madam President, allow me congratulate you on the way
you have conducted the meetings during the month and
thank you for taking the initiative to organize today’s
meeting, which addresses the evolution of the electoral
process in my country, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. I would also like to take this opportunity to
express my delegation’s thanks to the members of the
Security Council for the ongoing interest and support
they have always shown the situation in my country.
18-26814

27/08/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

After having followed the various statements of
the speakers who preceded me, it seems important
to me, on behalf of my Government, to express our
understanding of the situation that is the subject of our
discussions. Before continuing my remarks, I would
like to apologize for the absence of the President of
the Independent National Electoral Commission, who,
because of his busy schedule, could not be here today.
To return to our topic of the day, as we reported last
month before the Council (see S/PV.8318), the electoral
process has evolved sufficiently. As of today, the
deadline to submit candidatures has passed. It should be
noted in that regard that the Commission received 19,437
applications for the provincial elections, 15,222 for the
legislative elections and 25 for the presidential election.
With particular regard to the presidential election, as
those present have followed, His Excellency Mr. Joseph
Kabila Kabange, President of the Republic, has kept
his word, thereby complying with the declaration to
respect the Constitution of the country that he made
well before the beginning of the electoral process and
has maintained throughout the process.
After the submission of various applications for
candidature, the Commission, in accordance with the
law, proceeded to review them, after which the files
of those candidates who did not meet the eligibility
conditions prescribed by law were declared inadmissible.
Speaking of only the case of the presidential election,
out of the 25 applications registered by the Independent
National Electoral Commission, six were not selected.
As members of the Council can see, the process has
reached cruising speed and is nearing its point of arrival.
Despite the enormous and valuable efforts by the
Government and the Commission to obtain the results
achieved today, some continue to be sceptical and ask
questions, five of which seem particularly important to
me and deserve a clarification from our part. Those are
questions regarding the voting machines, the 6 million
potential voters registered without fingerprints, the
financing of the elections, logistics and the easing of
the political climate.
As far as the voting machines is concerned, the
Commission is aware of the apprehensions that have
been raised by some. The Congolese themselves have
also raised them. In order to bolster confidence and
dispel any doubts, the Commission has undertaken an
outreach and awareness-raising campaign on the use
of such machines for several months. The campaign,

S/PV. 8331

which began with opposition and majority political
parties, as well as civil society, continues today in the
outlying regions with the rural populations. As we
already pointed out to the Council on 26 July, although
wrongly called “voting machine”, it will not vote in the
place of the voter. Its role is to print the ballot that the
voter will put into the ballot boxes. In any case, my
delegation reassures the Council that remains open
and will deliver all the information that the Council
would like on the technical aspects related to the use
of the machines.
With regard to the 6 million voters registered
without fingerprints, the International Organization
of la Francophonie (IOF), which carried out the
audit of the electoral register and noted the situation,
made recommendations to improve registration. is
working to that end. It is also important to note that
the International Organization of the Francophonie
emphasized in its conclusions that this situation does
not call into question the status of the persons concerned
as voters. In that regard, the International Organization
of la Francophonie states in its conclusions that
“The presence of 16.6 per cent of voters without
fingerprints throughout the national territory does
not, however, call into question their status as
voters, in accordance with the law.”
It is important to underline here that the audit carried
out by IOF demonstrates the will of the Government
and the Commission to ensure the transparency of the
process for credible elections.
With regard to election financing and logistics,
the Government is determined to continue its efforts
to make sure that the process takes place on time and
to use only funding from the country itself. As we
have always stressed, our country remains open to the
contributions of other partners, provided that they are
without conditions and are respectful of our sovereignty.
Finally, with regard to the easing of the political
climate, so as not to go back to the explanations already
given in previous statements, it seems important
to summarize by saying that the Government has
already taken a series of measures to respond to
requirements formulated in the 2016 New Year’s Eve
political agreement in relation to the release of political
prisoners. Those who were part of that category have
actually been released. The pending cases, so-called
emblematic, which we have also often mentioned

18-2681419/20

S/PV.8331

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

27/08/2018

before members of the Council, concern people who
have committed common law offenses.

of international partners. In that regard, my delegation
would like to note the following points.

Members will agree with us that the public
authorities, who are supposed to protect the weakest
and promote the rule of law and the equality of citizens
before the courts, cannot interfere in that kind of
situation without violating the Constitution by creating
a double standard of justice in the country.

The electoral process in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo has been negatively affected to a great degree
by many instances of outside interference — a situation
that continues until this day. That state of affairs has
hardly moved the process forward and has, among other
things, resulted in the postponement of elections, which
unfortunately was blamed on a single person — President
Kabila. The process has also suffered from the
no-confidence crisis fuelled by suspicions instilled in
the Congolese people, whereby they doubted themselves
and became sceptical of the solemn promise made
by the Head of State to respect the Constitution. My
delegation believes that the international community,
which bears its share of responsibility for that situation,
must adopt measured and deliberate language to
help dispel the crisis at the process’ current stage.
The results achieved by the Commission so far must
motivate us to trust that institution and allow it to
complete its task, while avoiding interference in its
work for reasons that pertain more to speculation than
reality. Constructive contributions aimed at improving
the process are welcome. They must be done in mutual
respect among partners.

I would be remiss were I to conclude on this
point without coming back to challenges involving
those candidates whose candidacies were invalidated.
My delegation would like to inform the Council that
elections in every country throughout the world are
conducted based on an electoral law, which determines
the criteria that candidates must meet. The same
applies to the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It
is therefore natural that candidates who have not met
the prerequisite legal conditions may not run. As some
Council members acknowledged, such candidates can
file an appeal from now until 19 September before
the relevant Court to restore their rights. Should their
appeals be rejected, however, my Government would be
grateful it the Council and the international community
would ask the unfortunate candidates to accept the law
to its full extent, the country’s laws and the Constitution,
as President Kabila has done.
The Congolese people are looking forward to the
holding of elections, which, as members know, will
take place on 23 December. The Government and
the Commission are working to ensure that they are
conducted smoothly, transparently and peacefully. That
goal can be achieved only with the commitment of all
political actors — of every stripe — who must refrain
from any type of rhetoric or behaviour that could
lead to tensions or public disorder. The Government
therefore expects all political actors in the country to
support that process constructively through positive
actions. The Government expects the same behaviour

20/20

Lastly, since the fulfilment of the promise made by
the Head of State to respect the Constitution, the political
situation in the country, as well as at the international
level, is enjoying a period of respite. Our wish is to see
the situation continue so as to allow, for the first time
in the history of our country, a peaceful transition of
power at the highest level of the Congolese State. From
that perspective, the Congolese Government and people
also are also counting on the United Nations, especially
the Security Council, the mission of which is to ensure
international peace and security.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

18-26814
