S/2020/1074

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
2 November 2020
Original: English

Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2391
(2017), in which the Council requested me, in close coordination with the members
of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G5 Sahel) – Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali, Mauritania
and the Niger – and the African Union, to report on the activities of the Joint Force
of the Group of Five for the Sahel and the support provided by the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) in this
regard. Following a thorough review of the support model conducted in April 2020,
the Security Council adopted resolution 2531 (2020), renewing the mandate of
MINUSMA and recommending enhanced support of the Mission to the Joint Force.
2.
The report provides an update on progress made in the operationalization of the
Joint Force since my report of 8 May 2020 (S/2020/373), including international
support for the Force and implementation of the technical agreement signed between
the United Nations, the European Union and G5 Sahel States in February 2018. The
report also highlights the challenges encountered by the Force and the implementation
by the G5 Sahel States of a human rights and international humanitarian law
compliance framework.
3.
The reporting period was marked by repeated complex terrorist attacks on
positions of the defence and security forces in the region, suggesting well-coordinated
operational and logistical connections between terrorist groups operating broadly in
the Sahel, from Mauritania to the Lake Chad basin. The Jama'a Nusrat ul-Islam wa
al-Muslimin, affiliated with Al-Qaida, reclaimed territory from Islamic State in the
Greater Sahara, expanding its influence from central Mali to eastern Burkina Faso
and along the Mali-Niger border, while many parts of the Niger continue to be a focus
in the regional power struggle among different groups.
4.
The intensification of intercommunal conflicts, often instrumentalized by local
armed groups and terrorist groups, further complicated the security situation in the
areas of operation of the Joint Force. Civilian populations are often caught between
armed groups, intercommunal violence and military operations, causing
displacements and restrictions of movement, all severely affecting access to services,
livelihoods and assistance. The humanitarian situation in the Sahel is rapidly and
significantly deteriorating. In 2020, a new record high of 31.4 million Sahelians
required assistance and protection. More people than ever before have had to flee

20-14088 (E)

061120

*2014088*

S/2020/1074

their homes. Across the region, 5 million people were uprooted, 2 million people more
than in 2018 and five times more than in 2012. The Sahel faces unprecedented levels
of food insecurity. More than 14 million people are struggling with crisis or
emergency levels of food insecurity during the lean season, the highest level since the
beginning of the Sahel crisis in 2011. Conflict is severely affecting livelihoods,
markets and access to food.

II. Operationalization of the Joint Force
5.
According to the Joint Force, at present the security situation remains relatively
calm in the northern part of Sector West, along Mali’s border with Mauritania. The
situation, however, remains volatile in the southern part of the Sector. Complex
attacks against the Joint Force in that area, particularly in Bouka Were on 14 June,
point to increased terrorist operations. There is concern regarding the regrouping of
terrorist elements along the border in Ouagadou forest.
6.
Attacks continued in the Lake Chad area, where a Boko Haram faction, Islamic
State West Africa Province, remains a threat to north -east Nigeria and neighbouring
countries, including Chad and the Niger. In the northern part of Sector East, the two
battalions of the Joint Force located in Madama and Wour to protect the Libyan border
area, regularly confronted traffickers of weapons, drugs, gold and irregular migra nts.
7.
In Sector Centre, particularly in the Liptako-Gourma area, where the borders of
Burkina Faso, Mali, and the Niger converge, the Joint Force reported decreased
terrorist activities following several operations. Terrorists appear to have focused
their actions further west, towards Côte D’Ivoire and areas of the border between
Burkina Faso and the Niger. The continued competition between Islamic State in the
Greater Sahara and the Jama'a Nusrat ul-Islam wa al-Muslimin over illicit trafficking
routes in central Mali continued to negatively affect the security of civilians in the
Liptako-Gourma area, including attacks on high-value targets including humanitarian
workers and notabilities. Also, extortions, robberies, catt le rustling and looting did
not decrease.

A.

Military component
8.
During the previous and current reporting periods, two operations were
conducted in Sector Centre, in coordination with Operation Barkhane led by France,
aimed at improving the security situation, namely Operation Sama 1 and Operation
Sama 2, launched on 3 March and 1 August 2020, respectively. Operation Sama 1
ended on 31 July and was positively assessed by the Joint Force leadership, having
resulted in significant losses registered by terrorist armed groups, including the
abandonment of equipment such as motorbikes, fuel, weapons and radios. Following
the 18 August 2020 military coup in Mali, the decision of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) not to impose embargo m easures on military
operations in the context of sanctions, allowed for continuity of Joint Force
operations. Operation Sama 2 is expected to last six months, until the end of January
2021. During the eighth ordinary session of the G5 Sahel Council of Mini sters, held
on 5 October in Nouakchott, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Chad announced the
deployment of a Chadian battalion to participate in Operation Sama 2.
9.
According to the Joint Force command, the operations that have been
undertaken to date, have helped to create the conditions that would allow for the
progressive return of national armed forces and local authorities. The pressure placed
on terrorist groups has led to a decrease in their stranglehold on vulnerable
populations and contributed to the stabilization of the security situation in areas of

2/11

20-14088

S/2020/1074

Joint Force operations. So far, the joint operations have resulted in the neutralization
or arrest of terrorists and traffickers, the seizure or destruction of assets (including
vehicles, weapons and ammunition), as well as the destruction of logistical depots
and facilities used to produce improvised explosive devices.
10. Joint Force units have acquired additional practical experience and efficiency in
their operations, in particular in coordination and responsiveness. The completion and
handover, on 3 June, by MINUSMA to the Joint Force of the facilities for the Joint
Force temporary command post in Senou, in the outskirts of Bamako, greatly
enhanced the ability of the Joint Force to operate more efficiently, notably ensuring
an improvement in its planning and operational tasks.
11. The Joint Force and partners, such as Operation Barkhane, the Malian Defence
and Security Forces and MINUSMA, enhanced their coordination through joint
meetings and bilateral exchanges. On 27 July, the Instance de coordination militaire
au Mali held a meeting between the commanders of the main security forces operating
in Mali. Furthermore, operational coordination meetings have been organized on a
monthly basis to share assessments between all partner forces. The last such meeting
was organized by the European Union Training Mission in Mali on 1 October. The
coordination of efforts allowed for a more visible presence of defence and security
forces on the ground, as well as increased pressure on terrorist groups.
12. On 29 September, the G5 Sahel, the European Union and MINUSMA held a
tripartite coordination meeting to discuss, among other issues, the implementation of
the provisions in Security Council resolution 2531 (2020) concerning support for the
Joint Force, particularly its new aspects, inter alia, allowing for the delivery of life
support consumables through the United Nations procurement process, in
consultation with the G5 Sahel executive secretariat, at locations agreed upon by the
Joint Force and MINUSMA. The tripartite meeting offered an opportunity to discuss
ongoing assistance and stressed the need for additional funding to operationalize the
delivery of support to the Joint Force through the United Nations procurement
process. There was an agreement on the importance of enhanced cooperation and
information exchange to allow a full application of the human rights due diligence
policy.

B.

Police component
13. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) continued to support
the G5 Sahel Security Cooperation Platform, through a series of online weekly
meetings, with the aim of strengthening and streamlining intelligence -sharing with
the police component.
14. In close coordination with UNODC and the European Union capacity -building
mission in Mali, EUCAP Sahel Mali, MINUSMA police continued to provide training
and technical operational support to further strengthen the Specialized Investig ation
Brigade on Terrorism and Transnational Organized Crime. In order to strengthen
accountability of the Joint Force, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) supported the elaboration of two
instructions on internal investigations and commenced the planning and development
of a human rights training plan and modules for the Joint Force police component in
coordination with all technical partners. Joint field visits by OHCHR, Joint Force
headquarters and magistrates of the five judicial authorities, were undertaken to
Burkina Faso, the Niger and Mauritania (from 28 September–2 October, 5–12 October
and 12–16 October, respectively), in order to sensitize provost corps and military
officers on human rights violations and the conduct of internal investigations. Similar

20-14088

3/11

S/2020/1074

visits planned to Mali and Chad in October 2020, have been rescheduled for early
2021, owing to troop rotations.
15. Through its Instrument contributing to Stability and Peace, the European Union
contributes 18 million euros to the operationalization of the police component of the
Joint Force. This contribution is aimed at supporting Specialized Investigative Units
in the five countries, by offering training and equipment, and supports coordination
at regional level through the G5 Sahel executive secretariat.
16. In addition to the life support consumables provided by MINUSMA, during the
month of April, at the request of the Joint Force, UNODC procured personal
protective equipment (PPE) for the Joint Force to use in order to ensure continuity of
operations in the context of coronavirus disease (COVID -19) prevention throughout
the reporting period.

C.

G5 Sahel executive secretariat
17. Following the 18 August coup in Mali, the G5 Sahel Executive Secretary, on
behalf of the President of Mauritania and current Chair of the G5 Sahel, Mohamed
Ould Cheikh Ghazouani, led a delegation to Bamako on 22 August to engage with the
Joint Force Command Headquarters, ECOWAS and the leaders of the Comité national
pour le salut du peuple, to call for continuity of Joint Force operations. Subsequently,
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mauritania, Ishmael Cheikh, conducted a follow up mission to Bamako to further stress the need to prevent a spillover of violence
across the Malian border with Mauritania, while highlighting the need for the Joint
Force to abide by human rights principles in the conduct of counter-terrorism
operations.
18. During the reporting period, the executive secretariat of the G5 Sahe l continued
to support the operationalization of the Joint Force through the Comité de soutien de
la Force Conjointe du G5 Sahel. The executive secretariat supervised the acquisition
of logistics for the Force, in particular transport assets, by liaising w ith Member States
to ensure conformity with national procurement rules. The Executive Secretariat also
continued to lead advocacy for contributions towards the G5 Sahel Joint Force trust
fund.
19. On 27 July, the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of France an d the G5 Sahel held a
meeting to discuss further steps in the operationalization of the international coalition
for the Sahel, notably the establishment of its secretariat and that of the office of a
High Representative, in close collaboration with the G5 Sahel executive secretariat.

D.

Issues and challenges
20. The onset of the rainy season (June-September) contributed to a temporary
pause in the process of renewing Joint Force battalions with fresh troops, which
hampered military activities by limiting the mobility of troops and constraining
logistical capacities. Many areas of operation became almost inaccessible by road
during the rainy season. During this period, the Joint Force faced challenges in
providing supplies to its troops, a problem worsen ed by a lack of suitable means of
transport. Nonetheless, according to Joint Force leadership, as the rainy season neared
its end there were signs of high morale among troops and the Joint Force command,
as they focused on plans to relaunch their operation s.
21. More generally, equipment shortfalls remained a daily preoccupation that
constrained the efficiency and operations of troops deployed in garrisons, as well as

4/11

20-14088

S/2020/1074

affecting morale. The resulting limitation of mobility slowed or delayed operations
on the ground and made coordination between security partners more complex.
22. As a consequence, terrorist activities decreased in the Mali-Niger-Burkina Faso
borders, in addition to a decrease in the presence of transnational organized criminal
elements in the Niger-Libya-Chad borders. There was, however, a resurgence of
armed groups in Sector West and continued attacks in central Mali, coupled with the
persistence of intracommunity violence, undermined the gains achieved during the
first half of 2020.
23. Cooperation among security partners was pursued and strengthened.
MINUSMA’s uninterrupted and responsive operational and logistic support to the
Joint Force, including during the rainy season, remained essential to the Force’s
operations, especially in Sector Centre.

III. Implementation of the human rights and international
humanitarian law compliance framework of the Joint Force
and the human rights due diligence policy
24. The human rights due diligence policy sets forth and enforces the conditions for
the delivery of support to non-United Nations security forces, while the human rights
and humanitarian law compliance framework establishes a technical cooperation
framework allowing OHCHR and other partners to help the Joint Force to integrate
human rights and international humanitarian laws norms and principles into the
planning and conduct of military operations. Both are thus complementary, and during
the reporting period the Joint Force has made significant strides in the implementation
of the compliance framework, despite restrictions related to COVID -19 prevention
measures.
25. Within the framework of the human rights due diligence policy, MINUSMA and
OHCHR continued to monitor the human rights situation in relation to counterterrorism operations conducted by the Joint Force in the five countries. On 15 June,
MINUSMA shared with the Joint Force a list of five possible cases of serious human
rights violations allegedly committed by the battalion operating in Bo ulikessi, Mali.
The incidents occurred in the localities of Kobou (30 km west of Boulikessi) on
13 March, Pogol-N’daki (7 km north of Boulikessi) on 14 March and 21 March,
Tchiofol Boulmoutaka (7 km west of Boulikessi) on 19 March and Toussougou (8 km
south of Boulikessi) on 24 March and involved the alleged killing, in some cases the
possible extrajudicial executions, of 47 civilians, including 3 women. In its response
to MINUSMA, dated 2 July, the Commander of the Joint Force took note of the list
of cases and promised prompt internal investigations in conformity with the Joint
Force standard operating procedures on internal investigations.
26. Findings by MINUSMA also document 50 alleged arbitrary executions by
Burkina Faso forces between 26 and 28 May, including one woman in Malian
territory, in the context of counter-terrorism operations conducted jointly with Malian
armed forces. These incidents occurred in the localities of Peoukouye (3 km north of
Boulikessi), Kouroudoli (10 km east of Boulikessi), Kouna (7 km south-east of
Boulikessi) and in Hanfasou (Gossi cercle, Timbuktu region). It remains unclear
whether the Malian and Burkina Faso armed forces acted under the command and
control of the Joint Force or under their respective national military comm ands. This
is owing to, among other reasons, the lack of distinctive insignia for elements who
were serving under the Joint Force at that time, as well as the absence of a fully
operational civilian casualty tracking system and clearly communicated command
responsibilities for alleged human rights violations during operations.

20-14088

5/11

S/2020/1074

27. On 27 June 2020, the Joint Force established an internal mechanism, the
Civilian Casualty and Incident Tracking and Analysis Cell. MINUSMA and OHCHR
along with other partners plan to carry out a series of trainings and workshops to
operationalize the mechanism and to facilitate the future organization of regular
deconfliction exercises between Joint Force operations and those conducted under
national command of each country of the G5 Sahel.
28. On 4 August, MINUSMA and OHCHR procured 9,500 military badges for the
Joint Force, critical to facilitating the identification of all Joint Force personnel in
line with international standards, thus remedying the lack of distinctive insignia
which made distinguishing Joint Force and national army personnel a challenge.
29. MINUSMA and OHCHR continued to follow-up on the case of Joint Force
members accused of killing a civilian on 13 March 2019 during a Joint Force
operation in Nbeiket el Ahouach (Mauritania). The trial is pending.
30. Although several capacity-building activities were curtailed due to the
COVID-19 pandemic, OHCHR organized a remote online training on human rights
and international humanitarian law from 29 June to 3 July for 26 military personnel
through the Sahel Defence College in Mauritania. OHCHR also continued providing
technical advice supporting the revision of key elements in the Joint Force doctrine.
31. Significant progress has been made by the Joint Force in terms of m itigation
measures, primarily as a result of the ongoing establishment of the compliance
framework by the Force, supported by OHCHR. This has included the finalization of
standard operating procedures for internal investigations and the establishment of a
mechanism for identifying, monitoring and analysing harm to civilians.
32. On 17 September, MINUSMA in coordination with EUCAP Sahel Mali
delivered a sensitization session on international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, as well as on conflict-related sexual violence, to 10 gendarmes
from the provost deployed to the Boulikessi battalion. The training took place in
Mopti and focused on the human rights standards applicable in the conduct of counterterrorism operations, including procedures on capture, detention and transfer of
detainees.
33. In addition to its presence in Mali and Mauritania, and in the context of a
relaxation of COVID-19 prevention measures that led to the gradual opening of the
borders across the region, OHCHR has also deployed staff to Chad and the Niger.
This deployment aims at supporting the implementation of the compliance framework
at field level with national actors and the respective Joint Force operational and
tactical commands.
Human rights due diligence policy
34. MINUSMA continued to implement the human rights due diligence policy in its
support to the Joint Force, but challenges remain, including limited progress made by
the Joint Force in implementing key risk-mitigating measures. While there has been
progress since the adoption of the standard operating procedures on internal
investigations on 26 June, and since the setting-up of a mechanism for identifying,
monitoring and analysing harm to civilians, on 27 June, other mitigation measures
have yet to be implemented by the Joint Force.
35. These include the finalization of internal guidelines for the use of provosts
during Joint Force operations, and the preparation of standard operating procedures
on collateral damage. In addition, the Joint Force committ ed to transmit to
MINUSMA the list of battalion commanders for the three sectors, and followed up on
pending internal investigations in collaboration with national authorities for judicial
cases involving members of the Joint Force. Additionally, the Joint Force was
6/11

20-14088

S/2020/1074

requested to keep MINUSMA informed of any incident occurring in the course of
operations with an impact on civilians, as well as all measures taken pursuant to the
standard operating procedures on capture, detention and transfer of suspects, ado pted
by the Joint Force command on 4 March 2019.
36. On 8 September, the Human Rights and Protection Division of MINUSMA
chaired the first legal advisors meeting of the Instance de coordination au Mali ,
comprising personnel from MINUSMA, the Joint Force, the European Union Training
Mission in Mali, and the French forces from Operation Barkhane. The objectives of
the forum included, inter alia, establishing modalities of cooperation between the
international forces operating in Mali and the Human Rights and Protection Division,
exchanging information on incidents affecting the civilian population during military
and counter-terrorism operations, as well as on any corrective measures implemented.

IV. International support for the Joint Force
A.

Support from the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali
37. MINUSMA continued to provide logistical support to the seven battalions
operating under the command of the Joint Force. Between 8 May and 30 September,
the Mission received six requests related to rations and petrol, oil and lubricants. All
requests received during the reporting period were approved and fulfilled, including
within the 14-day response time stipulated by the technical arrangement between the
G5 Sahel, the United Nations and the European Commission, except for two which
required a more extensive human rights due diligence policy assessment.
38. Further to Security Council resolution 2531 (2020) that authorizes MINUSMA
to engage private contractors to deliver life support consumables to Joint Force
contingents operating outside of Malian territory, the Mission began making
appropriate arrangements to implement such support. The Mission held a serie s of
consultations with the Joint Force leadership and the G5 Sahel executive secretariat
to determine needs, desired quantities and suitable drop -off locations in order to help
identify contractors capable of delivering life support consumables closer to the area
of operations of the Joint Force’s contingents in all three sectors, managing associated
security risks. The coup d’état on 18 August in Mali somewhat delayed this process.
On 29 September, the G5 Sahel, the European Union and the United Nations h eld a
tripartite meeting in Nouakchott during which discussions were finalized on the type
of desired rations, locations for delivery, the methodology of the United Nations
procurement process and, most importantly, funding and contractual matters.
Update on requests for life support consumables received by contingents
39. On 31 March 2020, MINUSMA received the Joint Force’s quarterly support plan
for the period from April to June 2020, which included 43,000 combat ration packs
and 644,100 litres of fuel and lubricants, amounting to $1.7 million. The Mission
responded positively to the plan and specific requests, which are subject to human
rights risk assessment and due diligence. So far, MINUSMA has provided 30,500
ration packs and 443,700 litres of fuel and lubricants, valued at $1.2 million, which
represents a collection and consumption rate of 69 per cent of the quarterly support
plan.
40. On 22 June 2020, the Joint Force submitted its quarterly support plan for the
period from July to September 2020. The pick-up locations for the items contained in
the plan and quantities per item are summarized in Table 1 below.

20-14088

7/11

S/2020/1074

Table 1
Pick-up locations and items requested in the quarterly support plan (Jul–Sep)

Location

Combat
ration packs
(packs)

Fuel (l)

Water (l)

Oil 50 (l)

Grease (kg)

Coolant (l)

Bamako

19 000

594 300

–

6 600

780

840

Gao

2 000

30 000

–

1 000

120

120

Sévaré

3 000

–

–

1 000

120

120

24 000

624 300

–

8 600

1 020

1 080

Total

41. The Joint Force also submitted its quarterly support plan to cover the period
from October to December 2020, thus more petroleum, oil and lubricants were added
as detailed in Table 2.
Table 2
Pick-up locations and items requested in the quarterly support plan extension
(Oct–Dec)

Location

Combat
ration packs
(packs)

Fuel (l)

Water (l)

Oil 50 (l)

Grease (kg)

Coolant (l)

Bamako

0

510 600

–

6 000

720

720

Gao

0

0

–

0

0

0

Sévaré

0

88 500

–

1 000

120

120

0

599 100

–

7 000

840

840

Total

Update on engineering support
42. As noted in paragraph 10, the construction of the Joint Force temporary
headquarters was completed during the reporting period. On 3 June, the inauguration
took place in the presence of my Special Representative for Mali, the Head of the
European Delegation in Mali, the Commander of the G5 Sahel Joint Force, and other
partners. The project cost $1.13 million.
Update on casualty and medical evacuation
43. MINUSMA did not receive any request to conduct casualty evacuations during
the reporting period. The last casualty evacuation took place on 30 March 2020 as
indicated in my previous report.
Update on exceptional food delivery
44. In August 2020, the Joint Force requested an exceptional air delivery from
MINUSMA, as access to the Malian Defence and Security Forces camp in Boulikessi
was inundated and the site was therefore not reachable by logistics convoys. The
garrison inside the camp was reported to have very few days left of food. MINUSMA
granted this request by airlifting 4,315 kg of food from Mopti to Boulikessi on
22 August with two Mil Mi-8 medium utility helicopters.

8/11

20-14088

S/2020/1074

Update on the financial situation
45. The European Union has earmarked a total of 10 million euros for MINUSMA
support to the Joint Force. As at 31 August, $4.7 million or 76 per cent of the first
disbursement of 5 million euros ($6.2 million) transferred by the European Union has
been spent. On 12 October, MINUSMA requested the European Union to disburse the
remainder of the original earmarked funds, an additional 5 million euros as per the
terms of the technical arrangement which specifies that a request for disbursement of
the second tranche should be initiated after 70 per cent expenditure of the first
disbursement. As the provisions of Security Council resolution 2531 (2020) are
implemented, including regarding the procurement process for the transport of life
support consumables to the five countries of operation of the Joint F orce, there will
be a need to ensure continued funding. At the time of finalizing the present report, the
disbursement of the second tranche had not yet been effected.
46. Following the tripartite meeting in Nouakchott and the outcome of the technical
working group between MINUSMA, the Joint Force and the European Union, the
Mission estimated that an additional $13.5 million is needed to support the Joint Force
for one year, starting 1 January 2021. About $13.2 million of this amount is for petrol,
oil and lubricants, rations, medical evacuations, casualty evacuations, staff cost and
indirect costs, while $0.3 million will serve as a contingency provision to cover
potential liability fees. The additional disbursement is a necessary requirement in
order for MINUSMA to commence the procurement process.

B.

Multilateral support
47. At the Summit of Heads of State of the Group of Five for the Sahel on 30 June
in Nouakchott, the Heads of State of the five countries, along with the President of
France, committed to intensifying counter-terrorism operations along the tri-State
border areas of the Liptako-Gourma region, while reiterating their commitment to
investigating allegations of human rights violations by security and defence forces,
and ensuring that they adhere to the human rights and international humanitarian law
compliance framework. The Summit called for the consolidation of the Sahel
Coalition, as well as the determination of its institutional and governance architecture,
notably the establishment of its secretariat and the alignment of programme pillars –
the fight against terrorism, capacity-building for Sahelian forces, restoration of state
authority and development assistance – in close collaboration with the G5 Sahel
executive secretariat. On 8 October, a ministerial-level Sahel Coalition meeting took
place to further operationalize the general secretariat of the Sahel Coalition.
48. During the reporting period, UNODC, in partnership with the United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, conducted a legal analysis of the counter-terrorism legislation of Burkina
Faso, Mali and the Niger with the purpose of harmonizing national law with
international legal instruments and obligations.

C.

Regional and sub-regional initiatives
49. The African Union Commission (AUC) engaged with G5 Sahel Member States,
ECOWAS, the Executive Secretary of the G5 Sahel and the African Union Military
Staff Committee on the six-month deployment of the African Union Force of 3,000
troops to complement the efforts of the Joint Force in countering terrorism and violent
extremism in the Sahel region. Consultations have been ongoing be tween the AUC,
the G5 Sahel and ECOWAS on the development of the strategic concept , including
funding mechanisms, and the concept of operations. During a meeting held in Addis

20-14088

9/11

S/2020/1074

Ababa on 30 September, the Peace and Security Council of the African Union
endorsed a strategic concept note and announced the operationalization of a technical
working group assigned with all the tasks related to the planning and deployment of
the 3,000 troops.

V. Support options going forward
50. In its resolution 2531 (2020), the Security Council encourages MINUSMA to
engage and consult with the G5 Sahel executive secretariat on the selection process
for private contractors and encourages MINUSMA to pay attention to local c ontent,
in accordance with United Nations procurement rules and guiding principles. In
addition, the technical arrangement between the G5 Sahel, the European Union and
the United Nations requires the Joint Force to submit quarterly support requests for
life support consumables to be procured by MINUSMA, providing detailed
projections of the required quantities for a period of three months. In the context of
kinetic operations in an asymmetric and frequently changing environment, such
planning assumptions are often subject to change, which renders the provision of life
support consumables by the United Nations challenging at times. The establishment
of thorough and systematic joint planning mechanisms with the Joint Force leadership
has facilitated the process to some extent, although the current support model
provides limited room for more flexibility. Planning larger scale support, to be
delivered by a third party requires even more rigorous planning, as well as predictable
and sustainable funding. The current support model relies entirely on voluntary
contributions by external partners.
51. To continue the current support, resolution 2531 (2020) acknowledges that
additional costs may be incurred when it comes to engaging external contractors for
the delivery of food and fuel. The preliminary assessment by MINUSMA is that the
remaining $7.5 million would be insufficient to cover the cost of projected operations.

VI. Observations
52. The increase in the operational tempo of the Joint Force and the critical
contribution by MINUSMA are encouraging amid seriously concerning security
trends throughout the region. I commend the G5 Sahel for its efforts to address the
current security challenges characterized by regular asymmetric attacks against
national security forces, United Nations peacekeepers, humanitarian workers and
local notabilities. The Joint Force plays a critical role within the regional and
international security response to the activities of extremist armed groups in the
Sahel, along with other cross-border challenges, including trafficking in persons,
goods, weapons and drugs. I welcome the impending deployment of Task Force
Takuba that will advise, assist and accompany conventional combat units of the
Malian army in the fight against terrorist groups in the tri-border area, in coordination
with G5 Sahel partners and other international actors on the ground. In the same vein,
I commend the planned deployment of the African Union Force to complement the
efforts of the Joint Force.
53. I also welcome the enhanced coordination mechanisms that the Coalition for the
Sahel proposes to put into place, which will help all international partners to leverage
their comparative strengths and to work together more effectively to ensure better
efficiency and coordination of integrated initiatives encompassing development,
humanitarian and security dimensions. It is essential that the Joint Force continue to
receive the assistance it requires to carry out its mandated tasks. MINUSMA is
finalizing the support arrangements under the new mandate which will help the Joint
10/11

20-14088

S/2020/1074

Force sustain the momentum achieved to date. I however wish to once again stress
that the current support model does not offer the predictable certainty required to fully
operationalize the Joint Force and I reiterate my call for a more comprehensive model
that ensures sustainable and predictable funding through assessed contributions.
54. I acknowledge the renewed commitment made by the Heads of State of the G5
Sahel and the President of France at their summit in Nouakchott and the assurances
given by the Heads of State of the G5 Sahel that human rights violations in the fight
against terrorism shall not be tolerated. Respect for in ternational human rights and
international humanitarian law during counter-terrorism operations has to be the basis
for the protection of civilians and long-term stability. I therefore welcome the
progress made by the Joint Force towards the establishment of the human rights and
international humanitarian law compliance framework. To be effective, it needs to
promptly be fully operationalized, including its police component and the Provost
components of the national armies. Human rights violations and abuse s allegedly
perpetrated by members of the Joint Force and national forces must be fully
investigated, and those responsible held accountable.
55. To operationalize the compliance framework at the field level, existing
challenges, including financial, logistical and substantive security constraints, must
be overcome in efforts to support Joint Force personnel to conduct in -person internal
investigations into incidents. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights stands ready to lend its support in this regard. Moreover, it is
critical that the Force undertakes its own preliminary investigations and the Force
Commander maintains the capacity to take disciplinary action as appropriate,
including the suspension and/or removal of units implicated in such incidents. Given
the region’s increasingly militarized context, strong accountability will reinforce the
credibility of the Joint Force. Acceptance of the Joint Force at local level is critical
in mitigating risks and accessing populations in need. I urge all parties to the counterterrorism fight to comply with their legal obligation to protect civilians. I reiterate my
plea to non-State armed groups and other stakeholders to uphold their obligations
under international humanitarian law and to ensure unimpeded humanitarian access.
56. Security challenges in the Sahel remain deeply complex. Any initiative to
stabilize the region will be successful only if the root causes of instability are
addressed in a holistic, integrated and comprehensive manner. Underdevelopment,
poverty, the lack of governance and lack of access to basic services and economic
opportunities, exclusion and the effects of climate change must be addressed
simultaneously. The humanitarian situation in the Sahel remains a part icularly deep
concern. Until people’s basic needs are met, long term development and security
initiatives cannot bear fruit. The international community has a moral obligation and
shared responsibility to support the member States of the G5 Sahel in their
commendable efforts to bring peace and sustainable development to the region and to
alleviate the suffering of those who are most in need. I am deeply grateful to all donors
and partners who have so consistently and generously come forward, most recently
during the virtual conference on the humanitarian situation in the Sahel region on
20 October. I also express my deep gratitude to my Special Representative for Mali,
Mahamat Saleh Annadif, and to all MINUSMA colleagues, who continue to spare no
effort to ensure that the Mission provides support to the Joint Force, whenever it is
requested.

20-14088

11/11
