S/2018/419

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
3 May 2018
Original: English

Report of the Security Council mission to Afghanistan,
12–15 January 2018
I. Introduction
1.
In a letter dated 13 November 2017, the President of the Security Council
informed the Secretary-General of the Council’s intention to send a mission to
Afghanistan in January 2018. The terms of reference for the visit were subsequently
approved by the Council (see annex I). The mission, led by Ambassador the
Permanent Representative of Kazakhstan to the United Nations, Kairat Umarov,
comprised representatives of all current members of the Council: Ambassador Sacha
Sergio Llorentty Soliz (Bolivia), Minister Counsellor Shen Bo (China), Ambassador
Bernard Tanoh-Boutchoue (Côte d’Ivoire), Ambassador Anatolio Ndong Mba
(Equatorial Guinea), Ambassador Tekeda Alemu (Ethiopia), Deputy Permanent
Representative Anne Gueguen (France), Ambassador Mansour Ayyad Sh. A. Alotaibi
(Kuwait), Ambassador Karel Jan Gustaaf van Oosterom (Netherlands), Ambassador
Gustavo Meza-Cuadra (Peru), Ambassador Joanna Wronecka (Poland), Deputy
Permanent Representative Vladimir K. Safronkov (Russian Federation), Ambassador
Olof Skoog (Sweden), Deputy Permanent Representative Jonathan Guy Allen (United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland) and Ambassador Nikki R. Haley
(United States of America). The Permanent Representative of Afghanistan to the
United Nations, Ambassador Mahmoud Saikal, joined the mission for parts of its visit.

II. Background
2.
This was the Council’s fifth visit to Afghanistan since 2001, having previously
visited in November 2003, November 2006, November 2008 and June 2010. The
mission left New York on 12 January and concluded its work on 15 January. The
mission met the President of Afghanistan, Mohammad Ashraf Ghani, the Chief
Executive, Abdullah Abdullah, and members of the Cabinet, including the Ministers
of Agriculture, Defence, the Economy, Finance, Foreign Affairs, the Interior, and
Trade and Commerce, and the National Security Adviser and the Director General of
the National Directorate for Security. They also met other key local figures, including:
the Speaker of the Wolesi Jirga (lower house) of the National Assembly, Abdul Rauf
Ibrahimi; the Speaker of the Meshrano Jirga (upper house), Fazal Hadi Muslimyar;
the Chair of the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission; members of
the Independent Electoral Commission and Electoral Complaints Commission;
representatives of civil society organizations; and members of political par ties.
International interlocutors included: the Commander of the Resolute Support Mission

18-07124 (E)

170518

*1807124*

S/2018/419

of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), senior staff of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Afghanistan. All meetings were held in Kabul (see annex II for
the schedule of meetings).
3.
The purpose of the visit was to: underscore that a conflict-free and violence-free
Afghanistan is critical for regional and global peace and s ecurity; underline the
importance of an inclusive, Afghan-led and owned peace process, in which women’s
participation is promoted at all levels, for the long-term prosperity and stability of
Afghanistan; reiterate the Council’s support for the Government and people of
Afghanistan and their efforts to rebuild the country and strengthen the foundations of
sustainable peace and constitutional democracy; underscore the importance of
continued progress with regard to electoral reform and the holding of credible and
inclusive parliamentary elections in 2018 and presidential elections in 2019; express
strong support for UNAMA in fulfilling its mandate as defined in resolution 2344
(2017); review efforts by the Government to address a wide range of interconnected
challenges; identify how the Council can further assist efforts on the ground;
recognize the importance of linking security and development objectives, in order to
achieve durable peace and prosperity in Afghanistan and the wider region; emphasize
the importance of a regional approach to supporting security and prosperity in and
around Afghanistan and underline the Council’s commitment to contributing
constructively in that regard; and recommend greater coor dination between United
Nations agencies and programmes in order to increase the effectiveness of the
assistance provided on the ground, ensure greater transparency in the administration,
including through anti-corruption measures, foster the more effective use of shrinking
development and humanitarian aid and thereby promote a harmonized United Nations
approach in Afghanistan and other Central Asian countries.
4.
The timing of the mission was significant, given the preparations for the second
meeting of the Kabul Process for Peace and Security Cooperation in February 2018,
the district council and parliamentary elections scheduled for 2018 and the open
debate held by the Council on 19 January 2018 on the subject “Building regional
partnership in Afghanistan and Central Asia as a model to link security and
development”.
5.
The mission, which was organized under the presidency of Kazakhstan, the first
Central Asian country to sit as a member of the Security Council, also provided an
opportunity to emphasize the importance of linking security and development
objectives in achieving a durable peace and prosperity in Afghanistan and the wider
region and to underline the Council’s commitment to contributing constructively in
that regard.
6.
The mission emphasized the Council’s continued support for the people of
Afghanistan and the commitment of the international community to stability, peace
and reconciliation and socioeconomic development in the country. It expressed
support for the role of the United Nations in supporting Afghan-led efforts in those
areas and urged the United Nations agencies present in Afghanistan and Central Asia
to improve cooperation among themselves.

III. Key issues
Security situation
7.
The members of the Council voiced concern about the continued security
incidents and indiscriminate attacks on civilians, which had reached record numbers,
the growing presence of Taliban militants and fighters affiliated to Islamic State of

2/15

18-07124

S/2018/419

Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan Province (ISIL-KP), in particular in the north and the
east of the country, and the use of increasingly violent tactics that had the potential to
deepen ethnic and sectarian tensions. The return of foreign terrorist fighters from Iraq
and the Syrian Arab Republic to regroup in Afghanista n represented a challenge, in
addition to concerns about the potential use of the territory of Afghanistan to
destabilize countries in the region.
8.
The Council members expressed support for Mr. Ghani’s efforts to reform the
security sector and for greater international and regional cooperation in countering
transnational terrorism, the movement of foreign terrorist fighters, extremism and
criminal networks, including those involved in drug -trafficking. They also inquired
about security for the forthcoming elections.
9.
Mr. Ghani addressed the drivers of insecurity and outlined measures taken by
his Government to respond to the security challenge. Recalling the political,
economic and security transition of 2014 and subsequent developments, he
emphasized that the Government was prioritizing reform of the security institutions,
in particular the Ministry of Defence and the Ministry of the Interior. Support by the
international community for the Government in its efforts to reform the Ministry of
the Interior would help to lessen the influence of regional strongmen. The security
forces of Afghanistan were the first line of defence for global security. The world
faced an emerging fifth wave of violence, forming a nexus between transnational
terrorism and criminal networks, including drug-traffickers, exacerbated by State
sponsorship of non-State armed groups. That “challenge of our generation” required
a concerted response by the international community, combining military options with
a State-building agenda. The year 2018 could either be the worst of the conflict thus
far or, should the Taliban suffer a strategic loss, lead to gradual engagement in the
peace process.
10. Mr. Abdullah stressed that State-sponsored terrorism in the pursuit of specific
national interests could no longer be tolerated. There was consensus in the national
unity Government on the need to pursue good relations with the country ’s neighbours
and it had reached out to them. Nonetheless, the status quo remained unchanged and
the persons whom the Afghan security forces were fighting lived outside Afghanistan.
The Tehrik-e Taliban Pakistan group, however, might be able to operate from some
Taliban-controlled areas in Afghanistan.
11. In a meeting on security issues attended by a number of senior government
officials, the National Security Adviser, Mohammad Hanif Atmar, said that the
conflict in Afghanistan constituted an evil axis of violent extremism, criminal
networks and State-sponsored terrorism that threatened the wider region. The
situation required a response combining peace and reconciliation efforts among
Afghans, a regional counter-terrorism strategy, efforts to strengthen the Afghan State
and international partnerships. The United States strategy on South Asia was widely
welcomed, as was the support provided to the Afghan National Defence and Security
Forces. The Director General of the National Directorate for Security, Masoom
Stanekzai, provided details regarding the insurgent groups and their tactics. The two
officials said that the Taliban, including the Haqqani Network, had about 30,000 to
35,000 fighters, who were focused primarily on Afghanistan. They had established
links with criminal networks to fund their operations and were responsible for some
98 per cent of the attacks carried out in 2017. A further 7,500 fighters had reportedly
escaped military operations conducted against them in Pakistan and relocated to
Afghanistan, while between 1,200 and 1,700 foreign fighters from groups with links
to Al-Qaida, such as the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan, the Eastern Turkistan
Islamic Movement and Jundullah, had come from neighbouring countries. Those
groups posed a threat to their countries of origin and the wider region.

18-07124

3/15

S/2018/419

12. In addition, around 200 to 400 international terrorists link ed to Al-Qaida and
ISIL were said to be operating in Afghanistan. Mr. Atmar said that fighters affiliated
to the latter’s local branch, ISIL-KP, typically were recruited locally, not in the Syrian
Arab Republic. Around 1,500 to 2,000 Pakistanis, mostly associated with Tehrik-e
Taliban Pakistan, were fighting in the name of ISIL-KP in eastern Afghanistan, in
particular in Nangarhar Province. Around 1,200 to 1,700 fighters had thus far
switched allegiance from the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan and the Easter n
Turkistan Islamic Movement to ISIL-KP in the northern and north-eastern provinces.
Some 2,500 to 3,500 Afghan Taliban had also switched allegiance to ISIL -KP and
moved largely to the north and the north-east. ISIL-KP had been able to take hold in
the eastern part of the country and increase its numbers since 2015 because of the
reduction in military assets and activity, especially air strikes, deployed against them
following the transfer of responsibility for security from the International Security
Assistance Force to the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces. However,
recent joint military operations carried out by the Afghan security forces and
international military forces had resulted in the elimination of top ISIL -KP leaders
and thousands of its fighters or their arrest and extradition to their countries of origin.
The officials acknowledged the challenges facing the Afghan security forces,
especially in terms of air force capabilities, leadership and the high attrition rate.
13. The Minister of the Interior, Wais Ahmad Barmak, provided details of the
Government’s strategy on narcotics and combating transnational drug networks and
about the links between those networks and insurgent groups. He said that, in 2017,
the Taliban had made between $400 million and $500 million from the drugs trade,
compared with $1 billion to $1.5 billion for the drug -trafficking networks, $2 billion
for the Pakistani Taliban and $6 billion for the international mafia.
14. Members of political parties welcomed the United States strategy for South
Asia. They stressed the importance of fully equipping the Afghan security forces, in
addition to providing them with training and advice. The Chair of the Afghanistan
Independent Human Rights Commission, Sima Samar, focused on the impact of the
security situation on access to education and health care, and freedom of association
and speech.
15. The commander of the NATO Resolute Support Mission, General John
Nicholson, provided an overview of the security situation in Afghanistan, the United
States strategy for South Asia and the road map of the Government of Afghanistan
until 2020. He said that improvements in the capabilities and leadership of the Afghan
security forces, in particular in the special forces and the air force, were resulting in
more effective operations. As a result, Anti-government elements had had to lower
their ambitions and adjust their tactics, reverting to suicide and guerrilla -style attacks
that alienated the population. He elaborated on the joint operations against ISIL -KP
by the Afghan security forces and international military forces and outlined elements
of United States counter-terrorism operations. Dismissing as absurd allusions to the
effect that the United States was supporting ISIL-KP, he said that joint operations had
reduced the amount of territory under the group’s control by two thirds. Contact
between ISIL-KP and ISIL in the Syrian Arab Republic, including guidance and
funding, had diminished greatly. ISIL-KP was able to survive only because of
continual new recruitment from the ranks of Tehrik-e Taliban Pakistan. The United
States would maintain the pressure and coordinate closely with Central Asian
countries to prevent spillover.
16. General Nicholson said that military operations were not a solution in
themselves but were conducted in support of an eventual political solution to the
conflict. The Government controlled 64 per cent of the country; the rest was either
contested or controlled by anti-government elements. Once the Government had
regained control of 80 per cent of the territory, the Taliban would have more incentive
4/15

18-07124

S/2018/419

to join peace talks, especially if such talks were accompanied by a crackdown on
sanctuaries. Afghanistan and the surrounding region together accounted for the
highest concentration in the world of terrorist groups, as defined by the United States;
hence the importance of securing Afghanistan and, by extension, “our homelands”.
On cooperation with the Russian Federation, there were three shared interests:
countering terrorism, combating the drugs trade and promoting reconciliation efforts
in Afghanistan. Given that the drugs trade accounted for around 60 per cent of funding
for the insurgency, the United States had begun to targe t drug-trafficking facilities in
Helmand Province.
Peace and reconciliation
17. Council members noted with concern the lack of tangible results in the peace
process with the Taliban and underlined the need for negotiations between them and
the Government. They concurred that there could be no solution to the conflict in
Afghanistan in the absence of a political process and inquired how the Council could
best support such a process. Some members asked whether there was national
consensus on peace and stressed the importance of inclusivity.
18. Mr. Ghani outlined the Government’s approach to seeking peace with the
Taliban. He said that he favoured a three-phased approach: pre-negotiations,
negotiations and verification. The international community had a key role to play in
the third phase and in addressing the issue of cutting the flow of finance to the
insurgents and in reintegration and job creation programmes for ex -combatants. He
underscored the importance of involving women in any process and referred to the
initiatives of the First Lady, Rula Ghani, and the High Peace Council in that regard.
Referring to the peace process in Colombia, he said that the most important question
was one of a trade-off: what price were the Afghan people willing to pay? The first
meeting of the Kabul Process on Peace and Security Cooperation was the umbrella
under which Afghanistan would work with its partners. Mr. Abdullah said that,
although the absolute majority of the population favoured a peace process with the
Taliban, they were also sceptical and concerned that the Government might sacrifice
some of the people’s rights. There was no clear sign from the Taliban of a willingness
to join a peace process.
19. Mr. Atmar said that, since 2014, the national unity Government had worked to
advance the peace process with the Taliban. The latter, however, had many incentives,
such as benefitting from the illicit economy, for continuing to fight. Therefore, the
right balance of disincentives and incentives was required. The Security Council
could help by securing regional cooperation and by making use of sanctions. The head
of the High Peace Council, Karim Khalili, described the body’s structure and work,
including its contacts with some members of the Taliban aimed at initiating more
formal talks. The second meeting of the Kabul Process, scheduled for February 2018,
would bring more concrete outcomes. Referring to the peace agreement with Hizb -i
Islami of 2016, he stressed that any peace initiative had to be led and owned by
Afghans. Further delay in launching a peace process with the Taliban would increase
the danger of a proxy war in the region.
20. Members of political parties said that any peace process would be difficult
because the States supporting terror organizations had their own interests. War, they
said, was not an Afghan but rather an international phenomenon.
21. The Special Representative of the Secretary-General emphasized the importance
of a peace and reconciliation process led and owned by Afghans, a view echoed by a
number of parliamentarians and government officials. The second meeting of the
Kabul Process would provide an opportunity to build consensus and move the process

18-07124

5/15

S/2018/419

forward. For other countries to rally around, however, more clarity was needed
regarding the approach of the Afghan authorities.
Political situation and elections
22. Council members urged Mr. Ghani and Mr. Abdullah to maintain unity in the
Government, which it needed in order to be able to deliver to the people, and
reiterated the importance of holding free, fair, transparent and inclus ive elections
according to the agreed upon timetable. It was important for women to participate in
those elections as candidates and voters. The President of the Council underlined that
credible election results were important for stability. Council member s asked how the
lack of trust in the electoral management bodies could be overcome and how elections
could become a vehicle for unity rather than for division. In their meeting with the
electoral commissioners, Council members stressed the importance of sa feguarding
the independence of their institutions and inquired about the main challenges ahead.
They also asked to be informed should the electoral manage ment bodies run into
obstacles.
23. Mr. Abdullah recalled that, following the contested elections of 2 014, the first
peaceful transfer of power had taken place in Afghanistan with the agreement to
install the national unity Government. He said that opportunities had since been
missed, in particular in terms of delayed electoral reform and the systemic flaw s of a
highly centralized political system. The electoral impasse in 2014 had required greater
wisdom and long-term thinking. That situation, combined with the security transition
and the fact that many people had lost their livelihoods in that period, had rendered
the first three years of the national unity Government very difficult. Deliberate efforts
to marginalize one side of the Government had contributed to the deeply rooted
mistrust and political fragility facing the country. He and Mr. Ghani, nevert heless,
remained committed to ensuring that the Government functioned until a new
government was elected.
24. Mr. Ghani acknowledged that the widespread lack of trust represented a
fundamental challenge and underscored the need for parliamentary and distri ct
council elections in 2018. Elections were crucial for consolidating democracy and
peace. Because, however, the electoral management bodies were independent, his
capacity to influence the process was limited. Mr. Ghani and other participants
welcomed the robust involvement of the United Nations and the international
community, in particular in terms of monitoring, but were critical of the electoral
support, which had not created sufficient capacity and had included very poor advice,
provided by the United Nations thus far. Mr. Abdullah described an environment of
mistrust and emphasized the critical importance of electoral reform to ensure
transparent and inclusive elections. He also noted the importance of the role to be
played by the international community, including the United Nations, in that regard.
Questionable elections would affect the political process, stability and development.
With regard to security, most urban centres were relatively secure, meaning that
elections could be held in around 60 per cent of the country.
25. Members of the Independent Election Commission and the Electoral Complaints
Commission focused on the preparations for the forthcoming parliamentary and
district council elections. They explained the steps that had been taken to assess
polling stations and centres and preparations for voter lists based on national
identification cards, which should reduce the incidence of multiple voting. They
acknowledged that trust in the electoral management bodies was lacking, outlined
measures to address the issue (for example, through regular meetings with political
parties and civil society) and stressed their commitment to organizing transparent
elections in 2018. They provided details of the electoral law, explained the role of the
selection committee in nominating commissioners and noted the need for the support
6/15

18-07124

S/2018/419

of the Government and donors for the electoral process. Challenges included the
difficult security environment, political tensions and the non -allocation of the
electoral budget.
26. The Speakers of both houses of the National Assembly emphasized that the
Assembly was keen for parliamentary elections to be held in 2018. Preparations,
however, had been delayed and it was important that the Government did not interfere
in the process. The lack of confidence in the electoral timetable and transparency of
the electoral process was even more apparent among members of political parties.
They welcomed the dismissal of the previous Chair of the Independent Election
Commission but expressed doubt that parliamentary elections would be held, as
scheduled, in 2018. They further stressed that the failure to hold presidential elections
in 2019, as provided for in the Constitution, would mean the end of the post -Bonn
era. The elections needed to be transparent, inclusive and impartial to ensure the
credibility of the next government, rebuild people’s trust in the institutions and
prevent further destabilization.
27. The representative of the Free and Fair Election Forum of Afghanistan, Yousuf
Rashid, said that doubts were rife about the capacity of the electoral management
bodies and about the electoral timeline. A comprehensive election plan, including
security and logistics measures, was needed and the electoral management bodies
must be made more sustainable. Representatives of several political groups expressed
growing concern about factionalism within the Government, which had created
political tensions, and called for the renewal of constructive dialogue between the
political forces.
Governance, rule of law and human rights
28. Council members voiced appreciation for the efforts made by the Government
to promote good governance, the rule of law and reforms, but underscored the need
for more progress. Continued international support for the country’s development was
critical for peace and reconciliation. In that regard, the visit by the Council presented
its members with an important opportunity to better understand the challenges facing
the country and identify how they could best support the Afghan people and the
Government.
29. Mr. Ghani outlined his Government’s vision for responding to the major
challenges facing the country, emphasizing the progress that had been made in
implementing reform initiatives ranging from rule of law measures a nd combating
corruption to overhauling the civil service system. Benchmarks, all of which had been
achieved, had been set for every reform plan and agreed upon with the donor
community. Revenues had increased over the previous three years. Measures to
combat corruption included the establishment of the Anti-Corruption Justice Centre.
In addition to reform of the judiciary, the Ministry of Defence and the Ministry of the
Interior, the civil service was being renewed by replacing retirees with younger staff,
among them many women. He stressed that the country’s most important asset was
human capital and that Afghanistan would move forward, not backward. Mr. Abdullah
expressed support for the President’s reform agenda, provided that it was not used to
advance a one-sided political agenda or to marginalize parts of the Government. He
stressed that, to advance, the reform process must be inclusive and consultative.
30. The First Lady, Ms. Ghani, who was accompanied by several women officials,
discussed with the Council members a wide range of issues, from the Government ’s
plan for the economic empowerment of women to the health sector. She underscored
the importance of drawing lessons from previous United Nations programmes and
referred to the positive example of the work of the World Food Programme in
Helmand Province. Another participant pointed out the need for long -term training
18-07124

7/15

S/2018/419

and mentor programmes for women entrepreneurs. A major challenge was access to
finance, in particular because women did not have the right of inheritance. Access to
markets was another challenge. Overall, participants stressed the desire to be seen as
partners rather than beneficiaries.
31. Ms. Samar briefed the Council members on the human rights situation. She
focused on children’s rights, protection issues and civilian casualties and the situation
of women. Noting the link between the lack of governance and support for antigovernment elements, she stressed the importance of inclusivity in political processes
and the need for more intra-Afghan political dialogue. She also deplored the
continuing culture of impunity, in particular with regard to violence against women.
Socioeconomic development
32. The Kabul Process provides for the increasing transfer of responsibility for
security and civilian matters to the Afghan authorities, but that does not mean that
Afghanistan no longer needs assistance from the international community. In most of
its meetings, Council members were told of the importance of the continued provision
of aid, whether through counter-terrorism support (through cooperation on borders,
data-sharing and capacity-building) or development assistance to the reconstruction
process, including to the region.
33. The Minister of the Economy, Mustafa Mastoor, said that he was concerned that
population growth was continuing to outpace the growth rate in Afghanistan, with
400,000 young people joining the labour market every year and 39 per cent of the
population living below the poverty line. The country remained highly dependent on
imports but was diversifying its trade partners.
34. Afghanistan, Council members were told, should have the central role in
coordinating aid. Mr. Ghani reiterated his request for increased on-budget assistance
and the implementation of the “One United Nations” initiative to ensure coherence
among United Nations bodies. Other participants called for improved coordination to
ensure that donor support reached those in need.
35. Although the Government emphasized the importance of development
assistance in promoting stability in Afghanistan, discussions revealed a preference for
a new paradigm, based not just on aid but rather, in particular, on increasing
investment opportunities for trade, infrastructure, energy exchanges, market solutions
and connectivity. Mr. Ghani emphasized the possibilities for investment in
Afghanistan and that the interdependence of markets and transport routes between
countries could create incentives for peace and development in the region.
Regional cooperation and connectivity
36. Council members emphasized the importance of integration between
Afghanistan and the neighbouring region. Connectivity would not only bring
economic benefits but also contribute to stability. The President of the Council invited
Afghan interlocutors to provide their views on how to develop connectivity further
and better coordinate efforts on the ground.
37. Mr. Ghani expressed satisfaction that Afghanistan had again become an integral
part of Central Asia and outlined cooperation and trade agreements with various
neighbouring countries. He said that economic development and greater regional
cooperation would be crucial factors in achieving security in Afghanistan. The
country’s assets, which included its location as a “roundabout”, water, natural
resources and human capital, could facilitate the integration of Afghanistan into
regional processes. In turn, regional initiatives would contribute to long -term stability
in Afghanistan.
8/15

18-07124

S/2018/419

38. The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Salahuddin Rabbani, also noted the
importance of relations between Afghanistan and the rest of Central Asia. In meetings
on connectivity and infrastructure and on the economy, development, refugees and
combating corruption, members of the Cabinet focused on opportunities in three
areas: energy, goods and data. They spoke about the potential of several initiatives,
including the Belt and Road Initiative, the Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India
Pipeline, the Central Asia South Asia Electricity Transmission and Trade Project,
plans for a fibre-optic corridor to China, the rapid development of railway corridors
from Central Asian countries, China and the Islamic Republic of Iran to South Asia
through Afghanistan and the development of the ports of Gwadar (Pakistan) and
Chabahar (Islamic Republic of Iran) to provide landlocked countries in Central Asia
with access to warm water ports.
39. Strong cooperation between neighbours is critical for promoting stability and
prosperity in and around Afghanistan. This model of economic integration and
stabilization can be used by any subregion to prevent conflict and restore peace.
International cooperation, “One United Nations” and requests to the
Security Council
40. Council members noted the importance of maintaining international support and
cooperation and, at the same time, the need for sustained progress with reform. They
inquired about the work of the United Nations in the country, its cooperation with the
Government and how the Council could best support the Afghan people and the
Government.
41. Mr. Ghani reiterated his request for increased on-budget assistance and
implementation of the “One United Nations” initiative. He said that he had requested
the United Nations country team to review its model of assistance, which did not
support national ownership. Instead of building parallel structures, on -budget
assistance was required to “put the money where the reforms are”. Lastly, he stressed
the importance of the Security Council’s unity and consensus on Afghanistan.
42. Mr. Abdullah asked the Council to address the issues of safe havens and crossborder violations and to implement the sanctions regime more rigorously. Mr. Atmar
emphasized the Council’s role in securing the region’s cooperation and in using the
sanctions regime as a means of dissuasion and persuasion. Ms. Samar said that
UNAMA, in particular its political arm, should continue its work in Afghanistan. With
regard to human rights, there was no need for capacity-building, but rather closer
cooperation with the Mission. A representative of the Afghan Women ’s Network,
Hasina Safi, making particular reference to the Afghan People’s Dialogue on Peace,
said that the performance of the Mission had improved over the years and that the
Network would like it “to listen” and “to be with us”. Noting the role of the United
Nations in supporting and strengthening civil society, she said that civil society
groups were key stakeholders that would not be satisfied with a merely token presence
around the table. There was no need for new strategies but rather the implementation
of the existing one.

18-07124

9/15

S/2018/419

Annex I
Terms of reference of the Security Council mission to Afghanistan
1.
The Security Council will carry out its mission to Afghanistan from 12 to
15 January 2018 within the context of and in line with: presidential statements on the
situation in Afghanistan (S/PRST/2014/12 and S/PRST/2016/14); resolution 2344
(2017) on the situation in Afghanistan; the report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for international peace and security
(A/72/392–S/2017/783); the special report of the Secretary-General on the strategic
review of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan ( A/72/312–
S/2017/696); and the eighth report of the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team submitted pursuant to resolution 2255 (2015) concerning the
Taliban and other associated individuals and entities constituting a threat to the peace,
stability and security of Afghanistan (contained in document S/2017/409).
2.
The members of the Council will meet representatives of the Government of
Afghanistan, members of political parties, representatives of civil society and
members of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNA MA) and the
Resolute Support Mission. The main objectives of the mission will be:
(a) To underscore that a conflict and violence-free Afghanistan is critical for
regional and global peace and security;
(b) To reiterate the support of the Council for the Government and people of
Afghanistan and their efforts to rebuild their country, strengthen the foundations of
sustainable peace and constitutional democracy and assume their place in the
community of nations;
(c) To express strong support for UNAMA and its Head, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan, in fulfilling their mandates
as defined in resolution 2344 (2017);
(d) To review efforts by the Afghan authorities in support of an Afghan-led
development and stabilization process and, with the assistance of the international
community, in addressing the instability caused by the Taliban, including the Haqqani
Network, and the threat to the security and stability of Afghanistan and the region
posed by Al-Qaida, Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant affiliates and other terrorist
groups, violent and extremist groups, illegal armed groups, criminals and those
involved in the drugs trade, trafficking in persons and in the diversion of chemical
precursors;
(e) To underscore the importance of continued progress on electoral reform
and towards the holding of credible and inclusive parliamentary elections in 2018 and
presidential elections in 2019;
(f) To underline the importance of an inclusive Afghan-led and owned peace
process, in which the participation of women is promoted at all levels, for the long term prosperity and stability of Afghanistan;
(g) To review the progress made by the national unity Government, with the
assistance of the international community, including through capacity-building
initiatives, in addressing interconnected challenges, including in the areas of security,
economic and social development, governance, human rights and the rule of law, the
empowerment of women, regional cooperation and combating the drugs trade;
(h) To encourage increased cooperation and coordination between
Afghanistan and the Central Asian States, including through intergovernmental
relations and personal contacts;
10/15

18-07124

S/2018/419

(i) To encourage also increased cooperation and coordination between
UNAMA, the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central
Asia and other relevant United Nations agencies and regional organizations in order
to strengthen the region’s capacity to overcome challenges to peace, stability and
sustainable development, including terrorism, cross-border organized crime,
trafficking in illicit drugs and in persons, irregular migration and the use of the
Internet for criminal purposes;
(j) To recognize that development, peace and security and human rights are
interlinked and mutually reinforcing, reaffirm the primary responsibility of the
Government and authorities in identifying, driving and directing priorities, strategies
and activities for sustaining peace and, in that regard, emphasize that inclusivity,
including by ensuring the full and effective participation of women, is the key to
advancing the peacebuilding process and related objectives in Afghanistan and
thereby ensuring that the needs of all segments of society are taken into account;
(k) To recognize the importance of linking security and development
objectives, in order to achieve durable peace and prosperity in Afghanistan and in the
wider region;
(l) To emphasize the importance of a regional approach to support security
and prosperity in and around Afghanistan and underline the Council ’s commitment to
contribute constructively in that regard;
(m) To recommend greater coordination between United Nations agencies and
programmes in order to increase the effectiveness of the assistance provided on the
ground, ensure greater transparency in the administration, including through anti corruption measures, foster the more effective use of shrinking development and
humanitarian aid and thereby promote a harmonized United Nations approach in
Afghanistan and other Central Asian countries.

18-07124

11/15

S/2018/419

Annex II
Schedule of meetings of the Security Council mission to Afghanistan
Saturday, 13 January 2018
1430

Arrival in Kabul

1620–1630

Safety briefing by the Department of Safety and Security of the
Secretariat

1630–1730

Meeting with senior members of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA):
• Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan,
Tadamichi Yamamoto
• Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Toby Lanzer
• Acting Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General
(Political)
• Chief of Staff, Denise Wilman
• Special Adviser, Stephen Brooking
• Chief of the Political Affairs Service, Scott Smith
• Chief of the Human Rights Service, Danielle Bell
• Chief of the Strategic Communications Service, Liam McDowall

1730–1830

Meeting with security officials:
• National Security Adviser, Mohammad Hanif Atmar (lead)
• Minister of Defence, Tariq Shah Bahrami
• Minister of the Interior, Wais Ahmad Barmak
• Director General of the National Directorate for Security, Masoom
Stanekzai

1900–1930

Meeting with the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Salahuddin Rabbani

1930

Dinner hosted by the Chief Executive, Abdullah Abdullah, at the
Ministry for Foreign Affairs

Sunday, 14 January 2018
0800–1000

Meeting with the President, Mohammad Ashraf Ghani, ministers and
senior officials:
• Second Vice-President, Sarwar Danish
• Chief Justice, Sayed Yousuf Halim
• Minister of Finance, Eklil Ahmad Hakimi
• Minister of Rural Rehabilitation and Development, Mujiburrahman
Karimi
• Minister of Justice, Abdul Basir Anwar

12/15

18-07124

S/2018/419

• Minister of Defence, Tariq Shah Bahrami
• Minister of the Interior, Wais Ahmad Barmak
• Attorney General, Mohammad Farid Hamidi
• Acting Minister of Mines and Petroleum, Nargis Nehan
• Deputy Minister of Refugees and Repatriation, Alema Alema
• National Security Adviser, Mohammad Hanif Atmar
• Director General of the National Directorate of Security, Masoom
Stanekzai
• Director General of the Independent Directorate of Local
Governance, Abdul Matin Вek
• Permanent Representative of Afghanistan to the United Nations,
Mahmoud Saikal
• Head of the Afghanistan Administrative Reform and Civil Service
Commission, Nader Nadery
• Secretary of the High Peace Council, Mohammad Akram Khpalwak
• Civil society representative, Nadima Sahar
• Chief of Staff of the Office of the President, Abdul Salam Rahimi
• Senior Adviser to the President, Mohammad Qayoumi
• Senior Adviser to the President, Farkhunda Zahra Naderi
• Adviser to the President, Shahrzad Akbar
• Adviser to the President, Fazel Mahmood Fazly
1020–1120

Meeting with the Chief Executive, Abdullah Abdullah, and senior
officials:
• Second Chief Executive Officer, Mohammad Mohaqeq
• Head of Secretariat of the Council of Ministers, Nasrullah Arsalaye
• Deputy Chairperson of the High Peace Council, Habiba Sarabi
• Senior Adviser to the Chief Executive on the Economy, Shafiq
Qarizada
• Chief of Staff for the Office of the Chief Executive, Abdul Qahar Abed

1140–1230

Meeting on connectivity and infrastructure with:
• Senior Adviser to the President, Mohammad Qayoumi (lead)
• Minister of Agriculture, Nasir Ahmad Durrani
• Minister of the Economy, Mustafa Mastoor
• Minister of Trade and Commerce, Hamayoon Rasaw
• Minister of Transportation and Aviation, Mohammad Hamid Tahmasi
• Minister of Public Works, Yama Yari

18-07124

13/15

S/2018/419

• Director of the National Procurement Authority, Alham Omer Hotaki
• Senior Adviser to the President, Ajmal Ahmadi
1245–1345

Lunch with members of the Independent Election Commission (IEC)
and the Electoral Complaints Commission (ECC):
• IEC Commissioner, Wasima Badghisy (Acting Chairperson)
• IEC Commissioner, Abdul Qadir Quraishi
• IEC Commissioner, Gulajan Abdul Badih Sayad
• IEC Commissioner, Maliha Hassan
• IEC Commissioner, Mazullah Dawlaty
• IEC Commissioner, Rafiullah Bidar
• ECC Commissioner, Abdul Aziz Ariaey (Chairperson)
• ECC Commissioner, Humaira Haqmal
• ECC Commissioner, Ali Reza Rohani
• ECC Commissioner, Ghulam Dastgir Hedayat
• ECC Commissioner, Abdul Basir Fayez
• Chief Executive Officer of IEC, Shahla Haque
• Director of the Central Statistics Organization, Jawid Rasuli
• Director General of Population Registration, Humayun Muhtat

1400–1515

Meeting on peace with:
• Head of the High Peace Council, Karim Khalili
• National Security Adviser, Mohammad Hanif Atmar
• Director General of the National Directorate of Security, Masoom
Stanekzai
• Secretary of the High Peace Council, Mohammad Akram Khpalwak
• Deputy of the High Peace Council, Habiba Sarabi

1515–1615

Meeting on the economy, development, refugees and combating
corruption with:
• Minister of Finance, Eklil Ahmad Hakimi (lead)
• Attorney General, Mohammad Farid Hamidi
• Minister of the Economy, Mustafa Mastoor
• Minister of Telecommunications, Shahzad Gul Aryobee
• Acting Minister of Mines and Petroleum, Nargis Nehan
• Deputy Minister of Refugees and Repatriation, Alema
• General Director and Chief Executive Officer of the Afghan
Railway Authority, Yama Shams

14/15

18-07124

S/2018/419

• President’s Senior Adviser, Mohammad Qayoumi
• Chief Executive Officer of Da Afghanistan Beshnak Sherkat Eng.,
Amanullah Ghalib
• Senior Adviser to the President, Ajmal Ahmadi
1615–1645

Meeting on parliamentary affairs with the Speakers of the parliament:
• Speaker of the Wolesi Jirga, Abdul Rauf Ibrahimi
• Speaker of the Meshrano Jirga, Fazal Hadi Muslimyar
• Minister of Parliamentary Affairs, Farooq Wardak

1700–1730

Meeting on security with the Commander of the Resolute Support
Mission of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, General John
Nicholson

1730–1800

Meeting on women’s empowerment with the First Lady, Rula Ghani,
and 25 staff members of the Office of the First Lady

1815–1900

Tea with members of political parties
• Abdul Sattar Murad, representative of Jam’iyat-i Islami
• Mawlavi Qarloq, Deputy Head of Junbish-i Milli
• Muhammad Nateqi, Representative of Hizb-i Wahdat
• Mohammed Omar Daudzai, Representative of the Afghanistan
Protection and Stability Council
• Sayed Mohammad Gailani, Representative of the Council of Jihadi
Leaders
• Ghairat Bahir, Representative of Hizb-i Islami (Gulbuddin)

1900–1945

Meeting on human rights and civil society with:
• Chairperson of the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights
Commission, Sima Samar
• Afghan Women’s Network, Hasina Safi
• Free and Fair Election Forum of Afghanistan, Yousuf Rashid

2000

Dinner hosted by the President, Mohammad Ashraf Ghani, with:
• Chief Executive, Abdullah Abdullah
• First Lady, Rula Ghani
• Permanent Representative of Afghanistan to the United Nations,
Mahmoud Saikal
• Diplomatic representatives

Monday, 15 January 2018
0825

18-07124

Travel from Kabul to New York via Istanbul

15/15
