UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1994/57
30 September 1994
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3433rd meeting of the Security Council, held on 30 September 1994,
in connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The
situation in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina", the President of the
Security Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council is deeply concerned at the deteriorating
security situation in the safe area of Sarajevo and elsewhere in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which has included increased levels of armed violence,
deliberate attacks on UNPROFOR troops and on humanitarian flights, severe
restrictions on public utilities, and continued restriction on the flow of
transport and communications. It notes that normal life has not been fully
restored to Sarajevo, as called for in its resolution 900 (1994).
"The Security Council expresses concern at the deliberate
interruptions of utilities and communications to the civilian population in
Sarajevo, as well as the extended period of closure of Sarajevo airport to
humanitarian flights and the route across that airport opened in
cooperation with UNPROFOR following the agreement of 17 March 1994, as a
result of the actions by the Bosnian Serb party. The Council calls upon
the Bosnian Serb party not to interfere with the normal functioning of
Sarajevo airport. It further calls upon the Bosnian Serb party to
cooperate with efforts to fully restore the flow of gas and electricity to
Sarajevo, to reopen all land routes to Sarajevo and, now and in the future,
to refrain from impeding the normal operations of these and all other
utilities, and means of communication and transport. It calls upon all
parties not to interfere with the supply of gas or electricity to the
civilian population. It reiterates its call to all parties, with the
assistance of the United Nations, to achieve complete freedom of movement
for the civilian population and for humanitarian goods to, from and within
Sarajevo, to remove any hindrance to such freedom of movement, and to help
restore normal life to the city.
"It condemns in particular the deliberate attack on 22 September 1994
on UNPROFOR troops in Sarajevo, just one of a number of attacks which
clearly suggest a deliberate pattern. The Council also notes with alarm,
and condemns without reservation, the reported statements of the Bosnian
Serb leadership that the Bosnian Serb party would target UNPROFOR

94-38238 (E)

300994

/...

S/PRST/1994/57
English
Page 2

activities in retaliation for the passage of a Council resolution
tightening sanctions against the Bosnian Serbs. It warns the Bosnian Serb
leadership against any retaliatory action, whether against UNPROFOR or any
other party, and, in that context, welcomes efforts to support UNPROFOR
troops.
"The Council fully supports UNPROFOR’s efforts to assure compliance
with measures designed by the international community to improve conditions
in Sarajevo. It advises both parties, and in particular the Bosnian Serbs,
to comply with those measures.
"The Council strongly condemns any provocative actions in Sarajevo and
elsewhere in Bosnia and Herzegovina by whomsoever committed and demands
immediate cessation of such actions.
"The Council encourages the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and UNPROFOR to explore as a matter of priority proposals for the
demilitarization of Sarajevo.
"The Council affirms its determination to remain seized of the
matter."

-----
