A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/51/53
9 January 1997

Fifty-first session
Agenda item 79
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the First Committee (A/51/566/Add.19)]
51/53.

African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty
(Treaty of Pelindaba)

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 50/78 of 12 December 1995 and all its other
relevant resolutions, as well as those of the Organization of African Unity,
Noting and welcoming with satisfaction the successful conclusion of the
signing ceremony of the African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty (Treaty of
Pelindaba)1 that was held at Cairo on 11 April 1996,
Recalling the Cairo Declaration adopted on that occasion, which
emphasized that nuclear-weapon-free zones, especially in regions of tension,
such as the Middle East, enhance global and regional peace and security,
Noting with satisfaction the statement made by the President of the
Security Council on behalf of the members of the Council on 12 April 1996,2
in which it was stated that the signature of the African Nuclear-Weapon-Free
Zone Treaty constituted an important contribution by the African countries to
the maintenance of international peace and security,
Considering that the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones,
especially in the Middle East, would enhance the security of Africa and the
viability of the African nuclear-weapon-free zone,

1

See A/50/426.

2

S/PRST/1996/17.

97-76099

/...

A/RES/51/53
Page 2

Bearing in mind resolution CM/Res.1660 (LXIV) on expediting the process
of ratification of the Treaty of Pelindaba, adopted by the Council of
Ministers of the Organization of African Unity at its sixty-fourth ordinary
session, held at Yaoundé from 1 to 5 July 1996,3
1.
Calls upon African States to sign and ratify the African NuclearWeapon-Free Zone Treaty1 as soon as possible so that it may enter into force
without delay;
2.
Expresses its appreciation to the international community and in
particular to the nuclear-weapon States which have signed the Protocols that
concern them, and calls upon them to ratify the Protocols as soon as possible;
3.
Calls upon the States contemplated in Protocol III to the Treaty
to take all necessary measures to ensure the speedy application of the Treaty
to territories for which they are, de jure or de facto, internationally
responsible and which lie within the limits of the geographical zone
established in the Treaty;
4.
Calls upon the African States parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons4 which have not yet concluded
comprehensive safeguards agreements with the International Atomic Energy
Agency pursuant to the Treaty to do so, thereby satisfying the requirements of
article 9 (b) and annex II to the Treaty of Pelindaba when it enters into
force;
5.
Expresses its profound gratitude to the Secretary-General for the
diligence with which he has rendered effective assistance to the signatories
to the African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty in accordance with resolution
50/78;
6.
Expresses its gratitude to the Secretary-General of the
Organization of African Unity and the Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency for the diligence with which they have rendered effective
assistance to the signatories to the Treaty;
7.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to extend assistance,
within existing resources, to the signatories in 1997 in order to achieve the
aims of the present resolution;
8.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-second
session the item entitled "African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty".
79th plenary meeting
10 December 1996

3

A/51/524, annex I.

4

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.
