II.

25

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

the attention of the international community to the need
to contribute to the Assistance Fund for the Struggle
against Colonialism and Apartheid established by the
Organization of African Unity;

40/21. Question of the Falkland Islands (Malvi-

20. Urges the specialized agencies and other organizations concerned within the United Nations system to continue to expand their co-operation with the Organization
of African Unity and, through it, their assistance to the liberation movements recognized by that organization;

(Malvinas) and having received the report of the SecretaryGeneral, 35
Aware of the interest of the international community in
the peaceful and definitive settlement by the Governments
of Argentina and the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland of all their differences, in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations,
Taking note of the interest repeatedly expressed by both
parties in normalizing their relations,
Convinced that such purpose would be facilitated by a
global negotiation between both Governments that will
allow them to rebuild mutual confidence on a solid basis
and to resolve the pending problems, including all aspects
on the future of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas),
l. Requests the Governments of Argentina and the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to
initiate negotiations with a view to finding the means to
resolve peacefully and definitively the pending problems
between both countries, including all aspects on the future
of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas), in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his
renewed mission of good offices in order to assist the parties in complying with the request made in paragraph l
above, and to take the necessary measures to that end;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its forty-first session a report on the
progress made in the implementation of the present resolution;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-first session the item entitled "Question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas)".

21. Reaffirms its willingness to co-operate with the
Organization of African Unity and its organs in the implementation of resolutions and decisions of mutual concern;
22. Calls upon the competent organs, specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system
to continue to ensure that their personnel and recruitment
policies provide for the just and equitable representation
of Africa at all levels at their respective headquarters and
in their regional and field operations;
23. Urges all Member States and regional and international organizations, in particular those of the United
Nations system, and non-governmental organizations to
provide material and economic assistance to help African
countries of asylum cope with the heavy burden imposed
on their limited resources and weak infrastructures by the
presence of large numbers of refugees;
24. Invites Member States and regional and international organizations, in particular those of the United
Nations system, and non-governmental organizations to
contribute generously and effectively to the implementation of the Declaration and Programme of Action of the
Second International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in Africa; 33
25. Calls upon United Nations organs - in particular
the Security Council, the Economic and Social Council,
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, the Special Committee against Apartheid and the United Nations
Council for Namibia - to continue to associate closely the
Organization of African Unity with all their work concerning Africa;
26. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that adequate facilities continue to be made available to facilitate
continued liaison and consultations on matters of
common interest as well as for the provision of technical
assistance to the General Secretariat of the Organization of
African Unity, as required;
27. Also requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with the Secretary-General of the Organization of
African Unity, to arrange the date and venue for the next
meeting between representatives of the General Secretariat
of that organization and the secretariats of the United
Nations and other organizations of the United Nations
system;
28. Further requests the Secretary-General to report to
the General Assembly at its forty-first session on the
implementation of the present resolution and on the development of co-operation between the Organization of
African Unity and the organizations concerned within the
United Nations system.
87th plenary meeting
21 November 1985
33 A/39/402. annex.
34 Sec also sect. I, footnote 7, and sect. X.B.6, decision 40/410.

nas)34

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the Falkland Islands

95th plenary meeting
27 November 1985

40/40. Critical economic situation in Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 39/29 of 3 December 1984, and

the Declaration on the Critical Economic Situation in
Africa annexed thereto,
Noting the Declaration on the Economic Situation in
Africa and Africa's Priority Programme for Economic
Recovery 1986-1990, annexed thereto, adopted by the
Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
Organization of African Unity at its twenty-first ordinary
session, held at Addis Ababa from 18 to 20 July 1985, 29
Noting further Economic and Social Council resolution
1985/80 of 26 July 1985,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on the critical economic situation in Africa, 36
Expressing its appreciation to the international community ~p.d the United Nations system for their positive
resprin,se to the emergency situation in Africa and recognizing the need to continue to extend that support to fulfil
unmet emergency needs,
Commending the Secretary-General for his continuing
efforts in ensuring that the emergency assistance by the
United Nations system and the international community
is delivered to affected countries in a concerted manner,
35 A/40/891.
36 A/40/372-E/1985/104 and Add. I and 2.
