Resolutions adopted on the reporta of the Third Committee

antagonisms and deep unrest in society, aggravated by
the existence of conditions of economic and social
inequality,
Aware that discriminatory prejudices must be combated and eliminated by means of education and information as well as by the adoption of positive legislative or other measures designed to bring about a climate
of understanding and co-operation among the various
ethnic and cultural groups of society,
Convinced that the International Year for Action
to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, which
the General Assembly has proclaimed for the year
1971, will not achieve its objective unless effective
measures are taken in all fields to combat attitudes and
laws contrary to the principles of the Charter and the
norms of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
Welcorr.ing the entry into force of the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination and noting with satisfaction the first
report of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination,11
1. Solemnly reiterates its condemnation of all forms
of racial discrimination wherever they may occur, and
particularly of apartheid, as a flagrant contradiction of
the spirit and the letter of the Charter of the United
Nations and the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, and deplores the persistence of such_ practices;
2. Appeals to the Governments of countries where
forms of racial discrimination still persist and to the
Governments which officially apply such policies as
apartheid to take without delay all the legislative,
educational and social measures necessary to end them
and to ensure respect for human rights in accordance
with the Charter;
3. Vehemently affirms the need for all men to be
given an equal chance and to be enabled to live and
work together in an atmosphere of mutual trust and
tolerance, without discrimination and with full respect
for the national and cultural identity of peoples or
distinct ethnic groups;
4. Urges Member States to do their utmost to
eliminate all racial discrimination in education, employment, housing and other fields of community life, and
to encourage the development of multiracial activities
with a view to removing obstacles to understanding
among the various racial groups;
5. Invites all peoples of the world and all men of
goodwill to condemn unrelentingly the evils of racial
policies and to disseminate all information calculated to
combat such policies;
6. Invites countries which are not yet parties to the
International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination to take any steps
necessary to ratify it or accede to it if possible in 1971,
on the occasion of the International Year for Action
to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination;
1. Emphasizes the importantic- of the work being
done by the United Nations, io particular the Commission on Human Rights and tl-ic Sub-Commission on
Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of
Minorities, and by the speciafo:ed agencies, including
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization and the International Labour Organisation, and the non-governmen',tl organizations asso-·
r,'ofjicial Records of the Gene;,.' 1issembly, Twenty-fifth
Session, Supplemem No. 17 { A/ll\11.,

73

ciated with their efforts towards the elimination of all
forms of racial discrimination;
8. Reaffirms. its intention to take the opportunity
of the International Year for Action to Combat Racism
and Racial Discrimination to promote throughout the
world social justice based on absolute respect for the
dignity of the individual.
1915th plenary meeting,
30 November 1970.
2648 (XXV), Report of the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Noting that the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination
entered into force on 4 January 1969 and that, as at
22 October 1970, forty-four States had deposited their
instruments of ratification or accession to the Convention,
Noting also the meetings of the States parties to the
Convention in 1969 and the election by them of the
members of the Committee on the Elimination of
Racial Discrimination in accordance with the provisions
of article 8 of the Convention,
Having received the report of the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination,8
1. Stresses the significance, for the fulfilment of the
objectives of the United Nations in the field of human
rights, of the coming into force of the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination and of the bringing into being of the
Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, which was created by that Convention and which
should play an effective role in the achievement of its
purposes;
2. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, submitted under article 9 of the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination, on the first year of its activities;
3. Requests all States parties to the Convention to
give full co-operation to the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination in order that it may
fulfil its mandate under the Convention.
1915th plenary meeting,
30 November 1970.
2649 (XXV). The importance of the universal
realization of the right of peoples to selfdetermination and of the speedy granting of
independence to colonial countries and peo•
ples for the effective guarantee and observ•
ance of human rights

The General Assembly,
Emphasizing the importance of the universal realization of the right of peoples to self-determination and
of the speedy granting of independence to colonial
countries and peoples for the effective guarantee and
observance of human rights,
Concerned that many peoples are still denied the
right to self-determination and are still subject to
colonial and alien domination,
6 fbid.
