I·.
····'. •.•'f. •. ,

.,

.

-~----------------

"

M

...;

;,' UNITED NATIONS

NATIONS UNIES

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL RECORDS
SECOND YEAR

CONSEIL DE SECURITE
PR,OCES-VERBAUX OFFICI'ELS
DEUXIEME ANNEE

No. 68
172nd and 173rd meetings
1 August 1947

( 66 p.)

172eme et 173eme seances
ler aout 1947

Lake Success
New York

TABLE DES MATIERES

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Hundred and seventy-second meeting
265.
266.
267.
268.

Cent-soixante-douzieme seance

Page

Pages

Provisional agenda
. 1651
. 1652
Remarks by the new President
Adoption of the agenda
. 1652
Continuation. of the discussion on the
Indonesian question .:
. 1652

265. Ordre du jour provisoire ..... :
1651
266. AIlocution du nouveau President
1652
267. Adoption de I'ordre du jour. . . . . . .. 1652
268. ~uite ,d~ la discussion sur la question
Indoneslenne ..•.................. 1652

Hundred and seventy-third meeting

Cent-soixante-treizieme seance

269. Continuation of the discussion on the
Indonesian question
1670

269. .Suite ,d.e la discussion sur la question
mdoneslenne
1670

Ducumenis

Documents

The following documents, relevant to the hundred
and seventy-second and hundred and seventythird meetings appear as follows:

Les documents suivants, se rapportant aux centsoixante-douzieme et cent-soixante-treizieme
seances, figurent dans les publications suivantes:

Official records of the Security Council:
First Year, First Series, Supplement No. 1,
Annex 4
The Indonesian question:
Letter from Mr. D. Manuilsky, head of the delegation of the Ukrainian SSR, to Mr. N. J. O.
Makin, President of the Security Council, and
reply

Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite,
Premiere Annee, Premiere Serie, Supplement
No 1, Annexe 4
La question indonesienne:
Lettre adressee par M. D. Manuilsky, chef de la
delegation de la Republique socialiste sovietique d'Ukraine, a M. N. J. O. Makin, President du Conseil de securite, et reponse de
M. Makin

Second Year, Supplement No. 16, Annex 40
Letter dated 30 July 1947 from the acting representative of Australia on the Security Council to the Secretary-General (document Sj449)

Deuxieme Annee, Supplement No 16, Annexe 40
Lettre, en date du 30 juiIlet 1947, adressee au
Sccretaire general par le representant par interim de l' Australie au Conseil de securite
(document Sj449)

Second Year, Supplement No. 16, Annex 4-1
Letter dated 30 July 1947 from the permanent
liaison officer of India to the President of the
Security Council (document Sj447)

Deuxieme Annee, Supplement No 16, Annexe 41
Lettre, en date du 31 juiIlet 1947, adressee au
President du Conseil de securite par I'agent
de liaison permanent de I'Inde (document
Sj447)

Second Year, Supplement No. 17, Annex 42
Letter dated 31 July 1947 from the permanent
representative of Greece to the United Nations addressed to the Acting Secretary-General, and enclosed letter dated 31 July 1947
fifom the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Greece (document Sj451)

Deuxieme Annee, Supplement No '17, Annexe 42
Lettre, en date du 31 juiIlet 1947, adressee au
Secretaire general par interim par le representant permanent de la Grece aupres de rOrganisation des Nations Unies et lettre jointe,
en date du 31 juilIet 1947, du Ministre des
.Affaires etrangeres de Grece (document
Sj451)

Second Year, Special Supplement No. 2
Report of the Commission of Investigation concerning Greek Frontier Incidents to the Security Council (document Sj360)

Deuxie.me Annee, Supplement special No 2
Rapport presente au Conseil de securite par la
Commission d'enquete sur les incidents survenus a la frontiere gre,cque (document
S/360)

•

J

UNITED NATIONS

NATIONS UNIES

SECURITY
COUNCIL
OFFICIAL RECORDS
SECOND YEAR

No. 68

CONSEIL
DE SECURITE
PROCES-VERBAUX OFFICIELS
DEUXIEME ANNEE
No 68

HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-SEC{lND
MEETING

CENT-SOIXANTE-DOUZIEME SEANCE

Held at Lake Success, New York,
on Friday, 1 August 1947, at'1O.30 a.m.

Tenue a Lake Success, New-York,
le vendredi 1er aout 1947, a 10 h. 30.

President: Mr. F. EL-KHOURI (Syria).

President: M. F. EL-KHOURI (Syrie).

Present: The representatives of the following
countries: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, China,
Colombia, France, Poland, Syria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom,
United States of America.

Presents: Les representants des pays suivants:
Australie, Belgique, Bresil, Chine, Colombie,
Etats-Unis d'Amerique, France, Pologne,
Royaume-Uni, Syrie, Union des Republiques
socia:listes sovietiques.

265. Provisional agenda (document
5/455)

265. Ordre du iour provisoire document
5/455)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The Indonesian question:
~ a) Letter dated 30 July 1947 from the
acting representative of Australia on the
Security Council to the Secretary-General (document S/449);1
(b) Letter dated 30 July 1947 from the permanent liaison officer of India to the
President of the Security Council (document S/447).2

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.

3. The Greek question:
(a) Report of the Commission of Investigation concerning Greek Frontier Incidents to the Security Council (document
8/360) ;3
(b) Letter dated 31 July 1947 from the permanent representative of Greece to the
United Nations addressed to the Acting
Secretary-General, and enclosed letter
dated 31 July 1947 from the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Greece (document S/451).4

3. La question grecque:
a) Rapport presente au Conseil de securite
par la Commission d'enquete sur les
incidents survenus a la frontiere grecque
(document S/360)3;
b) Lettre, en date du 31 juillet 1947,
adressee au Secretaire general par interim
par le representant permanent de la
Grece aupres de l'Organisation des
Nations U nies, et lettre jointe, en date
du 31 juillet 1947, du Ministre des
Affaires etrangeres de Grece (document
S/451 )4.

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, Supplement No. 16, Annex 40.
2 Ibid., Second Year, Supplement No. 16, Annex 41.
8 Ibid., Second Year, Special Supplement No. 2.
• Ibid., Second Year, Supplement No. 17, Annex 42.

1 Vc'ir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite.
Deuxieme Annee, Supplement No 16, Annexe 40.
2 Ibid., Supplement No 16, Annexe 41.
8 Ibid., Supplement special No 2.
• Ibid., Supplement No 17, Annexe 42.

2. La question indonesienne:
a) Lettre, en date du 30 juillet 1947,
adressee au Secretaire general par le
representant par interim de l'Australie au
Conseil de securite (document S/449)1;
b) Lettre, en da<:e du 30 juillet 1947,
adressee au President du Conseil de
securite par l'agent de liaison permanent
de l'Inde (document S/447)2.

· ..

.2

-

:cra

1I JIIIIISil

266. Remarks by the new President

266. ,Allocution du nouveau Pres;dent

The PRESIDENT: Before starting our work today, I consider it appropriate to express appreciation, which I believe is shared by. my colleagues, of the able and skilful manner in which
my eminent predecessor, Dr. Oscar Lange, conducted the discussions during his presidency last
month. In the month of July the Council was
faced with a heavy programme of difficult and
complicated questions. The number of meetings
of the Security Council-I think there were
twenty-one or twenty-two-during July constitutes a record in the history of the Council.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais):
Avant de commencer aujourd'hui notre travail,
il convient que je rende hommage, ep mon nom
propre et an nom de mes collegues, qui partagent, je pense, mon sentiment, a M. Oscar
Lange, mon eminent predecesseur, pour la
competence et l'habilete avec lesquelles il a
conduit les debats le mois dernier, pendant la
duree de sa presidence. Durant le mois de juillet,
le Conseil a discute quantite de questions difficiles
et complexes. Le nombre des seances - vingt
et une ou vingt-deux, je croid - qui ont eu lieu
dans le courant du mois constitue un record
dans l'histoire du Conseil.
Comme presque toutes ces questions sont
encore a l'ordre du jour et que d'autres peuvent
s'y ajouter, le Conseil, en principe, est cense
regler ce mois-ci la plupart d'entredles, afin
d'etre en mesure de presenter a leur sujet des
rapports et des recommandations a l'Assemblee
generale avant la prochaine session ore. aire de
l'Assemblee, qui doit avoir lieu en sept5mbre.
J'espere que mes collegues m'aideront a aplanir
ce chemin rocailleux et a atteindre nos objectifs
en s'acquittant des fonctions qui incombent a
cet organe supreme des Nations Unies.
De nombreux problemes attendent encore leur
solution au Conseil de securite; une liste en a ete
distribuee aux membfes du Conseil il y a quelque
temp3. Il est mutile que je vous les enumere
maintenant, puisque vous les connaissez tous.
En dehors des questions les plus importantes
d'Indonesie, d'Egypte et de Grece, nous auriQns
a resoudre au cours de ce mois un 'certain nombre
d'autres questions. Je crois que le travail du
Conseil avancera beaucoup plus rapidement si
nous nous effon;ons de faire des declarations et
des discours aussi brefs que possible et si nous
evitons de repeter inutilement les memes arguments. Si nous reussissons a regler la pIupart des
problemes que nous avons a etudk, nous pourrons peut-etre prendre une quinzaine de jours
de repos et accorder a nos fidcles interpretes et
autres membres du personnel des vacances bien
meritees.

As almost all these problems are still on the
agenda of the Security Council, while others may
be ad;' ~d to them, the Council is theoretically
SUpp( .sed to reach concrete conclusions this
month in most of these cases, so that it may be
able to submit reports or recommendations on
each of them to the General Assembly before the
next regular session in September. I hope my
colleagues will help smooth the rugged path and
achieve our goals by fulfilling the duties allotted
to this supreme organ of the United Nations.
The problems which are still pending in the
Security Council are numerous, and a list of
them was circulated to the members of the Council some time ago. It is not necessary to enumerate them now because you all know them. This
month we should also reach conclusions on other
matters outstanding besides the important ques, tions concerning Indonesia, Egypt and Greece.
I consider it will help expedite the work if we
try to make our speeches and statements as brief
and concise as possible, avoiding repetition and
duplication of arguments. If we succeed in disposing of the majority of the problems ahead of
us, we may be able to have a fortnight of rest,
and it may be possible not to deprive our faithful interpreters and staff of a well-deserved
vacation.

267. Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

267. Adoption de I'ordre du iour
L'ordre du jour est adopte.

268. Continuation of the discussion on the
Il"Idonesian question

268. Suite de la discussion sur la question
indonesienne

At the invitation of the President, Mr. B. R.
Sen, representative of India, and Mr. van
KlefJens, representative of the Netherlands, took
their seats at the Council table.

Sur l'invitation du President, M. Sen, representant de l'Inde et Al. van KlefJens, representant des Pays-Bas, prennent place a la table du .
Conseil.

Mr. VAN LANGENHOVE' (Belgium) (translated
from French): We all understand the generous
motives which have inspired the Australian
representative's proposal and prompted him to
emphasize its urgency.

M. VAN LANGENHOVE (Belgiquc): I1 n'est
personne qui ne comprenne l'inspiration genereuse a laquelle repond la proposition du representant de .}'Australie et qui pousse ce .dernier a
donner a cette proposition un caractere d'urgence.

1653
The Indonesian situation evokes many memories, as the Netherlands representative said
yesterday; he ha.d himself pointed this out to the
Security Council in February last.
But this is too serious a matter for us to be
swayed by blind sentiment without any judgment.
We are witnessing the difficulties which are
evoked by the growth of national feeling amongst
a vast population of some 70 million persons,
and we see new politkal entities being formed.
The declared aim of the N etherIands Government is to promote the development of this national feeling on organic and constructive lines
and within limits conducive to order and' prosperity.
This can only be a gradual process. It must
be effected stage by stage. What stage have we
reached now?
If we read the Linggadjati Agreement, we
shall see that it does not aim at ::letting up the
Indonesian Republic as a separate, sovereign and
independent State. According to the terms of
article 2 of the Agreement, it is the United States
of Indonesia which should be that sovereign
State while the Indonesian Republic is but to
form a part of it. Frequent disputes have arisen
with the representatives of the Indonesian Republic. Rightly or wrongly the Netherlands
Government questions the authority and the
representative nature of the Government of the
Indonesian Republic.
Wha t do we know of t.his Indonesian Governmem's right to speak on behalf of the complex mass of the 40 million inhabitants of these
vast territories? Can we base ourselves on mere
assumptions in this connexion? At the present
stage, the Netherlands Government holds sovereignty over this territory and thus argues that,
under the Charter, the Security Council has no
right to intervene.
I have so far heard no argument which proved
the contrary. In these circumstances, I think we
would be well advised to reserve our opinion on
this point.
The Belgian delegation dreads the hasty procedure which seems to be suggested for this question. A draft resolution was submitted to the
Council at the start of the discussion, even before
the State chiefly concerned had expressed its
views. The Council was thus asked to determine,
from the very outset, the existence of a threat to
the peace within the meaning of Article 39 of
the Charter and to make recomrr 'ndations to
the parties on the basis of Article 4\ .

La situation en Indonesie eveille bien des
echos, et le representant des Pays-Bas l'a rappele
hier; il le constatait lni-meme deja, en fevrier
dernier, devant le Conseil de securite.
Mais il s'agit d'une affaire trop grave pour
qu'on puisse, sans discernement, s'abandonner a
ses sentiments.
Nous assistons aux difficultes qui accompagnent le developpement du sentiment national
parmi de vastes populations, comptant quelque
soixante-d.ix millions d'ames, et a la formation
de nouvelles entites politiques. Le but declare
du Gouvernement neerlandais est de favoriser
l'epanouissement de ce sentiment national dans
un sens organique et constructif, et dans un
cadre qui assure l'ordre et favorise la prosperite.
Ce processus ne peut etre que progressif. n
comporte necessairement des etapes. A quel
point en sommes-nous?
A lire l'Accord de Linggadjati, on constate
que celui-ci ne tend pas a constituer la Republique d'Indonesie en un Etat separe, souverain
et independant. Aux termes de l'article 2 de cet
Accord, ce sont les Etats-Unis d'Indonesie qui
doivent former cet Etat sr)Uverain, et la Republique d'Indonesie ne doit en etre qu'une partie.
Des conflits repetes se sont produits avec les
representants de la Republique d'Indonesie. Le
Gouvernement neerlandais, a tort ou a raison,
conteste l'autorite et le caractere representatif
du Gouvernement de la Republique d'Indonesie.
Que savons-nous du droit qu'a ce Gouvernement d'Indonesie de parler au nom de la masse
complexe de quarante millions d'habitants peuplant ces vastes territoires? Alions-nous nous
fonder a cet egard sur de pures presomptions?
Au stade actuel, le Gouvernement neerlandais
detient la souverainete sur ce territoire et, dans
ces conditions, il soutient que le Conseil de
securite :!1,'a pas, d'apres la Charte, le droit
d'intervenir.
Je n'ai pas, jusqu'ici, entendu d'argument qui
ait etabli le contraire. Dans ces conditions, il me
parait sage de reserver notre opinion sur ce point.
La delegation belge redoute la precipitation
avec laquelle on parait vouloir proceder dans
cette affaire. Des le debut, et avant meme que
l'Etat principalement interesse se fUt exprime, un
projet de resolution etait soumis au Conseil. Le
Conseil etait ainsi invite a constater, d'entree de
cause, l'existence d'une menace a la paix au
sens de l'Article 39 de la Charte, et a faire aux
parties des recommandations sur la base de
l'Article 40.

The Netherlands delegation has given the reaLa delegation des Pays-Bas a fait valoir les
sons which lead it to conclude that this case is raisons qui la conduisent a conclure que l'affaire
covered by paragraph 7 of Article 2 of the Char- est visee par le paragraphe 7 de l'Article 2 de
ter and in the circumstances does not come with- la Charte, et echappe en l'occurrence a la comin the Council's preview.
petence du Conseil.
The Belgian delegation thinks it the duty of
Le Conseil, de l'avis de la delegation belge, a
the Council to make sure that it has power to le devoir de verifier sa competence. Le represenintervene. The Netherlands representative has tant des Pays-Bas nous a informes des intentions
told us of his Government's intentions with . de son GouvLrnement en Cot> olli rnnrprnp 11"';:

1654

regard to the serious problems which have arisen
in Indonesia, but he has not asked us to trust
him blindly. He stated yesterday that his Government was prepared to accept the mediation
of the United States Government and was ready
to invite impartial observers who might see for
themselves the true situation in Indonesia.

graves problemes qui se posent en Indonesie,
mais il ne nous demande pas de lui faire aveuglement confiance. Il a declare hier que son
Gouvernement etait dispose a accepter la mediation du Gouvernement de£ Etats-Unis et qu'il
etait pret ~ inviter des observateurs impartiaux
qui puissent rendre compte de la situation ~n
Indonesie.
The Security Council cannot consider these - Le Conseil de securite ne saurait considerer
statements as meaningless. On grounds of que ce sont la des declaratiohs sans valeur.
urgency it has been proposed that the Security Invoquant des raisons d'urgence, on a propose
Council should deal, for the time being, only que le Consei'l: de securite ne retmt, pour le mowith that part of the Australian resolution which ment, que la partie de la resolution australienne
refers to the cessa.tion of hostilities. The question qui vise l'arret des hostilites. La question est, en
is really not so simple as it may seem to be at realite, moins simple qu'elle ne parait au premier
a first glance.
abocd.
Indeed, apart from the objection based on
En effet, outre I'objection tiree de l'Article 2,
paragraph 7 of Article 2, the Council would not, paragraphe 7, le Conseil ne serait pas {onde,
under the Charter, be justified in applying d'apres la Charte, a appliquer l'Article 40 sans
Article 40 without first having determiIi.ed the avoir au prealable constate l'existence d'une
existence of a threat to the peace, a breach of menace contre la paix, d'une rupture de la paix
the peace or an act of aggression, according to ou d'un acte d'agression, suivant les termes
the actual terIl'.8 of Article 39.
memes de I'Article 39.
Proposer de ne reprendre, dans la suggestion
The proposal to take up Dnly that provision
in the Australian resolution which deals with the australienne, que la seule disposition visant la
cessation of hostilities is really tantamount to cessation des hostilites, cela revient, en realite, a
taking up the whole proposal, with the sole ex- reprendre l'ensemble de la proposition, a la swle
ception of paragraph (b), which concerns the exception de l'alinea b) visant le reglement du
settlement of the dispute.
conflit.
J'ai peine a penser, pour ma part, que le
Personally, I find it difficult to believe that the
Council would be prepared to take this road on Conseil sait pret a s'engager dans cette voie sur
the basis of the incomplete information at its la base ,des informations incompletes dont il
disposal.
dispose.
The PRESIDENT: Before calling upon the representative of the United ,Kingdom, I wish to
draw the, attention of the Council to the fact
that the matter now before us is the draft resolution presented by the Australian delegation1 calling for the cessation of hostilities forthwith.
At the hundred and seventy-first meeting, yesterday, the representative of the Netherlands presented an objection as regards the competence
and jurisdiction of the Security Council in this
matter. 1 He is now supported by the representative of Belgium, who is a member of the
Security Council. But so long as there is no
written proposal or motion to that effect, I
cannot put it to the vote.
Rule 38 of the rules of procedure of the Security Council states: "Any Member of the
United Nations invited in accordance with the
preceding rule or in application of Article 32 of
the Charter to participate in the discussions of
the Security Council may submit proposals and
draft resolutions. These proposals and draft
resolutions may be put to a vote only at the
request of a representative of the Security
Council."
As there is nothing of that nature before us,
I ask the representatives to confine their discus1

See Official Records of the Security Council, Second

Year. No. 67.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais):
Avant de donner la parole au representant du
Royaume-Uni, je tiens a faire remarquer au
Conseil que le document que nous avans a ttudier est le projet de resolution presente par la
delegation australiennel, qui demande la cessation immediate des hostilites.
Au cours de la cent-soixante et onzieme
seancel, le representant des Pays-Bas a fait une
objection relative a la competence du Conseil
de securite en la matiece. Le representant de la
Belgique, qui est membre du Conseil de securite,
appuie maintenant son objection. Mais, comme
il n'y a pas de proposition ecrite ni de motion a
ce sujet, je ne peux la mettre aux voix.
L'."lrticle 38 du reglement interieur du Conseil
de securite declare: "Tout Membre des Nations
Unies convie, conformement aux dispositions de
l'article precedent ou en vertu de l'Article 32 de
la Charte, a participer aux discussions du Conseil
de secu'rite, peut presenter des propositions ou
des projets de resolution. Ces propositions et ces
projets de resolution ne peuvent ctre mis aux
voix que si un representant au Conseil de securite
en fait la demande."
Aucune proposition de ce genre ne nous a ete
soumise. Je dernande done aux membres du
1 Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securiU,
Deuxieme Annee, No 67.

1655
sion and statements to the Australian draft resolution.

Conseil de limiter leurs discussions et leurs declarations au projet de resolution presente par
l'Australie.

There are three speakers, but Mr. van Kleffens
has asked to be allowed to make a brief statement which he considers urgent. If the other
speakers will agree that he should be given priority, I am ready to allow him to speak.

Trois orateurs sont inscrits, mais M. van
Kleffens a demande la permission de faire une
breve declaration qu'il considere comme urgente.
Si les autres orateurs acceptent que je Iui accorde
priorite, je suis pret a lui donner la parole.

Mr. VAN KLEFFENS (Netherlands): I beg
leave to inform the Council that I understand
that the offer of good offices has definitely been
made by the United States Government. That
being so, I have been authorized by my Government to make the following declaration:

M. YAN KLEFFENS (Pays-Bas) (traduit de
l'anglais): Je d€sirerais informer le Conseil que
l'offre de bons offices des Etats-Unis est, si. je ne
me trompe, presentee d'une maniere definitive.
Dans ces conditions, mon Gouvernement m'a
autorisc a faire la declaration suivante:

The Netherlands Governm~nt warmly welcomes the offer of good offices made by the Government of the United St?tes of America, an
offer which the Netherlands Government gladly
accepts. In view thereof, the Netherlands Government will be glad to enter into consultation
with the Government of the United States of
America in respect of the manner in which these
good offices can best be made effeCTIve.

Le Gouvernement des Pays-Bas accueille avec
f..:wpressement l'offre de bons offices du Gouvernement des Etats-Unis d;Ame.lque et ill'accepte
avec joie. C'est pourquoi le Gouvernement des
Pays-Bas sera tout pret a se mettre d'accord avec
le Gouvernement des Etats-Unis d'Amerique sur
la fa~on dont ces bons offices pourront s'exercer
avec le plus de succh

Mr. VAN LANGENHOVE (Belgium) (~:l-nslated
from French): I am an amenable member of
the Council and am always prepared to defer to
the Chair. I would, however, b~g to point out
with all due respect that the question of the
Council's competence is implicit in the resolution
tabled by the Australian delegation which we are
now discussing. Hence, I think it is difficult to
exclude it frem the debate, even though we have
no other resolution' on this specific point.

M. VAN LANGENHOVE (Belgique): Je suis un
membre discipline du Conseil et je suis toujours
pret a m'inc!iner devant l'autorite presidentielle.
Je voudrais, cependant, faire respectueusement
observer que la question de la competence du
Conseil est implicitement posee par la resolution
presentee par la delegation de l'Australie et qui
est actuellement en question. Des lors, il me
semble qu'il est difficile de l'exclure du debat,
meme a de£aut cl'une autre resolution visant
expressement ce point.

The PRESIDENT: The question of competence
is being disc~ssed within the framework of the
resolution of the Australian delegation. The Belgian representative has discussed it thoroughly,
and others are going to speak on it. I cannot put
to a vote a resolution that the question is not
within the competence of the Security Council
unless there is a resolution to that effect.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais):
Nous discutons la question de la competence du
Conseil a propos de la resolution de la delegation
australienne. Le representant de la Belgique l'a
traitee a fond, et d'autres representants vont
parler sur le meme sujet. J e ne peux pas mettre
aux voix une resolution etablissant que 1... question n'entre pas dans la competence du Conseil
de securite, a moins qu'on ne presente une
resolution a cette fin.

Mr. LAWFORD (United Kingdom): Yesterday, at the hundred and seventy-first meeting,
the Netherlands representative declared that in
the view of his Government, the Indonesian Republic is not a sovereign State. It is true that his
Government has accorded to the Republic, under
the Linggadjati Agreement, de facto recognition
of its authority over Java, Sumatra, and Madura; that is to say de facto authority over a
certain territory under an agreement by which
that territory and the Netherlands Government
are to co-operate in the establishment of a future
federal State, of which the Indonesian Republic
is to be only one component part. Dr. van
KIeffens has argued from that that the Security
Council has 'not the requisite authority for intervening in this question, since this is a matter of

M. LAWFORD (Royaume-Uni) (traduit de
l'anglais): Le representant des Pays-Bas a
declare hier, au cours de la cent-soL'{ante et
onzieme seance, que son Gouvernement ne considere pas la Republique d'Indonesie comme un
Etat 80uverain. Il est exact que, aux termes de
l'Accord de Linggadjati, son Gouvernement a
reconnu l'autorite de facto de la Republique
d'Indonesie sur Java, Sumatra et Madoura,
c'est-a-dire l'autorite de facto de la Republique
d'Indonesie sur un certain territoire, a la suite
d'un accoro aux termes duquel ce territoire et
le Gouvernement des Pays-Bas doivent cooperer
a la creation d'un Etat federal dont la Republique d'Indonesie ne sera qu'une des parties
constituantes. S'appuyant sur cet argument,
M. van Kleffens a declare que le Conseil de

1656
domestic jurisdiction within the meaning of
Article 2, paragraph 7, of the Charter.

securite n'a pas la comnetence necessaire pour
intervenir, puisqu'il s'agit la d'une a,ffaire qui
. releve de la competence nationale d'un Etat, aux
termes du paragraphe 7 de r Article 2 de la
Charte.

I

The United Kingdom delegation, for reasons
which I hope I shall make clear, is not at this
juncture concerned to comment on this question.
However, like my Belgian colleague, I shall only
say that so far we have not heard any really
convincing arguments to persuade us that this is
a war between two sovereign States. In our
view, what we are conGerned with there is a
situation resulting from the fighting which has
been taking place in Java and Sumatra, which,
given the particular circumstance;; now obtaining, may for economic or political reasons lead
to international friction in that area. I think it
could not be denied that the repercussions of
recent events in the Republic of Indonesia in
neighbouring Asia and Australasia have been
very serious, and that the situation is one which
might conceivably at any time actually endanger
international peace and security. In our view,
therefore, it is not Article 39 but rather Articles
34 and 35 which would be applicable to this
case, not as a dispute between the N ~therlands
and the Indonesian Republic, but because the
fighting in progress may well create a situation
leading to international friction.

Pour des raisons sur lesquelles j'espere m'expliquer clairement, la delegation du RoyaumeUni ne desire pas se prononcer pour l'instant sur
cette question. Comme moncom:gue belge, je
me contenterai de dire que, jusqu'a maintenant,
le Conseil n'a entendu aucun argument vraiment
convaincant qui puisse le persuader qu'il s'agit
la d'une guerre entre deux Etats souverains. A
notre avis, la situation dont nous nous occupons
en ce moment resulte des combats qui se
deroulent a Java et Sumatra et risque, etant
donne les circonstances particulieres qui prevalent actuellement, et pour des raisons
economiques et politiques, de provoquer une
tension internationale dans cette region. On ne
peut nier, je crois, l'extreme gravite des repercussions, dans les regions voisines d'Asie et
d'Australie, des evenements qui viennent de se
derouler dans la Republique d'Indonesie. On
ne peut non plus nier que cette situation risque
a tout moment, et on peut aisement concevoir
pourquoi, de mettre en reel danger la paix et la
securite internationales. En consequence, nous
estimons que ce n'est pas l'Article 39 qui devrait
s'appliquer a ce cas, mais les Articles 34 et 35;
non pas parce qu'il s'agit d'un differend entre
les Pays-Bas et la Republique d'Indcnesie, mais
parce que la lutte qui se poursuit risque de provoquer des incidents de portee internationale.

However, an important fact has emerged since
we began our discussion. While my Government
fully understands the view of our Australian and
Indian colleagues that this ~ a case requiring
urgent consideration, and while we certainly
recognize their interest in this matter, I was if I
may say so fully in accord with what the French
representative said in our discussion at the hundred and seventy-first meeting yesterday, to wit,
that it was really not possible to try and come to
a decision on this question in such a hurry that
we did not even have time to hear the representative of the Netherlands make his explanatory
statement.
We have now heard his statement. In it the
Netherlands representative told us that if the
helping hand of a nation such as the United
States of America were held out in the interests
of conciliation, the Netherlands Government
would take it. Shortly afterwards the United
States representative informed us that his Government has in fact just offered its good offices,
and this morning we have heard from Mr. van
Kleffens that the Netherlands Government gladly
accepts them.
in our view, such a development would obviate the necessity for action by the Security
Council at this juncture, since it is quite evidently, for the time being at any rate, the course
best calculated to remove the risk that this situation will give rise to international friction, and

Toutefois, un fait important s'est produit
depuis le debut de la discussion. Mon Gouvernement comprend parfaitement le point de vue de
mes collegues australien et hindou, et admet que
Ja question exige qu'on l'examine d'urgence;
nous nous rendons egalement tres bien compte
de l'interet qu'ils portent a cette question, mais
je suis, si je puis dire, pleinement d'accord aveC
le representant de la Franc~ qui a declare, au
cours de la ceut-soixante et onzieme seance,
qu'il etait vraiment impossible de regh;r la question de'maniere si hative que nous n'ayons meme
pas le temps d'entendre les explications du representant des Pays-Bas.
Nous avons maintenant entendu sa declaration. Il a declare que, si une nation comme les
Etats-Unis d'Amerique proposait sa mediation,
le Gouvernement des Pays-Bas accepterait cette
offre. Peu apres, le representant des Etats-Unis
nous a fait savoir que son Gouvernement venait
effectivement de proposer ses bons offices et, ce
matin, M. van Kleffens nous a dit lui-meme que
le Gouvernement des Pays-Bas acceptait cette
offre avec joie.
A notre avis, cette far;on de proceder epargnerait au Conseil de securite la necessite d'intervenir en l'occurrence; il est evident que la
mediation est, pour le moment du moins, la
meilleure far;on de proceder pour supprimer le
risque de voir cette situation engendrer des inci-

a

,,&S.S L

1657

it may indeed even provide a practical solution
of the entire problem.
If the members of the Security Council are in
agreement, it would seem to my delegation that
fr.,is Council, instead of proceeding on the lines
of the Australian proposal, should take note of
this offer of good offices and leave the question
on the list of matters of which the Council is
seized, so that in due course, and as soon as
possible, we may receive a report on all developments.

--... ...
:

dents de portee internationale, et qu'elle peut
meme apporter une solution pratique au probleme tout entier.
Ma delegation pense que le Conseil de securite,
au lieu de se 'Conformer a la proposition australienne, devrait, si ses membres sont d' accord,
prendre note de cette offre de bons offices et
laisser la question sur la liste des cas dont il est
saisi, afin qu'il nous soit fait rapport en temps
voulu et aussitot que possible sur l'evolution de
la situation.

Mr. ]OHNSON (United States of Ame:ica):
M. JOHNSON (Etats-Uni'l d'Amerique) (traThe Austra:1ian resolution as it is ItOW worded is duit de l' ang1ais j: Ma delegation approuve
a document which, in· ~he understanding of my chaleureusement les intentions manifestees, croitdelegation, has an objective with which we have elle, dans la resolution australienne sous sa forme
great sympathy. The invocation of Articles 40 actuelle. Mais, en invoquant les Articles 39 et
and 39, however, raises very complex and serious 40, cette resolution pose des problemes d'ordr~
questions of law. The question of sovereignty, juridique tres complexes et tres serieux. Le
and the question of the competence of this Coun- representant des P?ys-Bas a souleve le probleme
cil to deal with the case, have been brought up de la souverainete et ce1ui de la competence de
by the representative of the Netherlands and, in ce Conseil en la matihe; ces probleme3 meritent,
our opinion, also merit the respectful attention of a mon avis, toute l'attention du Conseil. lIs sont,
the Council. These are very important questions. en dfet, extremement importants. Mais il est un
The fact that there is shooting, and that men fait 0.ui est important aussi: dans ceUe partie
are being killed in that region of the world is du monde, on se bat et des hommes sont tues.
also very important. Thus it is a legitimate con- C'est a juste titre que le Conseil de securite
cern of the Security Council, no matter what s'interesse a cela, que! que soit le COLcept de
concept of sovereignty is involved or what rr.ay souverainete en cause ou celui qui, en derniere
ultimately be decided to be the fact.
analys.::, sera reconnu par le Conseil.
L'ampleur des combats, en un lieu quc1The scale on which shooting is taking place
anywhere is one of the criteria which the Coun- conque,- est l'un des criteres que le Conseil
cil may take into consideration in decidiag what pourrait utiliser pour determiner queUes mesures
action it ought to take. For instance. in unsettled il y a lieu de prendre. En des temps troubles,
times, a band of wicked and purposeful men par exemple, une bande d'hommes decides, sans
might very well be armed and gain control over scrupules, pourrait tres bien s'armer pour prendre
a large territory. They might have such com- le pOl~voir et imposer sa !oi stlr un vaste terriplete control that the people of that region would toire. Le pouvoir de ces hommes pourrait
have no recourse against them. They might even devenir si absolu que les peuples de cette region
set themselves up and call themselves a State. n'auraient plus aucun recours contre eux. lIs
I do not think that even the most humanitarian pourraient meme s'eriger en Etat. Je crois que
and peace-loving Members of the United Na- meme les Membres des Nations Unies les plus
tions would argue that the lawful and legitimate imbus de sentiments humanitaires et les plus
Government of that region might not use arms pacifiques n'cseraient affirmer que le Gouverneto put down that band of wicked and lawless ment legal et legitime de ce pays n'ait pas le
men and to release the people of that territory droit de prendre les armes pour abattre cette
from their tyranny and oppression. It would be bande d'hommes sans foi ni loi afin de liberer
no argument to say that those men had consti- la population de ce territoire de la tyrannie et de
tuted themselves into a State and that it was l'oppression. Dire que cette bande s'est constituee
war. No one, I believe, would take such an ~n gouvernement et que lutter contre elle c'est
faire la guerre ne serait pas un argument valable;
argument seriously.
personne, je crois, n'oserait l'avancer serieusement comme tel.
Mais, dans le cas qui nous occupe, il s'agit
In this case, however, we have a region which
is called the Republic of Indonesia. It is planned d'Ull territoire qui s'appe'lle la Republique
that, later on, it shaH be one of the constituent d'Indonesie. Elle doit devenir, plus tard, un des
subsidiary States of a larger federated republic Etate;; constitutifs d'une grande·republique fedeof Indonesia. It seems to me quite unnecessary ree d'lndonesie. II me semble tout a fait inutile
for th:; Council to decide now on the complex que le Conseil resolve maintenant le probleme
question of the sovereignty of the Netherlands complexe de la souverainete du Gouvernement
Government. My Government, after careful des Pays-Bas. Apres avoir soigneusement etustudy of this case, might decide that the Nether- die le probleme, mon Gouvernement decidera
lands Government's contention was entirely cor- peut-etre que, du point de vue juridique, les
rect in law. I am taking no stand and making affirmations du Gouvernement des Pays-Bas sont
no commitment on that point at the present parfaitement motivees. Je ne prends pas position

time. I do think, however, that the Council must
take cognizance of fighting on such a scale and
in such conditions that the peace of that region
and ultimately of the world might be put in
danger.
The United States Government, as I had the
honour to inform the Council yesterday, has
made an offer of its good offices to the Govern~
ment of the Netherlands, and it goes without saying that that offer will also be extended to the
de facto Government of the region called the
Republic of Indonesia. The representative of
the Netherlands made th~ very gratifying statement this morning, earlier in this debate, that his
Government accepted that offer of good offices.
I hope that the results of our effort in that direction will be fruitful.
I think, however, that the Security Council's
sentiment, as I have heard it expressed today
and also at the hundred and seventy-first meeting
yesterday, is that it wants the fighting there
stopped without prejudice to the position which
any member o~ this Council may feel that he
must take on the important juridical principles
involved"
I have discussed the point of view of my delegation with "the representative of Australia, and
I have so informed the representative of the
Netherlands. I had suggested to the representative of Australia that I should like to offer an
amendment to his resolution which, if the Council approved it, would, I believe, accomplish the
purpose of exhorting L~e parties to this dispute to
cease hostilities and to settle their disputes by
arbitration or by any other peaceful method. I
believe that such a resolution, if approved and
passed by the Council, would be a fitting complement to the offer of good offices which we
have now made and which the Netherlands Government has accepted, and which we hope may
be rapidly implemented.
In this amendment to the Australian resolution, which I shall read in a moment-I have
copies for the members of the Council-there is
no mention of any Article of the Charter, and
there is no commitment regarding the sovereignty
of the Netherlands over the region in question.
All of those questions are left open and without
prejudice to any determination which the Council may later reach.
The amendment as it now reads-which I
shall give to the President and the other members-is as follows:
((The Security Council,
((Noting with concern the hostilities in progress
between ,-he armed forces of the Netherlands and
of the Republic of Indonesia,
((Calls upon the parties,
"( a) To cease hostilities forthwith, and
" (b) To settle their disputes by arbitration or
by other peaceful means."

et je ne m'engage en rien pOUf l'instant a cet
egard. Mais je pense que le Conseil ne doit pas
ignorer les hostilites qui se deronlent a une si
gra.'lde echelle et dans des conditions telles
qu'elles risquent de menacer la paix de ce territoire et, en fin de compte, celle du monde entier.
Comme j'ai .eu l'hon..Tleur de le faire savoir
au Conseil hier, le Gouvernement des Etats-Unis
a offert ses bons offices au Gouvernement des
Pays-Bas, et il va sans dire que cette offre s'etend
au Gouvernement qui a ete reconnu de facto
dans le territoire appe1e Republique d'Indonesie.
Ce matin, au cours des debats, le representant
des Pays-Bas a declare que son Gouvernement
acceptait cette offre de bons offices; cette nouvelle est des plus encourageantes. J'espere que
nos efforts dans cette direction seront couronnes
de succes.
D'apres les opinions que j'ai entendu exprimer
aujourd'hui et au cours de la cent-soixante et
onzieme seance hier, je crois pourtant que le
Conseil veut faire cesser les hostilites sans porter
atteinte aux droits juridiques ou moraux d'aucune des parties interessees et sans prejuger la
position que croiront eventuellement devoir
prendre un ou plusieurs des membres du Conseil
a l'egard des principes juridiques importants qui
sont mis en cause.
J'ai di.scute le point de vue de ma deUigation
avec le representant de l'Australie, et j'ai fait
part au representant des Pays-Bas de ces discussions. J'avais fait savoir au representant de
l'Austra:lie que je me proposais de soumettre un
amendement a sa resolution, amendement qui,
si le Conseil l'approuvait, reussirait, je crois, a
persuader les parties en cause de cesser les hostilites et de regler le differend par arbitrage ou
par tout autre moyen pacifique. Je crais qu'une
telle resolution, si le Conseil l'approuvait et la
votait, completerait heureusement l'offre de bons
offices que nous venons de faire, qu~ le Gouvernement des Pays-Bas a acceptee, et a laquelle,
nous l'esperons, il sera donne suite rapidement.
L'amendement a la resolution australienne
dont je donnerai lecture dans un instant - j'en
ai plusieurs exemplaires a l'intention des membres du Conseil- n'invoque aucun Article de
la Charte et n'engage pas la position du Conseil
a l'egard de la souverainete des Pays-Bas sur la
region en question. Il laisse tous ces problemes
en suspens, sans prejudice des decisions que le
Conseil pourrait prendre ulterieurement.
Voici, sous sa forme actuelle, le texte de
l'amendement, dont je fournirai un exemplaire
au President et aux autres membres:
"Le Conseil de securite,
"Constatant a regret que des hostilites sont en
cours entre les forces armees des Pays-Bas et
celles de la Republique d'lndanesie,
"Invite les parties,
"a) A mettre immediatement fin aux hostilites, et
"b) A regler leur differend par voie d'arbitrage au par tout autre moyen pacifique."

1659
I respectfully submit that amendment to the
judgment of the Council. My delegation believes
that if we can pass that simple statement quickly,
we may then go il1to the legal issues involved at
a subsequent time, when our various delegations
on this Council will have had the time to study
and to think of all of the indications which
might follow our adopting anyone of the juridical principles.

Je soumets respectueusement cet amendement
au jugement du Conseil. Ma delegation estime
que, si nous approuvons sans tarde. cette simple
declaration, nous pourrons aborder plus tard les
aspects juridiques du probleme, lorsque nos delegations respectives aupres du Conseil auront eu
le temps d'etudier et d'envisager toutes les
consequences qu'entrainerait l'adoption de l'un
quekonque des principes juridiques en cause.

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): As you are
aware, the question of the situation of Indonesia
was considered by the Security Cuuncil in 1946
at the request of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic during the Council's sessions in London.! Even then the Indonesian situation was
attracting the attention of world public opinion.
The situation that prevailed in Indonesia was
even then alarming and warranted the Security
Council'~ attention. Unfortunately, there were
too many sceptics at the time who did not agree
that the Indonesian situation warranted serious
attention, and called for the adoption, by the
Security Council, of decisions that would have
led to an improvement.

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): On
sait que le Conseil de securite a deja examine
la situation en Indonesie au cours des reunions
qu'il a tenues en 1946 a Londres; cet examen
a eu lieu sur la demande de la delegation de la
Republique socialiste sovietique d'Ukrain'e!. A
ce moment-~a deja, la situation en Indonesie
attirait l'attention de l'opinion mondiale.. Des
cette epoque, la situation dans ce pays etait
inquietante et meritait l'examen du Conseil de
securite. Malheureusement, il y avait a ce moment-la trop de sceptiques qui doutaient que la
situation dans ce pays meritat une etude approfondie, et meritat egalement que le Conseil de
securite dfit prendre des mesures appropriees
pour la redresser.
Le Conseil n'a pu a ce moment-la prendre
aucune decision en vue d'assainir la situation
qui s'etait cn~ee en Iridonesie. Les evenements
qui se sont produits depuis, pendant l'annee
1946 et en 1947, ont donne raison a ceux qui
affirmaient que la situation en Indonesie constituait une menace a la paix et que, par consequent, elle meritait un examen approfondi.
Nous savons tous que la situation en Indonesie
a empire de mois en mois, de semaine en
semaine, de jour en jour. Par suite de cette
aggravation, le Conseil de securite a repris
l'examen de la question, cette fois sur la demande
des Gouvernements de l'Inde et de l'Australie.

The Security Council was unable then to take
any decision in regard to improving the situation prevailing in Indonesia. The events which
have since occurred, durLng 1946 and the past
months of 1947, have confirmed how right were
those who affirmed that the Indonesian situation
was a threat to peace and therefore merited seri:ous attention.
We all know that the situation in Indonesia
has worsened with the passing of each month,
each week and each day. As a result of the
worsening of this situation, the Security Council
has once again reopened consideration of this
question, this time in connexion with applications from the Governments of' India and Australia.
What then is going on in Indonesia at present?
In Indonesia the Netherlands has undertaken
large-scale military operations against the Indonesian Republic. The fact that these military
operations are called by the Netherlands Government, "police measures" and even of a "limited
character" does not alter the situation. Everyone knows that, in fact, large-scale military operations with the participation of aircraft, naval
units and infantry formations are being carried
out in Indonesia. The world Press, including the
United States Press, is full of reports on the situation in Indonesia and the Netherlands military
operations.
Everyone knows that Netherlands troops are
advancing deep into Indonesian territory; capturing important economic, strategic, administrative and other objectives; shooting Indonesians,
• See Official Records of the Security Council, First
Year, First Series, 11th meeting, pages 174 et saq.

Que se passe-t-il done actuellement en
Indonesie? Des operations militaires de grande
envergure s'y deroulent, entreprises par les PaysBas contre la Republique d'Indonesie. Que le
Gouvernement neerlandais qualifie ces operations militaires de "mesures de police", qui
seraient meme d'un "caractere limite", cela ne
change rien a la situation. Tout le monde sait
que, en realite, des operations militaires tres
etendues ont lieu en Indonesie, auxquelles
participent l'aviation, la marine et des unites
d'infanterie. La presse mondiale, y compris la
presse des Etats-Unis, est pleine d'informations
sur la situation en Indonesie et sur les operations
de guerre menees par les Pays-Bas.
Tout le monde sait que les troupes neerlandaises progressent au cceur du territoire indonesien, qu'elles occupent des points d'importance
economique; strategique et administrative, etc.;
1 Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite,
Premiere Annee, Premiere Serie, 11eme seance, page 174
et seq.

1660
in at!. effort to bring military operations to an
end more quickly and secure victory.

qu'elles tirent sur les Indonesiens et s'efforcent
de terminer leurs operations militaires par une
victoire aussi rapide que possible.

That is the present situation in Indonesia, It
may be asked how we are to describe this situation? If a really serious and objective appraisal
of the Indonesian situation is made by the Security Council, it cannot but characterize the
actions of the Netherlands as a breach of the
peace. However one may try to belittle the
significance of these events, by advancing false
arguments to the effect that the Netherlands
Government has allegedly been obliged to undertake military operations against the Indonesian
Republic, there can be no dissembling the fact
that here we have a breach of the peace and
that the Netherlands, in having taken this course,
bears a heavy responsibility.

Telle est la situation qui existe a l'heure
actuelle en Indonesie. Comment la qualifier? Si
le Conseil de securite examine d'une fa~on
approfondie et objective la situation qui s'est
creee dans ce pays, il ne pourra manquer de
caracteriser l'action des Pays-Bas comme une
rupture de la paix. Quels que soient les efforts
de ceux qui cherchent a amoindrir la signification de. ces evenements, en avan~ant la these
fallacieuse selon laquelle le Gouvernement des
Pays-Bas aurait ete force a entreprendre des
operations militaires contre la Republique d'lndonesie, on ne peut pas se dissimuler que nous
sommes en presence d'une rupture de la paix,
et que les Pays-Bas, qui se sont engages dans
cette voie, portent une lourde responsabilite.

The United Nations Charter, in such cases,
obliges the Security Council, which has the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace, to take decisions which will
restore peace and put an end to aggression. That,
in the view of the USSR delegation, is the task
facing the Security Council in connexion with
the issue raised by the Governments of Australia
and India. If for any reason the Security Council were to shirk from taking a decision as required by the United Nations Charter, that
would mean it had failed to fulfil its duties in
this matter. This could not but reflect on its
own authority and on the authority of the whole
Organization. We must not allow this to happen.

Pour les cas de cet ordre, la Charte des
Nations Unies oblige le Conseil de securite, qui
assume la responsabilite principale du maintien
de la paix internationale, a prendre les decisions
appropriees pour retablir la paix et couper court
a. l'agression. Telle est, de l'avis de la delegation
de l'URSS, la tache du Conseil de securite en ce
qui concerne la question soulevee par les Gouvernements de l'Australie et de l'Inde. Si, pour
une raison quelconque, le Conseil de securite
evitait de prendre une decision, comme le veut
la Charte de notre Organisation, il se deroberait
en l'espece a son devoir. Cela porterait atteinte a
son autorite, ainsi qu'a cdle de l'Organisation
tout entiere. C'est la une eventualite que nous
ne devrions pas admettre.

The Netherlands Government, and representatives of certain other States on the Security
Council, are trying to prove to us that the Indonesian Republic is not a sovereign and independent State and that what is going on in
Indonesia should not as they say, demand the
attention of the Security Council. I find it impossible to agree with such an assertion. It is
true that the Indonesian people are finding it
difficult to achieve their independence and are
having to overcome numerous obstacles, but they
have already been very successful in achieving
this purpose.

Le Gouvernement des Pays-Bas ainsi que les
delegations de certains pays representes au
Conseil de securite s'efforcent de nous persuader
que la Republique d'lndonesie n'est pas un Etat
souverain et independant, et que le Conseil de
securite ne devrait pas s'interesser aux evenements qui se deroulent dans ce pays. Je ne puis
partager cette maniere de voir. Il est exact que
le peuple indonesien a beaucoup de peine a
s'ouvrir le chemin de l'independance et qu'il
doit surmonter de nombreux obstacles; il a deja,
neanmoins, obtenu de grands succes dans cette
VOle.

It is a known fact that the Netherlands itself
gave de facto recognition to the Indonesian
Government. Let us see what this Agreement,
to which the Netherlands representative has
referred, says. This Agreement, concluded between the Netherlands and the Indonesian Republic on 25 March 1947, says that the Netherlands Government, in accordance with article 1
of the Agreement, recognized the Government
of the Republic of Indonesia as the de factoauthority and de facto Government in Indonesia.

On sait que les Pays-Bas ont eux-memes
reconnu de facto le Gouvernement d'lndonesie.
Voyons ce que dit l'Accord auquel s'est refere
ici le representant neerlandais. Nous lisons dans
cet Accord, conclu le 25 mars 1947 entre les
Pays-Bas et la Republique d'Indonesie, que, en
vertu de l'article premier, le Gouvernement
neerlandais reconnait le Gouvernement de la
RepubJique d'Indonesie comme etant en fait le
Gouvernement de ce pays et comme y exer~ant
en fait le pouvoir.

By this the Netherlands Government undertook a definite obligation-to respect the Indonesian Government. Article 1 of this Agreement, in fact, reads as follows:

Par ceUe reconnaissance meme, le Gouvernement des Pays-Bas a assume l'obligation tres
nette de respecter le Gouvernement d'Indonesie.
Voici d'ailleurs le texte de l'article premier de
cet Accord:

PI . . .

.,

1601 ( - ¥

"The Netherlands Government recognizes the
Government of the Republic of Indonesia as
exercising de facto authority over Java, Madura
and Sumatra. The areas occupied by Allied or
Netherlands forces shall be included gradually,
through mutual co-operation in republican territory."
After the conclusion of this Agreement between the Netherlands and the Indonesian
Republic, we know that the latter was recognized
as an independent State by a number of other
countries. As the representative of Syria has informed us, the Indonesian Republic was recognized by the Arab States. It was recognized by
India. The United States of America and the
United Kingdom accorded recognition. It may
be said that the Indonesian Republic has not
been recognized by a sufficient number of States.
This argument, I think, can be easily refuted.
If we look at the number of States which have
recognized certain countries, Members of the
United Nations, we would probably find that
some countries have been recognized by fewer
States than the Indonesian Republic has been.
Such countries can be found for instance in
Latin America, in Africa and even elsewhere.
I want to draw the Security Council's attention to the fact that we should be making a gross
mistake if we transferred the centre of our attention from the basic issue to its legal aspect, and
tried by various kinds of legal definitions to
conceal the fact that military operations are being carried out in Indonesia by the Netherlands
and that a war is going one.
Yesterday, at the hundred and seventy-first
meeting, we heard a statement by Mr. van
Kleffens, who tried to justify the position of the
Netherlands Government. In the first place, he
denied the right of the Security Council to consider this question; that is quite inadmissible.
Such an assertion is at variance with the Charter
and with the obligations laid by it on the Security
Council for the maintenance of international
peace and security.

Hi¥L.4bl4i

"Le Gouvernement des Pays-Bas reconnait au
Gouvernement de la Republique d'Indonesie
une autorite de facto sur Java, Madoura et
Sumatra. Les regions occupees par les forces
alliees ou par les forces des Pays-Bas seront progressivement rattachees par cooperation mutuelle
au territoire de la Republique."
On sait que, apres la signature de cet Accord,
conclu entre les Pays-Bas et la Republique
d'Indon.esie, cette derniere a ete reconnue par
un certain nombre de Eays comme un Etat
indepcndant. La Republique d'Indonesie a ete
reconnue par les Etats arabes, ainsi que nous en
a informes le representant de la Syrie. Elle a ete
reconnue par l'Inde. Elle a ete reconnue par les
Etats-Unis d'Amerique et par le Royaume-Uni.
Certains pourraient dire que les Etats qui ont
reconnu la Republique d'Indonesie ne sont pas
assez nombreux, mais je crois que cet argument
n'est pas difficile a refuter. En effet, si l'on considere combien de pays ont reconnu certains
Etats Membres des Nations Unies, on verra
probablement que certains Etats ont ete reconnus par moins de pays que ne l'a ete la
Republique d'Indonesie. On peut trouver, par
exemple.1 de tels Etats en Amerique latine, en
Afrique, et meme ailleurs.
J e voudrais faire observer au Conseil de
securite ql'.e nous commettrions une grave
erreur en detournant notre attention du fond
du problcme pour nous consacrer a ses aspects
juridiques, et en essayant de cacheI', par toutes
sortes de definitions juridiques, le fait que des
operations militaires entreprises par les Pays-Bas
ont lieu en Indollesie et qu'on y fait la guerre.
Nous avons entendu hier, au cours de la centsoixante et onzieme seance, la declaration de
M. van Kleffens, qui s'est efforce de justifier la
position du Gouvernement des Pays-Bas. Tout
d'abord, il a conteste le droit du Conseil de
securite d'examiner cette question, ce qui est
tout a fait inadmissible. Cette affirmation est
contraire a la Charte et au devoir que celle-ci
impose au Conseil de securite dans le domaine
du maintien de la paix et de la securite internationales.

Apart from that Mr. van Kleffens told us at
great length that the Netherlands had, in his
view, been obliged to undertake military operations because the Government of the Indonesian
Republic had failed to fulfil the obligations which
it undertook under the Agreement of 25 March
1947 to which I have referred.

D'autre part, M. van Kleffens nous a explique
longuement que les Pays-Bas auraient ete forces
d'entreprendre des operations militaires parce
que le Gouvernement de la Republique d'lndonesie ne remplissait pas les obligations qu'il avait
assumees en vertu de I'Accord du 25 mars 1947
auquel j'ai fait allusion.

According to Mr. van Kleffens' reasoning, we
might draw the very odd inference that when a
Government which has concluded an agreement
with another Government fails in some respect
to carry out provisions of the agreement, the
Government which is carrying out the agreement
or claims to be doing so, has the L611t to start
military operations against the State accused of
not carrying out the agreement. How can such
an assertion be accepted? Clearly, such an assertion is quite inadmissible, for it would mean
justifying and encouraging aggression.

Si nous adoptions la logique de M. van Kleffens, nous aboutirions a cette conclusion etrange
que, lorsqu'un Gouvernement, ayant signe un
accord avec un autre Etat, ne respecte pas l'une
quelconque des clauses de l'accord ou du traite,
l'Etat qui en respecte les termes, ou qui pretend
les respecter, a le droit d'engager des operations
militaires contre le Gouvernement accuse de
violation de I'accord. Peut-on accepter une telle
affirmation? Certes non, car cela equivaudrait a
justifier et a encourager l'agression.-

We know that the Netherlands had, and apparently still has, economic interests in Indonesia. It is possible that there are a number of
complicated questions which require settlement.
Let us even assume that the Government of the
Indonesian Republic is, in some respects, not
carrying out the Agreement. Can that really
justify military operations being undertaken
against the Indonesian Republic? Clearly, it
cannot justify such actions. There is still no
proof at all, however, that the Government of
the Indonesian Republic is not actually carrying
out the Agreement. We have heard the representative' of the Netherlands, but we have not
heard here the voice of the representative of the
Indonesian people.
Equally, the Netherlands action cannot be
justified by the arguments advanced by the representative of the Netherlands Government to
the effect that, by its character, the Government
of the Indonesian Republic is incompatible with
Netherlands interests. He calls this Government
"totalitarian", subject to "corruption", etc.

Nous. savons que les Pays-Bas avaient des
interets economiques en Indonesie; il semble
qu'ils en aient toujours. Il est possible qu'il existe
un certain nombre de questions compliquees qui
demandent a etre regIees. Admettons meme que
le Gouvernement de la Republique d'lndonesie
n'ait pas respecte certaines dispositions de l'Accord. ,Est-ce une raison suffisante pour ouvrir des
hostilites contre l'Indonesie? Il est clair que cela
ne suffit pas pour justifier une telle action.
D'ailleurs, il n'a pas encore ete prouve que
la Republique d'Indonesie ait reellement vioIe
l'Accord. Nous avons entendu le representant
des Pays-Bas, mais nous n'avons pas entendu le
representant du peuple indonesien.
Le representant du Gouvernement neerlandais
nous dit que le caractere du Gouvernement de
la Republique indonesienne ne repond pas aux
interets des Pays-Bas. Mais cet argument non
plus ne saurait justifier l'action du Gouvernement neerlandais.. Le representant neerlandais
qualifie le Gouvernement indonesien de "totalitaire", de corrompu", etc.

If we were to take such a view, we should
also come to an entirely absurd conclusion. We
should conclude that a State could justify its
aggression against another State on the ground
that it disliked the internal administration of the
other State. Clearly, such a point of view has
absolutely no substance or justification. More
than that, such an attitude is dangerous to the
United Nations. The form of a country's internal
administration should not afford an excuse to
any State whatsoever to take aggresive action
against another State, even if its internal administration is not acceptable to everyone, so long
as it does not create complications for international peace and. security or constitute a threat
to peace. On these points, however, we have,
as you all know, heard only the Netherlands representative's views; we have not heard the voice
of the people of the Indonesian Republic.

Si nous nous rangions a son avis, nous aboutirions a une autre conclusion absurde. En effet,
nous devrions conclure qu'un Etat pourrait justifier les actes agressifs qu'il commet a l'egard
d'un autre Etat en declarant qu'il n'aime pas
son regime politique. Il est evident qu'un tel
argument est absolument inconsistant et qu'il
est denue de tout fondement. Je dirais meme
que cette attitude risque de mettre en danger
l'Organisation des Nations Unies elle-meme. Le
regime politique d'un pays, s'il ne provoque pas
de complications dangereuses pour la paix et la
securite, s'il ne constitue pas une menace pour
la paix, ne devrait pas servir de justification aux
actes d'agression qu'un autre Etat entreprend
contre ce pays, meme si ce regime politique ne
plait pas a tout le monde. Sur ces questions-Ht
cependant, nous avons entendu, comme vous le
savez, le representant des Pays-Bas, mais nous
n'avons pas entendu la voix du peuple indonesien.

Mr. van Kleffens pointed out that the Indonesians had caused great inconvenience to tne
Netherlands because they had blockaded certain
areas garrisoned by Netherlands troops, thus
making it difficult to supply them with food;
that the President of the Indonesian Republic.
is not acting in conformity with the Netherlands
desires, for eX::i.mple, in frequently changing the
members of his Cabinet etc.

M. van Kleffens a indique que les Indonesiens avaient cause aux Pays-Bas des inconvenients serieux en faisant le blocus de certaines
regions ou se trouvaient des troupes neerlandaises, ce qui avait entrave le ravitaillement de
ces troupes; que le President de la Republique
d'Indonesie n'agissait pas conformement aux
desirs des Pays-Bas, que, par exemple, il modifiait souvent la composition de son ministere,
etc.

The Netherlands representative even complained that, after military operations began, the
Indonesians took such steps as the destruction of
plantations, thus damaging Netherlands economic interests. He told us that the Indonesian
Government had not the unity which the Netherlands would have liked, and that this was also
one of the reasons why the Netherlands had to
take up arms. All these arguments are also entirely point1e~s. Even if these facts, or some of

Le representant des Pays-Bas s'est meme plaint
que, depuis l'ouverture des hostilites, les Indonesiens aient pris des mesures telles que la destruction des plantations, en nuisant ainsi aux
interets economiques des Pays-Bas. Selon lui, il
n'y aurait pas, au sein du Gouvernement indonesien, cette unite que le Gouvernement neerlandais aurait souhaitee, et ce serait la une des
raisons pour lesquelles les Pays-Bas ont pris les
armes. Ce sont la egalement des arguments tout

b&&

.£42

Ql

them, were established, they could never be the
least justification for the aggressive action which
the Netherlands has taken against the Indonesian Republic.

a fait inconsistants. Meme si ces faits, ou certains
d'entre eux, etaient demontres, cela ne suffirait
pas le moins du monde a justifier les actes
d'agression commis par les Pays-Bas a l'egard de
la Republique d'Indonesie.

The Netherlands representative tried at great
length to prove to us that the existing situation
in Indonesia is not a threat to peace, and that
the events taking place there are of a purely loca 1
character. That argument cannot be accepted.
We all know, and history teaches us, that big
wars have sometimes sprung from insignificant
incidents.

Le representant des Pays-Bas a parle longuement pour nous persuader que la situation en
Indonesie ne constitue pas une menace pour la
paix, et que les evenements qui s'y dtI'Oulent
sont d'un caractere purement local. C'est la un
argument que l'on ne peut accepter. Nous savons
tous - c'est l'histoire qui nous l'enseigne - que
parfois de grandes guerres ont commence par
des incidents insignifiants.

We have heard the representatives of India
and Australia, countries which are geographically and territorially nearer to Indonesia than
other countries. They have rightly pointed out
that tlle events occurring in Indonesia have a
direct connexion with the maintenance of international peace and security and that they have
more tllan local significance. That is precisely
what explains the applications made by the Governments of India and Australia asking the Security Council to consider the situation in Indonesia.

Nous avons entendu ici les representants de
l'Inde et de l'Australie, c'est-a-dire de pays qui,
au point de vue de leur position geographique,
sont plus proches de l'Indonesie que les autres
pays. Ils ont indique a juste titre que les evenements qui ont lieu en Indonesie interessent
directement le maintien de la paix et de la
securite internationales, et que ces evenements
depassent le cadre local. C'est precisement pour
cette raison que les Gouvernements de l'Inde et
de l'Australie ont adresse au Conseil de securite
une demande le priant d'examiner la situation
en Indonesie.

At yesterday's as well as today's Council meetings, the question of mediation has been mentioned. On behalf of his Government, Mr. van
Kleffens today officially stated that the Netherlands Government accepts the United States'
offer of mediation. The question of mediation
is worthy of attention. The Security Council
must go into the matter. First of all, what does
the mediation of one country, say the United
States of America, mean, as this mediation is
envisaged, for example, by Mr. van Kleffens and
the United Kingdom representative? The United
Kingdom representative stated that, in his opinion, the Security Council should not take any
decision but should merely await the results of
mediation. Were we to agree with this conception, it would mean that the Security Council
had eluded the taking of a concrete decision on
a question upon which it ought to take a decision, and had repudiated responsibility for the
alarming situation which has arisen in Indonesia.

Au cours des seances du Conseil de securite
qui ont eu lieu hier et aujourd'hui, on a evoque
la question de la mediation. M. van Kleffens a
fait aujourd'hui, au nom de son Gouvernerhent,
une declaration officielle, aux termes de laquelle
le Gouvernement des Pays-Bas acceptait l'offre
de mediation des Etats-Unis. La question de la
mediation merite d'etre examinee. Le Conseil de
securite devrait l'etudier de pres. Et, d'abord,
que signifie la mediation d'un Gouvernement,
par exemple celui des Etats-Unis, telle que l'envisagent M. van Kleffens et le representant du
Royaume-Uni? Le representant du RoyaumeDni a declare que, a son avis, le Conseil de
securite ne devrait prendre aucune decision et
qu'il devait simplement attendre les resultats de
la mediation. Si nous acceptions ce point de vue,
cela signifierait que le Conseil de sewrite evite
de prendre une decision precise sur une question
qui demande a etre tranchee, et qu'il renonce ases responsabilites en ce qui c:oncerne la situation
tendue qui s'est creee en Indonesie.

The representative of the United Kingdom
said outright that it would be a good thing if
the Security Council took no decision, still less
action, in this matter; it should merely 1-' left on
the agenda and await further developn" is.

Le representant du Royaume-Uni a declare
sans ambages qu'il serait souhaitable que le
Conseil de securite ne prenne aucune decision;
que, a fortiori, le Conseil devrait n'entreprendre
aucune action et se borner a maintenir la question a son ordre du jour, en attendant les developpements futurs.

The USSR delegation considers this an inadmissible way of deciding such an important and
urgent matter. Firstly, this course would mean
virtually by-passing the United Nations. For the
Council itself to abstain from taking a decision
on this question would be a blow to the United
Nations. If we are going to continue by-passing
and ignoring the United Nations, it may become

La delegation de I'DRSS estime cette methode
: .acceptable pour le reglement d'une affaire si
grave et si pressante. En fait, cette methode
signifie avant tout qu'on ne tient pas compte de
l'Organisation des Nations Unies. En s'abstenant
de son propre gre de prendre aucune decision
sur cette question, le Conseil de securite porterait
atteinte a notre Organisation. Si les cas ou l'on

a dangerous habit which will do serious damage
to its authority. It may seriously undermine the
faith of peoples in the United Nations as an
instrument in the struggle for international security. Such a situation would be incompatible
with our common interests in the struggle for a
stable peace and security for the nations.

ne tient ~ucun compte de I'Organisation se multipliaient, cela pourrait devenir une' habitude
dangereuse qui ne manquerait pas de nuire a
son autorite. Cela pourrait ebranler la confiance
des peuples, qui considerent cette Organisation
comme un instrument de de£ense de la securite
internationale. Cela serait contraire a nos interets communs dans notre lutte pour une paix
durable et pour la sec'-1rite des peuples.

Si nous acceptions la proposition du RoyaumeUui, cela signifierait egalement que les positions
dont les Pays-Bas viennent de s'emparer en
Indonesie permettraient aux Neerlandais de se
trouver dans une situation favorisee vis-a-vis de
la Republique d'lndonesie au moment du reglement des questions litigieuses qui separent ces
deux pays.M. van Klefi'ens a fait remarquer
hier que les Pays-Bas esperaient terminer bientot
leurs operations militaires, c'est-a-dire qu'ils esperaient remporter la victoire sur les forces de la
Republique d'lndonesie. Dans ces conditions,
que 1'0n s'arrete a la mediation ou que l'on
choisisse n'importe quelle autre methode pour
regler les questions litigieuses qui separent les
Pays-Bas et la Republique d'lndonesie, les PaysBas se trouveraient dans une situation privilegiee
pour la seule raison que leurs troupes auraient
triomphe des forces de la Republique d'lndonesie et occupe ses centres industriels, economiques et strategiques. Telles sont les conditions
dans lesquelles on nous propose d'avoir recours
a la mediation, al'arbitrage ou a d'autres moyens
pacifiques pour regler les questions litigieuses
entre les Pa.ys-Bas et la Republique d'lndonesie,
ceci en negligeant I'Organisation des Nations
Unies.
Nous savons tous ce que signifient les negociaWe all know the meaning of negotiations
between two countries, when one country has oc- tions menees entre deux pays, lorsque l'un occupe
cupied the other's territory. We know the mean- le territoire de l'autre. Nous savons ce que signiing of negotiations between two States when one fient les negociations menees entre deux Etats,
State has its troops and administration on the lorsque l'un maintient ses troupes et son admioth€r's territory. Such negotiations would be nistration civile sur le territoire de l'autre. Ces
carried out under advantageous conditions for negociations se deroulent dans des conditions
one country and disadvantageous conditions for favorables pour l'une des parties et defavorables
the other, in this case as a result of the Nether- pour l'autre. Dans le cas que nous examinons,
lands having used armed force against the Indo- ces conditions auront ete creees par l'action militaire des Pays-Bas contre le peuple indonesien.
nesian people.

The acceptance of the United Kingdom proposal would also mean that the positions which
the Netherlands has now seized in Indonesia
would give it an advantage over the Indonesian
Republic in the subsequent settlement of outstanding questions between these countries. Mr.
van Kleffens yesterday drew our attention to the
fact that the Netherlands hopes to end military
operations soon, i.e., to score a victory over the
forces of the Indonesian Republic. That means
that mediation, or any other procedure which
may be chosen for settling the questions outstanding between the Netherlands and the Indonesian Republic, would place the Netherlands in
a more advantageous position, simply because
its troops had been victorious over the forces
of the Indonesian Republic and had occupied
its important productive economic and strategic
centres. It is in these circumstances that we are
recommended to use mediation, arbitration and
other peaceful means of settling the various questions between the Netherlands and the Indonesian Republic and so by-pass the United
Nations.

The USSR delegation considers that the Security Council should go seriously into the whole
question raised by the Governments of Australia
and India, and should take its own decision about
improving the situation which has arisen in Indonesia. A part of this decision should be a decision to stop hostilities immediately. I spoke of
the need of taking such a decision yesterday, but
some other representatives on the Security Council wished to. postpone it until today's Council
meeting.
We should consider what other decision the
Security Council can and should take in order
to ensure the restoration of peace in this part of
the world in the interests of both the States involved in the dispute, as well as in the interests
of the United Nations as a whole.

La delegation de l'URSS estime que le Conseil
de securite doit etu-dier a fond la question qui a
ete soulevee par les Gouvernements de l'Australie
et de l'lnde, et .qu'il doit prendre lui-meme une
decision en vue de remedier a la situation qui
s'est creee en Indonesie. Cette decision doit
inclure des dispositions pour une cessation immediate des hostilites. Hier deja, j'ai dit qu'une telle
decision etait indispensable, mais d'autres membres du Conseil de securite ont pre£ere l'ajourner
a la presente seance.
Nous devons examiner quelles autres decisions
le Conseil de securite pourrait et devrait prendre
afin d'assurer le retablissement de la paix dans
cette partie du monde, conformement aux interets des deux pays en conflit ainsi qu'aux interets
de l'Organisation des Nations Unies dans son
ensemble.

adi!!!!!

liE

.! .1l?'!i!IiIIi!.

T &II1II

1665
In conclusion, on behalf of the USSR delegation, I beg to submit the following motion:

"The Security Council

Pour conclure~ je vous soumets, au nom de la
delegation de l'URSS, la proposition suivante:

"Le Conseil de securite

"Considers it necessary that the troops of both
sides, the Netherlands and the Indonesian Republic, should be immediately withdrawn to the
previous positions which they occupied before
the beginning of military operations."

"Estime indispensable que les troupes des deux
parties, Pays-Bas et Republique d'Indonesie, se
replient immediatement sur les positions qu'elles
occupaient avant le debut des operations."

The adoption of this proposal would improve
the Australian resolution, which provides only
for the cessation of military operations. It would
make the Council's decision on this important
and urgent question even more operative and
effective, and would be a practical step towards
the restoration of peace in this part of the world.

Si cette proposition etait adoptee, cela ameliorerait le texte de la resolution australienne,
qui ne prevoit que la cessation des hostilites. La
decision que le Conseil doit prendre dans cette
affaire grave et pressante en serait rendue plus
efficace, et l'on aurait adopte ainsi une mesure
d'ordre pratique pour retablir la paLx dans cette
partie du monde.

At the conclusion of the interpretation of the
above remarks, Mr. Gromyko added the following statement in English:

Apres Finterpretation de ces remarques,
M. Gromyko ajoute en anglais la declaration
suivante:

As a continuation of my statement, I should
like to make the following proposal for the con··
sideration of the Security Council:

Comme suite a ma declaration, je desire soumettre la proposition suivante a l'examen du
Conseil de securite:

"The Security Council

"Le Conseil de securite

"Considers it necessary that the troops of both
sides, the Netherlands and the Indonesian Republic, should be immediately withdrawn to the
previous positions which they occupied before
the beginning of military operations."

ccEstime indispensable que les troupes des deux
parties, Pays-Bas et Republique d'Indonesie, se
replient immediatement sur les positions qu'elles
occupaient avant le debut des operations."

I consider this proposal to be an addition to
the text of the Australian resolution, which is
acceptable to the USSR delegation in the form
in which it was submitted to the Security Council yesterday. The USSR delegation considers
that the addition of such a paragraph would
improve the Australian resolution and would
bring the eventual decision of the Security Council into conformity with the seriousness of the
situation in Indonesia.

Je desirerais que cette proposition constitue
une addition au texte de la resolution australienne, que la delegation de l'URSS considere
comme acceptable dans la forme sous laquelle
elle a ete presentee hier au Conseil de securite.
La delegation de l'URSS estime que l'addition
de ce paragraphe ameliorerait la resolution
australienne, et donnerait a la decision finale du
Conseil de securite un caractere qui correspondrait a la gravite de la situation existant en
Indonesie.

The USSR delegation naturally reserves its
right to make additional proposals, taking into
account the progress of OUl' discussion.

La delegation de l'URSS se reserve evidemment le droit de presenter de nouvelles propositions, en tenant compte de la suite des debats.

The PRESIDENT: I understand that the USSR
representative is proposing the addition of another paragraph to the Australian proposal,
which consists of paragraphs (a) and (b). If
that is so, when we come to a vote on the Australian proposal, we shall add the additional
paragraph suggested by the USSR representative, and we shall put it to a vote.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais):
Le representant de l'URSS propose, je crois,
l'addition d'un nouveau paragraphe a la
proposition australienne, qui se compose des
paragraphes a) et b). Dans ces conditions,
quand nous voterons sur la proposition australienne, nous ajouterons le nouveau paragraphe
propose par le representant de l'URSS et nous
m<:ttrons l'ensemble des trois paragraphes aux
VOIX.

Mr. CROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics): It may be made a separate part of
the resolution, or it may be added as an amendment to paragraph (a) of the Australian resolution. However, if the Security Council decides
to take an immediate decision on the cessation
of military operations in Indonesia without taking a decision on other aspects of this question,

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques) (traduit de l'anglais): On
peut considerer ce paragraphe comme une partie
distincte de la resolution ou comme un amendement au paragraphe a) de la resolution australienne. Toutefois, si le Conseil de securite decide
de prendre immediatement une decision concernant la cessation des operatIons militaires en

1666
then, in order not to delay the taking of a decision on the first point, I think: it would be better
to consider my proposal as a separate paragraph.

Indonesie sans prendre de decision en ce qui
concerne les autres aspects de la question, je
crois qu'il serait preferable de faire de ma proposition un paragraphe distinct, afin de ne pas
retarder la decision sur le premier point.

The PRESIDENT: This matter will be disposed
of when we come to the vote. At this time, we
shall hear the remaining speakers. I repeat my
request that we make brief, concise and not repetitious speeches. It is sufficient to support the
statement of another speaker and confirm what
he has said without repeating his thoughts.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais):
On decidera de cette question au moment de
voter. Pour l'instant, nous allons entendre les
autres orateurs. J e demande encore une fois aux
orateurs d'etre le plus bref et le plus concis
possible et de ne pas se repeter. I1 suffit d'appuyer les declarations d'un autre orateur et de
confirmer ce qu'il a dit; il est inutile de repeter
ce qu'il a deja dit.

Mr. VAN LANGENHOVE (Belgium) (translated
from French): Mr. President, I shall try to comply with your request to be brief.
The main purpose of the Australian delegation's proposal is to ensure that the first urgent
steps are taken. The Council is now faced with
a new fact: a mediation agreement concluded
between the Netherlands and the United States.
The Council cannot but take note of this, for
this new fact would seem to meet the requirements which the Anstralian resolution was intended to cover.
In these circumstances, I think there is no
practical interest in discussing now whether the
Council is competent and, if it is, what further
action should be taken on the draft resolution
before us. The United Kingdom representative
has suggested that the question be kept on the
list of matters of which the Council is seized.
Such a decision would leave the question of the
Council's competence entirely open. In this connexiori, I am afraid that even the United States
amendment cannot be regarded as taking a positive view about the competence of the Council.
This objection applies even more strongly to the
amendment proposed by the USSR representative. As we have seen, certain members of the
Council take exception to, and have very serious
reservations on such a course. I repeat, it has
no practical value, in view of the mediation
agreement concluded between the Netherlands
and the United States. That agreement offers
the speediest means of achieving the pacification
and constructive understanding which I am sure
we all desire.

M. VANLANGENHOVE (Be1gique): Je m'efforcerai, Monsieur le President de me conformer a
votre demande de concision.
L'objet essentiel de la proposition de la
delegation australienne est de pourvoir aux premieres mesures d'urgence. Le Conseil se trouve
maintenant en presence d'un fait nouveau: un
accord de mediation intervenu entre les PaysBas et les Etats-Unis. Le Conseil ne peut qu'en
prendre acte. Ce fait nouveau semble, en effet,
de nature a repondre aux necessites auxquelles
la resolution australienne vise a pourvoir.
J'estime que, dans ces conditions, il est devenu
sans interet pratique de rechercher, a l'heure
actuelle, si le Conseil est competent et, dans
l'affirmative, quelle suite devrait etre donnee au
projet de resolution qui nous est soumis. La
delegation du Royaume-Uni a suggere de maintenir la question sur la liste des affaires dont le
Conseil est saisi. Une decision dans ce sens reserverait entierement la question de la competence
du Conseil. A cet egard, je crains que IIteme
l'amendement des Etats-Unis ne puisse etre considere comme une prise de position affirmative
sur la competence du Conseil. A fortiori cette
objection s'applique a la proposition d'amendement du rep:r:esentant de l'URSS. Une telle prise
de position, ainsi que nous avons pu le constater,
suscite des objections et les plus serieuses reserves
de la part de plusieurs membres du Conseil.
Elle n'offre, je le repete, aucun interet pratique
en presence de l'accord de mediation intervenu
entre les Pays-Bas et les Etats-Unis. Cet accord
ouvre la voie la plus rapide vel'S la pacification
et l'entente constructive qui sont, j'en suis sur,
dans les vceux de tous.

Mr. LANGE (Poland): I do not intend at this
late hour to speak on the substance of the subject under consideration. I should simply like
to find out when our discussion is to be cqntinued. Is that to be done this afternoon, or is
there a possibility that an evening meeting will
be called?
I should like to urge the Council very earnesdy
to take at least one action today: either to adopt
the recommendation calling for a cessation of
hostilities; or to decide, if it so believes, that the
representative of the Netherlands is correct in his
contention that the matter is outside the competence of the Council. I believe the matter is of

M. LANGE (Pologne) (traduit de l'anglais) :
Je n'a,i pas l'intention, a une heure aussi tardive,
de discuter le fond de la question que nous
examinons actuellement. Je desire simplement
savoir quand nous poursuivrons cette discussion.
Sera-ce cet apres-midi ou serait-il possible de
nous reunir ce soir?
Je demande au Conseil avec une insistance
toute particuliere de prendre aujourd'hui au
moins une decision: soit d'adopter la recommandation qui vise a la cessation des hostilites, soit
de decider, si tel est le point de vue du Conseil,
que le representant des Pays-Bas a raison d'affirmer que la question depasse la competence du

«

-1667sufficient importance for us to decide today
whether it is within our competence to recommend a cessation of hostilities; and, if it is, to
make such a recommendation.

Conseil. Je crois que la question a pour nous
assez d'importance pour que nous decidions
aujourd'hui si nous avons la competence necessaire pour recommander la cessation des hostilites et, si oui, pour que nous formulions cette
recommandation.

The PRESIOENT: It was proposed at our meeting yesterday that this afternoon's meeting should
be devoted to the Greek question, and I have
arranged our schedule accordingly. If we are
going to hear from all the members who have
indicated a desire to speak on the Indonesian
question, and if they are going to discuss that
question at length, I do not see how we can exhaust the list of speakers at this morning's meeting. In that case, it will be necessary to postpone
the discussion of the Indonesian question to a
later time. We might either take up the question again toward the end of this afternoon's
meeting, perhaps beginning at six or seven
o'clock and continue at a meeting tonight or
tomorrow, or we might discuss it at the meetIng
of the Council which is scheduled for Monday
afternoon.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais):
Il a ete propose, a notre seance d'hier, de consacrer la reunion de cet apres-midi a la question
grecque, et j'ai organise notre emploi du temps
en consequence. Si nous entendons taus les
representants qui ont exprime le desir de prendre
la parole a propos de la question indonesienne,
et si ceux-ci ont l'intention de traiter cette question a fond, je crois qu'il sera impossible d'entendre ce matin tous les orateurs inscrits sur la
liste. En ce cas, il nous faudra remettre a plus
tard la discussion sur la question indonesienne.
Nous pourrions, soit reprendre la question vers
la fin de la seance de cet apres-midi, en commen~ant a six ou sept heures pour la poursuivre
au cours d'une seance que nous tiendrions ce
soir ou dcmain, soit la discuter a la seance du
Conscil prevue pour lundi apres-midi.

The representative of Poland has spoken
about the question of the competence of the
Council in this matter. Had any motion in regard to competence been submitted, I would
have given it priority, because it would then have
been necessary to decide first whether or not the
Security Council was competent to deal with this
question. If that had been decided affirmatively,
we should then have proceeded to any other
recommendation that might have been made.
The fact is, however, that the question of competence has simply been mentioned by some of
the speakers in the course of the discussion. If
any member had submitted a formal proposal
stating that this matter was outside the competence of the Security Council and that therefore
this item ought to be deleted from the Council's
agenda, that proposal would have received priority over any other. However, no such proposal
has been made.

Le representant de la Pologne a dit quelques
mots a propos de la competence du Conseil en
la matiere. Si qudqu'un avait presente une motion relative a la competence du Conseil, j'aurais
accorde priorite a cette motion, car il aurait
alors fallu decider avant toute autre chose si,
oui ou non, le Conseil de securite etait competent
en la matiere. Dans le cas de l'affirmative, nous
nous serions ensuite occupes de toute autre
recommandation eventuelle presentee. Mais, en
fait, la question a ete seulement mentionnee au
cours de la discussion par certains orateurs. Si
un membre du Conseil avait presente une proposition formelle, declarant que cette question
ne relevait pas de la competence du Conseil de
securite et que, en consequence, il fallait retirer
ce point de l'ordre du jour du Conseil, cette
proposition aurait eu priorite sur toute autre.
Mais personne n'a presente une proposition de
ce genre.

I shall therefore call for further discussion on
the proposal of the Australian delegation, as
amended by the delegations of the United States
and the Union of SO'iet Socialist Republics. The
vote on that proposal will, after all, reveal the
views of the members on the question of competence. Those who believe that the matter is
within the competence of the Council may vote
affirmatively or negatively on the Australian
resolution; however, those who believe that the
matter is outside the competence of the Council
will certainly vote against the resolution.

Je demanderai donc que l'on poursuive la
discussion de la proposition de la delegation
australienne, modifiee par les delegations des
Etats-Unis et de I'Union des Republiques sodalistes sovietiques. Le vote du Conseil sur cette
proposition fera, en somme, connaitre l' opinion
des membres sur la question de competence.
Ceux qui estiment que la question releve de la
competence du Conseil peuvent accepter ou
repousser la resolution australienne, mais ceux
qui croient que la question depasse la competence du Conseil voteront certainement contre la
resolution.

Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America):
It is quite evident that we are approaching the
kind of impasse which the United States delegation had hoped, through its simple amendment, to avoid. A moment ago, the representative of Poland mentioned that element in the
situation which is, I think, nearest to the hearts

M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l'anglais): De toute evidence, nous nous
engageons dans l'impasse que la delegation des
Etats-Unis a voulu eviter par son amendement.
Il y a un instant, le representant de la Pologne
invoquait ce qui, en l'occurrence, nous tient, je
crois, le plus a creur: obtenir que le Conseil,

i'mlE

of all of us-the hope of obtaining some action
by the Council's asking that hostilities cease. The
United States amendment would accomplish that
purpose without prejudicing the legal position
of anyone at this table, without prejudicing, in
my opinion, even the position of the representative of the Netherlands.

d'une maniere ou d'une autre, demande la cessation des hostilites. L'amendement des EtatsUnis permettrait d'aboutir a ce resultat sans
prejuger la position que pourrait prendre un
membre du Conseil en ce qui concerne l'aspect
,juridique du probleme, sans meme, a mon avis,
prejuger la position du representant des PaysBas.

Si le Conseil desire sincerement la cessation
If the Council sincerely desires that hostilities
should cease, it can accomplish that purpose very des hostilites, il peut 1'0btenir rapidement. Nous
quickly. We can then postpone to a later time pourrions alors remettre a plus tard la discussion
the discussion of all the other points which have de tous les autres problemes qui ont ete poses,
been raised, including tho;;e raised by the USSR· y compris ceux qui 1'0nt ete par le representant
representative. We shall then be in a position to de I'URSS. Nous pourrions terminer la discusconclude our discussion of the Greek question, sion de la question grecque, comme le Conseil
as the Council has already decided to do. Mter avait deja decide de le faire. Songeons qu'il y
all, people are being killed in that area, too. If a aussi des morts en Grece. Si nous pouvons
we can adopt a resolution calling on the parties adopter une resolution demandant aux parties
to this dispute to cease hostilities, we shall have a ce differend de mettre fin aux hostilites, nous
accomplished all that we can accomplish right aurons accompli tout ce qu'il est en notre pounow. If we ·do not adopt such a resolution, we voir de faire maintenant. Si nous n'adoptons pas
shall be bogged down in interminable arguments cette resolution, nous nous enliserons dans des
on questions of rights and law.
discussions interminables sur la justice et le droit.
The only way to stop hostilities is to ask that
they be stopped and not to give any reasons for
it, but simply td express the Council's view, its
wish and its will entirely in conformity with the
spirit of the Charter of the United Nations. We
do not have to decide any legal questions in
order to make such a determination, nor do we
have to prejudice the opinions of anybody or of
any delegation by so doing. They would have
ample opportunity to air all their opinions afterwards.

La seule fa~on d'arreter les hostilites est de
demander qu'elles cessent, sans donner aucune
raison, en exprimant simplement 1'0pinion, le
desir et la volonte du ConseiI, en pleine conformite de l'esprit de la Charte des Nations Unies.
Cette decision n'exige pas que nous prenions
position sur des questions juridiques, dIe permet
egalement a tous les membres du Conseil et a
toutes les delegations de reserver leur opinion.
Plus tard, les membres du ConseiI auront tout
loisir d'exprimer leur point de vue.

Reference was made by the USSR representative to the United States offer of good offices to
the Netherlands Government. It goes without
saying that the offer of good offices is likewise
extended to the Republic of Indonesiao Furthermore, it goes without saying that good offices
cannot be effective unless both sides accept. That
is a voluntary act -:>n their part. To claim, however, that such an action on the part of the
United States is an endeavour to circumvent the
United Nations is a completely and totally erroneous statement which I do not believe any
member of this Council will believe.

Le representant de I'URSS a parle de 1'0ffre
de bons offices faite par les Etats-Unis au Gouvernement des Pays-Ba.s. 11 va sans dire que
cette offre s'adresse egalement a la Republique
d'Indonesie. Il est d'ailleurs evident que les bons
offices ne peuvent avoir d'effet que si les deux
parties les acceptent. Cette acceptation est un
acte volontaire. Mais il serait absolument faux
de declarer que cette offre de bons offices soit
une tentative de la part des Etats-Unis pour
circonvenir les Nations Unies, et je ne crois pas
que, en fait, aucun des membres du Conseil
nourrisse cette pensee.

Mr. LANGE (Poland) : Could we not, without
any further discussion, vote on the cessation of
hostilities, leaving all other points to a later occasion? Either the Australian formulation-which
I prefer-or that of the United States would be
acceptable. What the President said earlier is
quite true: no special vote is required on our
competence because by voting a cessation of hostilities, e1:eryone expresses his view of the Council's competence.

M. LANGE (Pologne) (traduit de l'anglais) :
Ne serait-il pas possible de voter sur la cessation
des hostilites sans autre discussion, en remettant
a plus tard toutes les autres questions? Le texte
de l'Australie, auquel va ma preference, et le
texte des Etats-Unis sont tous deux acceptables.
Ce que le President vient de dire est tres juste.
Il est inutiIe de voter a part sur la question de
notre competence, car, en votant [a cessation des
hostilites, chacun exprime son opinion quant a
la competence du ConseiI.

The PRESIDENT: At the hundred and seventyfirst meeting it was proposed that a vote should
'be taken on paragraph (a) of the Australian
proposal, dealing with the cessation of hostilities,
and that the discussion on juridical matters and
so forth should be deferred until future meetings.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais):
Au cours de la cent-soixante et onzieme seance,
on a propose de voter sur le paragraphe a) de
la proposition australienne, qui a trait a la cessation des hostiIites, et on a egalement propose de
remettre aux prochaines seances la discussion sur

.....

4-

1669
I believe the Australian delegation accepted that
motion.

les questions juridiques et autres. Je crois que la
delegation australienne a accepte cette motion.

The important point is to find a way to stop
these hostilities p.nd this bloodshed as soon as
possible. Is the Council ready to vote on this
point in the United States proposal? The United
States proposal is an amendment to the Australian proposal and therefore would be voted
upon first. If the United States amendment is
not accepted, we shall pass to the first point in
the Australian proposal. If the Council is ready,
before hearing any other speakers on my list, we
will first dispose of paragraph ( a), which is
rather urgent, and then we shall have ample
time to consider what else should be done.

Cc qui importe, c'est de decouvrir un moyen
de faire cesser les hostilites et d'arreter les effusions de sang le plus tot possible. Le Conseil
est-il pret a voter sur cette partie de la proposition des Etats-Unis? La proposition des EtatsUnis est un amendement a la proposition
australienne; il faut donc la mettre aux voix la
premiere. Si le Conseil repousse l'amendement
des Etats-Unis, nous passerons au premier point
de la proposition australienne. Si le Conseil est
dispose, nous voterons sur le paragraphe a), qui
est le plus urgent, avant d'entendre les orateurs
qui figurent sur ma liste, et nous aurons ensuite
tout le temps voulu pour etudier ce qu'il faut
faire.

Does anyone wish to speak on this suggestion,
whether or not to vote on the first item?

Quelqu'un desire-t-il prendre la parole a pro.
pos de cette proposition de voter sur le premier
point?

Mr. LAwFoRD (United Kingdom): I would
be sorry to appear to be obstructive in any way,
but this matter is not as simple as it looks. I
must ask the Council on my behalf, and I think
possibly on behalf of other members of the Council to whom this is a matter of rather grave
concern, to be given the opportunity of expressing our views. I cannot vote on this question
straightaway.

M. LAWFORD (Royaume-Uni) (traduit de
l'anglais): Je suis desole d'avoir l'air de me
livrer a une obstruction quelconque, mais cette
question n'est pas si simple qu'elle le parait. Je
tiens a demander au Conseil, en mon nom et
peut-etre au nom d' autres membres auxquels
cette question cause d'assez serieux soucis, qu'on
nous permette d'exprimer notre opinion. Je ne
peux pas incontinent voter sur cette question.

The PRESIDENT: The President hopes that the
comments on this point will be as brief as possible, just as the comment of the representative
of the United Kingdom has been.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais):
Le President espere que les commentaires sur
cette .question seront aussi brefs que possible,
aussi brefs que ceux du representant du
Royaume-Uni.

Colonel HODGSON (Australia): I have just a
suggestion to make about what you said in regard to our adjourning and meeting this afternoon.

Le colonel HODGSON (Australie) (traduit de
I'anglais): Je veux seulement formuler une suggestion relative a ce que vous avez dit apropos
de l'ajournement et de la reunion de cet apresmidi.

In view of the request by other members to
be heard on this important point, I think it is
imperative that we should settle the question as
far as we can this afternoon, and I urge that the
meeting this afternoon should, in the first place
at least, be devoted to a continuation of discussion on the Indonesian question.

D'autres membres ayant demande d'exprimer
leur point de vue sur cette question importante,
il est indispensable, me semble-t-il, que, dans
toute la mesure du possible, nous reglions la
question cet apres-midi, et j'insiste pour que la
reunion de cet apres-midi, ou tout au moins la
premiere partie de cette reunion, soit consacree
a la suite de l'examen de la question indonesienne.

Mr. L6PEZ (Colombia): As this matter is so
extremely urgent and important and as every
member of the Council wishes to express his
views, it seems to us clear that we should adjourn the meeting and agree to proceed with
our discussion after lunch.

M. L6PE2.. (Colombie) (traduit de l'anglais):
Cette question etant extremement urgente et
importante, et tous les membres du Conseil
desirant exprimer leur opinion, il me semble
evident qu'il conviendrait d'ajourner la seance
et de poursuivre notre discussion apres le dejeuner.

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics): The United States draft resolution is
not an amendment; it is a seperate resolution,
though it is called an amendment. Paragraph ( a )
of the two resolutions is almost identical. Therefore, if we decide to vote on this paragraph (a),
on the cessation of hostilities, at this meeting or

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques) (traduit de l'anglais): Le
projet de resolution des Etats-Unis n'est pas un
amendement, c'est une resolution distincte, bien
qu'on l'appelle amendement. Les paragraphes a)
des deux resolutions sont presque identiques. En
consequence, si nous decidons de voter sur ce

1670

at the next meeting, this afternoon, I am ready
to accept this paragraph now. It would be desirable to take s1,1ch a decision provided the remaining questions, including the questions of the
qualification of actions of the Netherlands Government in Indonesia and the qualification of
events which are taking place in Indonesia, are
left open for the time being. With this understanding I am ready to vote in favour of paragraph (a), preferably the Australian one.

paragraphe a) , relatif a la cessation des hostilites,
au cours de la presente seance ou au cours de
celle de cet apres-midi, je suis pret a accepter ce
paragraphe immediatement. 11 serait souhaitable
que nous prenions cette decision etant entendu
que les autres questions, y compris celle de
l'appreciation de l'action du Gouvernement des
Pays-Bas en Indonesie et celle des evenements
qui se deroulent en Indonesie, seront laissees en
suspens pour l'instant. Avec cette reserve, je suis
pret a voter pour l'adoption du paragraphe a)
et, de preference, du paragraphe a) de la resolution australienne.

The PRESIDENT: A motion for adjournment
has been made by the representative of Colombia
and it has priority. I shall put the motion to a
vote.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais):
Le representant de la Colombie a presente une
motion d'ajoumement qui a priorite. Je mets la
motion aux voix.

The motion to adjourn was adopted.

La motion d'ajournement est adoptee.

The PRESIDENT: The next meeting will be at
3 o'clock this afternoon.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais):
La prochaine seance aura lieu cet apres-midi, a
15 heures.

The meeting rose at 1.25 p.m.

La seanre est l('nee a 13 h. 25.

HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-THIRD MEETING

CENT-SOIXANTE-TREIZIEME SEANCE

Held at Lake Success, New r ork,
on Friday, 1 August 1947, at 3 p.m.

Tenue a Lake Success, New-York,
le vendredi ler aout 1947, a 15 heures.

President: Mr. F. EL-KHOURI (Syria).

President: M. F. EL-KHOURI (Syrie).

Present: The representatives of the following
countries: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, China,
Colombia, France, Poland, Syria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom,
United States of America.

Presents: Les representants des pays suivants:
Australie, Belgique, Bresil, Ch:..e, Colombie,
Etats-Unis d'Amerique, France, Pologne,
Royaume-Uni, Syrie, Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques.

269. Continuation of the discussion on the
,Indonesian question

269. Suite de la discussion sur la question
indonesienne

At the invitation of the President, Mr. van
Kleffens, representative of 'the Netherlands, and
Mr. B. R. Sen, representative of India, took their
seats at the Council table.

Sur l'invitation du President, M. van Kleffens,
representant des Pays-Bas et M. B. R. Sen,
representant de l'Inde, prennent place a la table
du Conseil.

The PRESIDENT: We shall resume the discussion of the Indonesian question, which was
started during the hundred and seventy-second
meeting held this morning. I wish to remind the
members that we have ten speakers already
listed. Our time is very limited. We hope to
accept a resolution with regard to this question
as soon aE possible, so that we may be in a position to proceed discussing [!' '~ Greek question this
afternoon, thereby obviating the necessity of having another meeting tonight. I therefore repeat
my request tc the members that they should
make their speeches as short as possible.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais)~
Nous allons reprenrdre la discussion de la question
de l'Indonesie que nous avons commencee a la
cent-soixante-douzieme seance, tenue ce matin.
Je rappellerai au Conseil qu'il y a deja dix
orateurs inscrits. Nous disposons d'un temps tres
limite. Nous esperons pouvoir adopter une
resolution au sujet de cette question 'le plus
rapidement possible, afin de pouvoir discuter
la question grecque cet apres-midi, ce qui nous
eviterait de tenir une autre seance ce soir. Je
demande done encore une fois aux membres du
Conseil d'etre aussi brefs que possible dans leurs
declarations.

Mr. VAN KLEFFENS (Netherlands): May I
raise a point of order? I have just been advised
that I shall receive some supplementary instruc-

M. VAN KLEFFENS (Pays-Bas) (traduit de
l'anglais): Je voudrais iloulever une question
d'ordre. Je viens d'€tre informe que, dans une

GENTS OF UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATION

DEPOSITAIRES DES PUBUCATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
Argentina-Argentine

Ecuador-Equateur

Editorial Sudamericana
S.A.
Alsina 500

Mufioz H~rmanos y Cia
Nueve de Octubre 703
Casilla 10-24

BUENOS AIRES

GUAYAQUIL

Ausualia-AustraUe

Belgium-Belgique
Agence et Messageries de la
Presse, S. A.
14-22 rue du Persil

Librairie "La Renaissance
d'Egypte"
9 She Adly Pasha
CAIRO

Bolivia-·Bolivie
Librerla Cientifica y
Literaria
Avenida 16 de Julio, 216
Casilla 972
LA PAZ

Akateeminen Kirjakauppa
2, Keskuskatu
HELSINKI

The Ryerson Press
299 Queen Street West
TORONTO

PARIS, Ve

ATHENES

Guatemala

Edmundo Pizarro
Merced 846

Jose Goubaud
Goubaud & Cia Ltda.
Sucesor
5a Av. Sur No. 6 y 9a C. P.

SANTIAGO

GUATEMALA

China-Chine

Haiti-Haiti

Trejo~ Hermanos

Oxford Book & Stationery
Co.
Sr~.ndia House
NEW DELHI

Cuba
La Casa Belga
Rene de Smedt
O'Reilly 455
LA HABANA

Czechoslovakia
Tchecoslovaquie
F. Topic
Narodni Trida 9
PRAHA 1
Einar Munskgaard
N6rregade 6

Bongahe Piaderow
731 Shah Avenue
TEHERAN

Iraq-lrak
Mackenzie & Mackenzie
The Bookshop
BAGHDAD

Lebanon-Liban

Dominican Republic
Republique Dominicaine
Librerla Dominicana
Calle Mercedes No. 49
Apartado 656

BEYROUTH

Luxembourg
Librairie J. Schummer
Place Guillaume

-r

- - . ' - ,"

, - -,--,

Librairie Hachette
469 Istiklal Caddesi
BEYOGLU-IsTANBUL

Central News Agency Ltd.
Commissioner & Rissik Sts.
JOHANNESBURG, CAPETOWN,
DURBAN

H.M. Stationery Office
p.a. Box 569
LONDON, S.E. 1
and at H.M.S.a. Shops at
LONDON, EDINBURGH,
MANCHESTE~ CARDIF~
BELFAST 'and BRISTOL

International Documents
Service
Columbia University Press
2960 Broadway
NEW,YORK 27, N. Y.

LUXEMBOURG

Netherlands-Pays-Bas

QUDAD TRUJILLO

"Printed
the U.S.A.
"",
- - ' .in -\;l--

Librairie universelle

United States of America
Etats-Unis d'Amerique

Librairie universelle

KJOBENHAVN

Syria-Syrie

United Kingdom
Royaume-Uni

Iran

Denmark-Danemark

Hans Raunhardt
Kirchgasse 17
ZURICH I

Union of South Africa
Union Sud-Afri~aine

India-Inde

SAN JOSE

Librairie Payot S. A.
LAUSANNE,GENEVE, VEVEY,
MONTREUX, NEUCHATEL,
BERNE, BASEL

Turkey-Turquie

Max Bouchereau
Librairie "A la Caravelle"
Bolte postale I11-B

Apartado 1313

~--J

DAMAS

PORT-AU-PRINCE

Costa Rica-Costa-Rica

SAN JUA~

STOCKHOLM

"Eleftheroudakis"
Librairie internationale
Place de la Constitution

SHANGHAI

D. P. Perez Cb.
132 Riverside

Switzerland-Suisse

Greece-Grece

The Commercial Press Ltd.
211 Honan Road

OSLO

A.-B. C. E. Fritzes Kungl.
Hofbokhandel
Fredsgatan 2

Editions A. Pedone
13, rue Souffiot

Chile-Chili

Norsk Bokimport A/S
Edv. Storms Gate 1

Sweden-Suede

France

Canada

Norway-Norvege

Philippines

Finland-Fi1z1ande

BRUXELLES

Gordon & Gotch, Ltd.
Waring Taylor Street
WELLINGTON

Egypt-Egypte

H. A. Goddard Pty. Ltd.
255a George Street
SYDNEY, N. S. W.

New Zealand
N ouvelle-Zelande

N. V. Martinus Nijhoff
Lange Voorhout 9

Drzavno Preduzece
Jugoslovenska Knjiga
Moskovska UI. 36

S'GRAVENHAGE

BEOGRAD

Price-.. ,.in the! United"-_States:
GO cents
.. _...

- .-'"

Yugoslavia-Yougoslavie

---_.,-.<-..,..,-,--;,.-;:-,,~,

,-.'~"

,._.~
