A/57/PV.75

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-seventh session

75

th plenary meeting
Monday, 16 December 2002, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kavan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Programme of work
The President: Before proceeding to the items
on our agenda for today, I would like to inform
Members that action on draft resolution A/57/L.67,
under agenda item 42, entitled “Follow-up to the
outcome of the twenty-sixth special session:
implementation of the Declaration of Commitment on
HIV/AIDS”, which had been announced in the Journal
of last Friday, 13 December 2002, is postponed to a
later date in order to allow for the review of the
programme budget implications.
Agenda item 44 (continued)
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Draft resolutions (A/57/L.6/Rev.1, A/57/L.61)
The President: Members will recall that the
General Assembly held its debate on this agenda item
at the 22nd to 26th plenary meetings on 4, 7 and 8
October 2002.
It is my honour to present to your attention draft
resolution A/57/L.61, entitled “Follow-up to the
outcome of the Millennium Summit”.
In the draft resolution in front of you, I have
reflected views of Member States expressed during the
general debate on agenda item 44 and also in the

(Czech Republic)

course of the negotiation process on this draft
resolution.
Operative paragraph 2 of this draft resolution
recognizes the uneven progress achieved in the
implementation of objectives and goals of the
Millennium Declaration, as stated in the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of the United
Nations Millennium Declaration (document A/57/270
and Corr.1) and expressed by many of you during our
deliberations. Since Member States are in the driver's
seat in implementing the Millennium Declaration, this
operative paragraph, therefore, urges the Member
States to undertake with determination appropriate
measures towards its implementation.
Operative paragraph 3 invites the entities of the
United Nations system and other interested parties to
continue to pursue vigorously the achievement of the
objectives and goals of the Millennium Declaration.
Operative paragraph 4 invites the entities of the
United Nations system, the Bretton Woods institutions
and the World Trade Organization to engage in the
review of its implementation.
Operative paragraphs 6 and 7 outline the way in
which the implementation of the outcomes of the
Millennium Summit will be reviewed in the years to
come.
In this draft resolution, Member States will
decide that the convening of a high-level plenary
meeting during the sixtieth session of the General
Assembly for a comprehensive review of the

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

02-74084 (E)

*0274084*

A/57/PV.75

Millennium Declaration as a whole will be considered
during the next session. The review of the
implementation of the development goals contained in
the Millennium Declaration should be considered
within the framework of the integrated and coordinated
follow-up to the outcomes of the major United Nations
conferences and summits in the economic and social
fields.

But the main thing is that the world community
already has an experienced effective mechanism — the
United Nations — which is capable of fulfilling the
functions of a worldwide coordinating centre, since it
possesses a unique legitimacy, universality, experience
and potential. These characteristics are the main areas
and methods for responding to new threats and
challenges.

I do hope that this draft resolution has the support
of Member States and can be adopted.

In essence, we are already agreed on the
Millennium Declaration, endorsed by Heads of State or
Government of United Nations Member States, and on
the implementation of its goals. We need to take into
account the constantly changing situation in world
affairs, and we need to respond promptly to new
problems arising along the way.

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Russian Federation, who will introduce draft resolution
A/57/L.6/Rev.1.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): On behalf of the delegations of Azerbaijan,
Armenia, Belarus, Brazil, China, Dominican Republic,
Egypt, Georgia, India, Republic of Moldova, South
Africa, Ukraine and my own country, the Russian
Federation, I have the honour to introduce draft
resolution A/57/L.6/Rev.1, entitled “Responding to
global threats and challenges”, for the consideration of
the General Assembly.
Contemporary civilization is being faced nearly
every minute with threats and challenges of the most
varied kind, a whole range of which have become
global in character, threatening people’s lives and wellbeing and whole communities throughout the world. A
graphic example of this is the worrying increase in the
scale and brutality of international terrorism — as well
as drug trafficking, transnational organized crime,
environmental degradation, the spread of poverty,
illiteracy, disease, the continuing acuteness of
sustainable development as a whole and continuing
bloody conflicts in various regions.
A successful response to such serious threats and
challenges is possible only through combining the
efforts of the entire international community. In an era
of globalization and unprecedented increase in the
interdependence of States, no one is in a position to
shut themselves off from the increasing problems in the
world.
In order to develop a collective response to these
challenges, there are real prerequisites — a recognition
by people of the dangers common to all, increased
political action and interaction through legal
instruments.

2

What is particularly important is that we always
need to keep in focus all of the goals, without
exception, of the Millennium Declaration, and to
mobilize efforts in all components of the United
Nations system and its Member States, regional
organizations, civil society and the private sector by
working persistently and collectively to find effective
responses to new challenges and threats in the interconnection, without reducing the amount of attention
paid to any of these problems.
That is the main thrust of the draft resolution
introduced by the sponsors. It supports the steps
already taken by the Secretary-General to achieve the
aforementioned goals through the coordinated actions
of the entire international community and encourages
further efforts to ensure a genuinely comprehensive,
integrated and complex response to new threats and
challenges on the basis of the United Nations Charter.
I wish to draw particular attention to paragraph 2
of the draft resolution, by which the Secretary-General,
in consultation with the heads of the agencies and
organizations of the United Nations system, and taking
into account the views of Member States and
cooperating with various international organizations,
would study possible ways to formulate, in the context
of implementation of the Millennium Declaration, a
multifaceted approach to the problem of the global
threats and challenges of the twenty-first century. The
Secretary-General would also be requested to include
his observations on the corresponding issues in his
report on the follow-up to the outcome of the
Millennium Summit to be submitted to the General
Assembly at its fifty-eighth session.

A/57/PV.75

The draft resolution was the subject of
negotiations with all interested delegations and groups
of States. We are grateful for the concrete proposals
made to improve the text, which the sponsors took into
account in the draft resolution before the Assembly. We
count on its being adopted by consensus.
The President: The Assembly will now take
decisions on draft resolutions A/57/L.6/Rev.1 and
A/57/L.61.
We turn first to draft resolution A/57/L.61,
entitled “Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium
Summit”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/57/L.61.
Draft resolution
(resolution 57/144).

A/57/L.61

was

adopted

The President: We now turn to draft resolution
A/57/L.6/Rev.1, entitled “Responding to global threats
and challenges”.
I should like to announce that, since the
publication of the draft resolution, Kyrgyzstan has
become a co-sponsor of A/57/L.6/Rev.1.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/57/L.6/Rev.1.
Draft resolution A/57/L.6/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 57/145).
The President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of vote, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to ten
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Ms. Menéndez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation has taken the floor to speak in explanation
of vote after the adoption of resolution 57/144, entitled
“Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium
Summit”.
Spain thanks the Secretary-General for the report
contained in document A/57/270. At the same time,
however, we have certain concerns about the contents
of certain sections of the report, in particular with
regard to the reference to ageing, which does not fully
reflect the commitments undertaken by States Members
in the course of the Second World Assembly on
Ageing, held at Madrid in April this year. During that
World Assembly, Member States unanimously adopted

a Political Declaration and a Plan of Action aimed at
guaranteeing the positive role that older persons can
play in our societies.
At the same time, I should like to recall that the
platform establishes important objectives and
challenges in the field of development that
unfortunately are not correctly reflected in the report.
The platform contains specific guidance with regard to
development that is absent from document A/57/270.
I also wish to emphasize the importance of
gender considerations in United Nations documents. In
that regard, Spain’s position differs from the view of
women as a vulnerable group of societies, as contained
in the report. I should like to make clear the importance
of integrating gender perspectives — an issue that is
not correctly reflected in the report under
consideration — into all reports.
Spain hopes that in the future, both issues —
ageing and gender perspectives — will be taken into
consideration, as is appropriate and necessary. Any
follow-up to the Millennium Summit would be
incomplete if it failed to refer to the commitments
undertaken during the Second World Assembly on
Ageing.
Mr. Durrani (Pakistan): I have taken the floor to
explain Pakistan’s position on resolution 57/145
entitled “Responding to global threats and challenges”.
My delegation supported the draft resolution
(A/57/L.6/Rev.1) in view of our support for its
objectives, which are consistent with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
Unfortunately, Pakistan was unable to participate
in the discussion of the draft resolution before it was
officially introduced. Had we had that opportunity, we
should have wished to strengthen the draft resolution in
certain respects. We feel that, in the present global
environment, it was essential to include a reference to
the peaceful settlement of disputes, in accordance with
the provisions of Chapter VI of the Charter. Moreover,
global threats can be effectively addressed in many
parts of the world if there is a genuine commitment to
the full and unreserved implementation of all relevant
Security Council resolutions, as required by Article 25
of the Charter.
Secondly, Pakistan is committed to combating
terrorism. Pakistan has been one of the principal
victims of terrorist over the years, including during the

3

A/57/PV.75

years when we supported the struggle of the people of
Afghanistan for self-determination. Global threats also
arise when the rights of peoples for freedom and
human rights are violated. Therefore, we would have
called for a reference in the resolution to the legitimacy
of the struggle of peoples for self-determination.

reconstruction of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo”.

If this matter comes up for deliberation next year,
my delegation reserves the right to raise the concerns
that I have just mentioned.

First of all, I wish to make two announcements.
The first concerns the list of sponsors, to which should
be added France, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal and
Sweden. The second announcement concerns a slight
modification in operative paragraph 5. After the word
“soldiers”, delete the following phrase: “contrary to
international law”.

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 44.

I should like the General Assembly to adopt this
draft resolution by consensus, as has been the case in
previous years.

Agenda item 21 (continued)

The text that is presented to the Assembly today
follows the broad outline of the draft resolution
adopted last year, because the grave crisis that is raging
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo continues to
have disastrous effects at the humanitarian level.
Human development, therefore, remains one of the
priorities of the leaders of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, who want to extricate their people from
their precarious existence in poverty and famine.

Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian
and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations,
including special economic assistance
Draft resolution (A/57/L.66)
(a) Strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations
Draft resolutions A/57/L.60, A/57/L.63,
A/57/L.64
(b) Special economic assistance to individual
countries or regions
Draft resolutions A/57/L.43/Rev.1, A/57/L.54,
A/57/L.57, A/57/L.62, A/57/L.65
(c) Assistance to the Palestinian people
Draft resolution A/57/L.51
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly held the debate on agenda item 21 and its
sub-items (a) to (c) at the 58th and 59th plenary
meetings on 25 November 2002 and adopted five draft
resolutions.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Congo to introduce draft resolution A/57/L.43/Rev.1.
Mr. Ikouebe (Congo) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to take the floor, on behalf of the sponsors,
to introduce draft resolution A/57/L.43/Rev.1, entitled
“Special assistance for the economic recovery and

4

However, modifications have been made to the
text, particularly to take account of certain
developments that are under way. It takes note of the
signing of certain peace agreements that offer new
opportunities for a return to peace, which the
international community should welcome. It also
welcomes the efforts made by the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to undertake
courageous economic reforms. It highlights the need
for urgent international economic assistance. Lastly, it
makes an appeal to the international community for
increased support to humanitarian activities in that
country.
As we consider this draft resolution, it is
important to keep in mind that the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is a least developed country that
has undergone grave economic crises that stem from,
among other things, economic structural imbalances
and a persistent, protracted war that has driven the
population into precarious living conditions. The
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo have
shown courage and endurance in the face of adverse
uncertainty and deserve the support of the international
community in order to benefit from the prospects of
peace that are now present.

A/57/PV.75

In this context, we welcome the recent adoption
of a number of initiatives that indicate a mobilization
to support the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I
will mention just three of them. During a public
meeting of the Security Council devoted to Central
Africa on 20 October 2002, an appeal was made for
increased assistance to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. On 4 December 2002, this country’s main
partners held another meeting in Paris — it included 13
countries and twelve agencies. Following that meeting,
this country’s partners solemnly undertook a financial
commitment to contribute about $2.5 billion for its
support. They also plan to release additional resources
to support the multi-sectoral emergency programme of
reconstruction and rehabilitation to help that war-torn
country. Lastly, on 12 December, the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
announced the launch of a project of road building and
rehabilitation in the Democratic of the Congo as part of
a programme to combat hunger and malnutrition, as the
country has one of the highest malnutrition rates in the
world. Therefore, the draft resolution before the
General Assembly aims at strengthening the solidarity
that is already wide-spread today. On behalf of all the
donors I urge the Assembly to adopt it by consensus.
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of Denmark to introduce, on behalf of
the European Union, draft resolutions A/57/L.51 and
A/57/L.66 in one intervention.
Ms. Løj (Denmark): On behalf of the European
Union and the co-sponsors, I have the honour of
introducing the draft resolution entitled “Safety and
security of humanitarian personnel and protection of
United Nations personnel”, contained in document
A/57/L.66, and the draft resolution entitled “Assistance
to the Palestinian people” contained in document
A/57/L.51.
After the tabling of the draft resolution entitled
“Safety and security of humanitarian personnel and
protection of United Nations personnel”, the following
countries have joined the sponsors: Brazil, Canada,
Cyprus, Madagascar, Slovakia, Slovenia, Republic of
Moldova, and United Republic of Tanzania. With
respect to the draft resolution on assistance to the
Palestinian people, the following countries have joined
the list of sponsors: Estonia, Gabon, Georgia, Japan,
Senegal, Slovakia, South Africa, United Republic of
Tanzania and United States of America.

The safety and security of United Nations and all
humanitarian personnel continue to be of utmost
concern to the European Union and the sponsors of this
resolution. We must all work to improve the situation
of United Nations and humanitarian personnel so that
they can safely and effectively assist people in need.
This year’s draft resolution contains some new
development based on the Secretary-General’s report
on the safety and security of United Nations and
humanitarian personnel. In the preambular paragraphs,
the General Assembly expresses, inter alia, profound
regret for the deaths of international and national
personnel who were involved in the provision of
humanitarian assistance. The Assembly strongly
deplores the rising toll of casualties among such
personnel.
In the operative paragraphs, the General
Assembly expresses deep concern over the escalation
of threats at an unprecedented rate against the safety
and security of humanitarian and United Nations
personnel and associated personnel in the past decades,
and that the perpetrators of acts of violence seemingly
operate with impunity. The General Assembly urges all
States to take stronger action to ensure that any threat
or act of violence committed against humanitarian and
United Nations personnel and associated personnel on
their territory is fully investigated, and ensure that the
perpetrators of such acts are brought to justice in
accordance to international and national law. The
Assembly welcomes the appointment of a full-time
United Nations Security Coordinator at the AssistantSecretary-General level and reaffirms the need to
further
strengthen
security
coordination
and
management, while sustaining initiatives aimed at
increasing the efficiency of the security management
system.
I would like to thank all the delegations that
participated in the negotiations on this important draft
resolution. The European Union and the co-sponsors
are of the hope that the draft resolution will this year
again be adopted with consensus.
The draft resolution on assistance to the
Palestinian people, contained in document A/57/L.51,
reflects the outcome of constructive consultations with
interested delegations. In the preambular paragraphs, it,
inter alia, expresses great concern at the deterioration
of the living conditions of the Palestinian people
throughout the occupied territories, which constitutes a
mounting humanitarian crisis. It notes the great

5

A/57/PV.75

economic and social challenges facing the Palestinian
people and is conscious of the urgent need for
international assistance in this regard. Furthermore, it
stresses the need for the full engagement of the United
Nations in the process of building Palestinian
institutions and providing broad assistance to the
Palestinian people.
In the operative paragraphs, the draft resolution
takes note of the report of the Secretary-General and
the report of the Secretary-General’s Personal
Humanitarian Envoy on the humanitarian conditions
and needs of the Palestinian people. Moreover, it urges
member States, international financial institutions of
the United Nations system, inter-governmental and
non-governmental organizations to extend, as rapidly
and generously as possible, economic and social
assistance to the Palestinian people, including
emergency assistance to counter the impact of the
current crisis. In this regard, the draft resolution calls
upon the international donor community to expedite the
delivery of pledged assistance and stresses the
importance of ensuring free passage of aid and free
movement of persons and goods.
Finally, the draft resolution requests the
Secretary-General to submit a report to the General
Assembly at its fifty-eighth session containing an
assessment of the assistance received and the needs
that are yet to be met. It is the hope of the co-sponsors
that the draft resolution will find broad support, and
that it will be adopted without a vote, as it has been in
previous years.
The President: I give the floor to the
representative of Yugoslavia to introduce draft
resolution A/57/L.54.
Mrs. Lalić-Smajević (Yugoslavia): I have the
honour to introduce to the General Assembly a draft
resolution on humanitarian assistance to the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia. I am pleased to announce that,
in addition to the countries listed in document
A/57/L.54, Canada, Lithuania and Liechtenstein have
become sponsors of the draft resolution.
Before proceeding, I should like to express my
sincere gratitude to all the sponsors and delegations
whose constructive participation and contribution
resulted in the consensus text of the draft resolution.
I should also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his valuable report, contained in document

6

A/57/174, concerning humanitarian assistance to the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
My
delegation
deeply
appreciates
the
humanitarian assistance and rehabilitation support that
has been rendered to the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia by a number of States, particularly the
major contributors, international agencies and
organizations and non-governmental organizations, as
well as the humanitarian assistance provided through
the United Nations and its specialized agencies.
The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia recognizes
the need to profoundly restructure the economy of the
country, and it has already mobilized its internal
resources in order to overcome the circumstances of its
dire starting position and to reform rapidly. The scale
of the problems that we have inherited, however, is
such that the process of reform and recovery will be
very difficult. It will take time to set the country firmly
on an accelerated development track. In the meantime,
humanitarian assistance is still needed so as to address
the widespread poverty and fragile basic services and
to provide support for the largest population of
refugees and displaced persons in Europe.
We note that there has been a decrease in
humanitarian assistance in 2002 due to a shift in donor
funding to humanitarian emergencies in other parts of
the globe. However, given the enormous burden of the
past, my country still requires significant short-term
backing from the international community in order to
complete the transition process from relief to
development.
An important element of the present draft, based
on the text of the consensus resolution from the fiftysixth session of the General Assembly, is an appeal to
the international community to support further the
Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in
its efforts to ensure transition from emergency
humanitarian assistance to the long-term rehabilitation,
reconstruction and development of the country.
In this respect, it is especially important for the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia that Member States
and international intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations assist — financially and
otherwise — the implementation of the national
strategy for resolving the problems of refugees and
internally displaced persons in Yugoslavia. The
national strategy, which is integrated into the overall
development strategy and reform programme of the

A/57/PV.75

country, reflects our firm determination to offer
assistance and concrete solutions to all refugees and
internally displaced persons. It is a transparent and
comprehensive policy aimed at helping refugees select
the best decision regarding their future — either safe
return to their homes or integration into the life of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
The draft resolution pays great attention to the
issue of finding durable solutions to the problems of
refugees, especially through voluntary repatriation and
reintegration. In this context, the draft resolution
stresses the importance of developing regional
cooperation in the quest for solutions that can improve
the difficult situation of the refugees.
The role of the United Nations and its specialized
agencies is also emphasized in the draft resolution, and
the Organization is requested to continue its efforts to
assess humanitarian needs, in cooperation with the
Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, the
relevant international and regional organizations and
bodies and interested States, with a view to ensuring
effective links between relief and long-term assistance
to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. Although there
will be no United Nations consolidated humanitarian
appeal for 2003, the importance of the coordination of
humanitarian assistance in Yugoslavia has nevertheless
been emphasized, inter alia, through the mechanisms of
the United Nations Resident Coordinator system.
Finally, the Secretary-General is requested to
prepare a report on humanitarian assistance to the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia for consideration at the
fifth-ninth session of the General Assembly.
In conclusion, let me express my sincere hope
that the draft resolution will receive the broadest
possible support and, as last year, that it will be
adopted by consensus. In that way, it will help to
accelerate the coordination of humanitarian assistance
and broad international cooperation for the recovery of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
The President: I give the floor to the
representative of Ethiopia to introduce draft resolution
A/57/L.57.
Mr. Hussein (Ethiopia): I should like to
announce that, since the publication of draft resolution
A/57/L.57, the following countries have become
sponsors: Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bhutan,
Canada, Costa Rica, the Democratic Republic of the

Congo, Ecuador, France, the Gambia, Ghana, Israel,
Jordan, Liberia, the Netherlands, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Slovakia, South Africa and Spain.
On behalf of the Ethiopian delegation, I am
pleased to introduce draft resolution A/57/L.57,
entitled “Emergency humanitarian assistance to
Ethiopia” under agenda item 21(b), “Special economic
assistance to individual countries or regions”.
Mr. Gallegos Chiriboga
President, took the Chair.

(Ecuador),

Vice-

Over the past decade, my country, Ethiopia, has
undertaken a series of political and economic reforms
with a view to improving the humanitarian situation
and ensuring sustainable development. We have also
focused on the agricultural sector in order to address
food insecurity. However, my country is now facing
unprecedented drought. We are encouraged by the
immediate willingness of Member States to sponsor the
draft resolution. It is my fervent hope that the adoption
of this draft resolution by consensus will pave the way
for a strengthened and committed partnership between
my country and the international community to meet
the immediate humanitarian assistance needed and,
over the long-term, for the integration of relief efforts
with recovery and development.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I call
on the representative of Turkey to introduce draft
resolution A/57/L.60.
Mr. Pamir (Turkey): It is my distinct pleasure to
introduce the draft resolution entitled “Strengthening
the effectiveness and coordination of international
urban search and rescue assistance”, which is before
the plenary today, under agenda item 21. Sixty
countries have sponsored this draft resolution, which
we hope will be adopted by consensus.
Given their humanitarian nature, all 16 draft
resolutions that have been presented to the Assembly
under agenda item 21 are of great importance and
particular significance. While they each have their own
focus, their common denominator is a noble effort to
alleviate human suffering in humanitarian emergencies.
By definition, humanitarian emergencies are bad
and unwelcome news. However, they do have one
aspect that is a source of hope for the future and that
should not go unnoticed in the “fog of calamity"
surrounding them. At such times, one can actually
expect the international community to unite almost

7

A/57/PV.75

automatically to reach out to those in need of help. As
its title indicates, the draft resolution in question is
geared towards that end. It aims to strengthen a specific
and very crucial activity, namely urban search and
rescue in time of disaster.
In his report entitled “International cooperation
on humanitarian assistance in the field of natural
disasters, from relief to development", the SecretaryGeneral points out the disturbing upward trend in the
occurrence and impact of natural disasters. The
Secretary-General also underlines the fact that
communities in many countries around the world are
increasingly exposed to the risk of natural disasters by
virtue of increasing urbanization.
Currently half of the world's population lives in
cities, and, by the year 2030, this ratio is expected to
go up to 60 per cent. This is one element that makes
the content of this draft resolution particularly
important. Another equally pertinent element is the
proven fact that, in the aftermath of disasters, 98 to 99
per cent of the lives that are saved are saved in the first
48 to 72 hours. Therefore, speed, efficiency and
coordination are of the essence when it comes to saving
lives. This draft resolution aims to address precisely
those issues by streamlining and ensuring efficiency in
urban search and rescue operations.
In brief, saving lives is the main goal of this draft
resolution, which is being submitted for the first time.
Its nature is such that its significance can only increase
in time.
As a country that has suffered from the tragic
consequences of natural disasters, Turkey is a keen
supporter of increased international cooperation in the
countering of such emergencies. Furthermore — again
through its own dealings with urban search and rescue
teams from a range of countries — Turkey is acutely
aware of the importance of making the best possible
use of such teams, which, when deployed efficiently,
can make the difference between life and death.
As recognized in the draft resolution, the
Guidelines developed by the International Search and
Rescue Advisory Group constitute a flexible and
helpful reference tool for disaster preparedness and
response efforts. Formulated on the basis of real-life
experiences, they contain detailed checklists and
guidance on technical urban search and rescue issues
such as the marking of buildings, training standards,
reception and departure procedures, and on-site

8

coordination.
They
also
include
specific
recommendations for both assisting and affected
countries, as well as for the United Nations — all with
the overarching goal of strengthening efficiency and
coordination. All of these aspects of urban search and
rescue, when implemented efficiently, can lead to
extremely positive outcomes. Yet when there is no
coordination in these areas, even the most resolute
efforts may be to no avail.
Turkey believes that this draft resolution
addresses key aspects of urban search and rescue and
therefore considers it to be a step in the right direction.
While Member States are the driving force behind the
draft, it would not have been possible without the
invaluable support of the United Nations Secretariat
and particularly of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs.
I should like to conclude, therefore, by thanking
the Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. Kenzo Oshima,
for his help throughout this process.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I give
the floor to the representative of Liberia to introduce
draft resolution A/57/L.62.
Mr. Sele (Liberia): At the outset, I wish to thank
Ambassador Hubert Wurth, Permanent Representative
of Luxembourg, for his skilful leadership in
coordinating the informal consultations held on the
humanitarian draft resolutions submitted under agenda
item 21. We also commend the Secretariat for its
important contribution to this process.
Since the inception of the Liberian civil crisis and
in its aftermath, the General Assembly has adopted a
resolution each year calling for international assistance
for the rehabilitation and reconstruction of Liberia. It is
in this context that, on behalf of the sponsors, I will
introduce draft resolution A/57/L.62, entitled
“Assistance for the rehabilitation and reconstruction of
Liberia”.
I should like to announce that, since the
publication of the draft resolution, the following
countries have become sponsors of A/57/L.62: Austria,
Gabon, Germany, Greece, France, Ireland, Mali,
Madagascar, Morocco, Mozambique, the Netherlands
and Togo.
The text before the Assembly is the product of
intensive negotiations conducted by interested
delegations, to which we are immensely grateful.

A/57/PV.75

Basically, the draft resolution calls upon Member
States and the international community at large to
respond to the humanitarian and development needs of
Liberia, which have serious implications for security
and economic stability within the subregion. Among
other things, the Government of Liberia is urged to
take the necessary steps to facilitate the peace- building
process in Liberia and to promote regional security and
socio-economic development.
The enormity of the task of rebuilding the country
and the inability of the Government to generate the
requisite financial resources at home and abroad cannot
be overemphasized. Clearly, the imposition by the
Security Council in May 2001 of selective sanctions
has been less than helpful in the peace-building
enterprise in Liberia. In spite of the programmes and
policies initiated by the Government, problems persist.
Inadequate funding is mostly responsible for the slow
pace of recovery, including the lack of basic necessities
such as electricity, safe drinking water and adequate
health care for the majority of the population.
Moreover, the problems of new Liberian refugees and
internally displaced persons are additional pressing
humanitarian concerns which require urgent attention.
In the light of these hard realities, I am obliged to
appeal to this body, on behalf of my compatriots, not to
give up on Liberia. In particular, I would ask the donor
community to overcome its indifference and to seek to
adopt a positive and humane approach to the Liberian
situation. As members of the human family, Liberians
cannot continue to be denied the goodwill and support
of the international community during this difficult
period of their national existence. I therefore request
that this draft resolution be adopted unanimously by
the Assembly.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I call
on the representative of Venezuela to introduce draft
resolution A/57/L.63.
Ms. López (Venezuela): I have the honour to
present, on behalf of the Group of 77 and other
sponsors,
draft
resolution
A/57/L.63
entitled
“International cooperation on humanitarian assistance
in the field of natural disasters, from relief to
development.” I wish to thank all delegations who
participated in the informal discussions on the text of
the resolution. We appreciate the positive and
constructive atmosphere in which the discussions were
held.

Given the length of the resolution I will not cover
each paragraph, but I will flag a few issues that are
mentioned in the resolution. Both the preambular and
the operative parts reaffirm, inter alia, the guiding
principles of humanitarian assistance that are contained
in the annex of General Assembly resolution 46/182.
The draft resolution stresses the importance of
strengthening cooperation in the provision of
humanitarian assistance, particularly through the
effective use of the multilateral mechanisms, including
the provision of adequate resources.
One of the new elements in the resolution is to
encourage donors to consider the importance of
ensuring that assistance for higher profile natural
disasters does not come at the expense of those natural
disasters with a relatively lower profile. Another
element emphasizes the importance of efforts to
increase the overall level of assistance.
The draft resolution also requests the SecretaryGeneral to examine the overall situation regarding the
mobilization of resources for responding to natural
disasters and to make concrete recommendations to
improve the international response.
The reference in the tenth preambular paragraph
to a resolution of the current General Assembly on
international urban search and rescue assistance is to
the resolution contained in A/57/L.60.
In addition to the delegations listed in A/57/L.63,
other delegations have joined as sponsors. It is our
hope that the resolution can, as in previous years, be
adopted by consensus.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I call
on the representative of Sweden to introduce draft
resolution A/57/L.64.
Mr. Schori (Sweden): I have the honour to
introduce, on behalf of the sponsors, a draft resolution
on the strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations
contained in document A/57/L.64. Since the
publication of the draft resolution before the Assembly,
the following countries have also become sponsors:
Brazil, Croatia, Ecuador, Estonia, Hungary, Lesotho,
Nepal, Nicaragua, the Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Senegal, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
and the United Republic of Tanzania.
Valuable proposals were made during several
informal consultations for improvement of the text and

9

A/57/PV.75

agreement was reached on all paragraphs. My
delegation would like to thank the sponsors and other
delegations for the good and constructive spirit of
cooperation and partnership in which the consultations
were held. The draft resolution begins by recalling the
landmark resolution 46/182, which of course still
guides the work of the United Nations in the
humanitarian field. It goes on to take note of the
reports of the Secretary-General and it stresses the need
to address further the issues of funding, coordination
and strategic planning in the context of natural
disasters and complex emergencies, particularly in the
transition between relief and development activities,
and the need to mobilize adequate levels of financing
for emergency humanitarian assistance.
The draft resolution addresses, among other
things, two issues of recent concern. First, the
aggravating effects that major diseases, in particular
the HIV/AIDS pandemic, cause in the context of
natural disasters and complex emergencies. There is a
request to the Secretary-General to address ways and
means for strengthening the humanitarian response and
for the mobilization of greater resources in this regard.
Secondly, the draft resolution outlines efforts to
develop the plan of action on protection from sexual
exploitation and abuse in humanitarian crises, and
stresses the importance of the timely implementation of
this plan.
The draft resolution commends the Emergency
Relief Coordinator and his staff for their activities in
emergency information management and stresses that
national authorities, relief agencies and other relevant
actors need to continue to improve the sharing of
relevant information related to natural disasters and
complex emergencies. It emphasizes that coordination
of humanitarian assistance within the United Nations
system is a mandate of the Secretary-General and that
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs should benefit from adequate and more
predictable funding. It invites the Economic and Social
Council to continue to consider ways to enhance
further the humanitarian affairs segment of future
sessions of the Council, including through the adoption
of negotiated outcomes of its deliberations. The draft
resolution in its final paragraph requests the SecretaryGeneral to report to the next session of the General
Assembly, through the Economic and Social Council,
on progress made in strengthening the coordination of
the United Nations humanitarian assistance.

10

On a final note I would like to express my
gratitude to my colleague, Ambassador Hubert Wurth
for his able chairmanship and guidance during the
informal consultations on this agenda item. My
delegation and other sponsors hope that the draft
resolution contained in this document can be adopted
by consensus.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I call
on the representative of Somalia to introduce draft
resolution A/57/L.65.
Mr. Hashi (Somalia): I take the floor to
introduce, on behalf of its sponsors, draft resolution
A/57/L.65 entitled “Assistance for humanitarian relief
and the economic and social rehabilitation of Somalia”.
I should like to announce that, since the publication of
the draft resolution, the following countries have also
become sponsors of this draft resolution: Austria,
Azerbaijan, Burkina Faso, France, Germany, Greece,
India, Ireland, Italy, Jordan and Libya.
I ask the General Assembly to adopt this draft
resolution on a consensus basis as was done last year. I
wish to emphasize that this draft resolution before you
is about humanitarian assistance to Somalia and the
rehabilitation and reconstruction of Somalia. Somalia
urgently needs this assistance, since we have had a
devastating civil war going on in Somalia for a long
time.
I wish also to point out that the current draft
resolution is a continuation of last year’s resolution
passed by the General Assembly. It calls for all to
contribute to humanitarian assistance for Somalia. The
draft resolution also encourages the current national
reconciliation process in Eldoret, Kenya, in which
nearly all stakeholders in the Somalia conflict are
participating. The success of this conference will
enable Somalia to move from relief to rehabilitation
and reconstruction of the country. The draft resolution
also draws attention to the current drought in the Horn
of Africa, and in particular to those areas in Somalia
that are affected, and urges the international
community, as an urgent matter, to provide
humanitarian assistance and relief to the Somali
people, so as to alleviate in particular the consequences
of the prevailing drought. The draft resolution further
urges all States and non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) to assist the Somali people in embarking on
the rehabilitation of basic social and economic
services, as well as institution-building aimed at the

A/57/PV.75

restoration of the structures of civil governance
throughout Somalia. The draft also welcomes
agreements and declarations recently signed by the
participants at the Somali National Reconciliation
Conference at Eldoret, Kenya.
The draft has the sponsorship of 47 countries and
we hope that the passage of this draft resolution will
add positively to the momentum of peace and
reconciliation and assist our rehabilitation.
I hope this draft resolution will be adopted on a
consensus basis, as it was last year.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We
shall now consider draft resolutions A/57/L.43/Rev.1,
as orally revised, A/57/L.51, A/57/L.54, A/57/L.57,
A/57/L.60,
A/57/L.62,
A/57/L.63,
A/57/L.64,
A/57/L.65 and A/57/L.66.
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of vote before the vote, may I remind the delegations
that explanations of vote are limited to ten minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
I now call on the representative of the United
States for an explanation of vote before the vote.
Mr. Scott (United States): My delegation has two
explanations to give, one on draft resolution A/57/L.57
and one on draft resolution A/57/L.60. Concerning the
draft resolution on emergency humanitarian assistance
to Ethiopia, while the United States Government joins
the consensus on this draft resolution, we note there is
a recurrent drought affecting the entire Horn of Africa.
Thus, if this topic comes up again next year, it would,
in our view, be more appropriate to handle it under the
umbrella of a regional resolution. The United States
Government is gravely concerned by the magnitude of
the current drought, which has affected up to 18
million people over the last two years, and by the
serious crop failures in many parts of the region. We
also have serious concerns that the prevailing dire
humanitarian situation in the region will have longterm socio-economic and environmental impacts. We
note in this context the Secretary-General’s decision to
eliminate food insecurity in the Horn of Africa over a
long-term period.
With these points in mind, the United States
recommends that the international community take into
account the entire region in their humanitarian
planning. The United States Government also
welcomes the initiative of the Secretary-General to

address the recurrent regional drought on a long-term
basis, calls for the implementation of that initiative and
requests that the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs continue considering ways to
further enhance the mobilization of emergency relief
assistance.
Concerning draft resolution A/57/L.60 entitled
“Strengthening the effectiveness and coordination of
international urban search and rescue assistance”, the
United States Government is pleased to co-sponsor this
important resolution and, by doing so, to support the
process of the International Search and Rescue
Advisory Group (INSARAG). The Government of the
United States also wishes to thank the Government of
Turkey for its outstanding leadership in this matter, as
well the Geneva staff of the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs. The INSARAG process has
been developed in order to save lives, to speed
qualified aid to victims and to make sure that rescue
teams are fully equipped and protected, while also
respecting the national sovereignty of nations.
With this in mind, the United States Government
urges nations subject to disasters to participate in the
INSARAG discussions and to cooperate with each
other and the United Nations to the greatest extent
possible.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now
call on the representative of Israel for an explanation of
vote before the vote.
Mr. Govrin (Israel): My explanation of vote
refers to the draft resolution on assistance to the
Palestinian people.
Israel shares the concern of the international
community over the deterioration in the humanitarian
situation in the region. Violence and terrorism, by their
very nature, entail hardship for the civilian population.
Israeli and Palestinian civilians have both endured
tremendous pain and suffering as a consequence of the
upsurge in terrorism that began in September 2000.
Bringing this suffering to an end and providing for the
security and prosperity of all the peoples in the region
are critical components of any successful peace
initiative and is therefore a prime objective of Israeli
policy.
In this respect, Israel welcomes the efforts of
Member States and of international agencies to relieve
the suffering of innocent civilians. Israel has done its

11

A/57/PV.75

utmost to cooperate with international actors in an
effort to facilitate their humanitarian work aimed at
improving the living conditions of Palestinians in the
West Bank and the Gaza Strip. Despite the unrelenting
threat of terrorism that Israel confronts on a daily basis,
we have consistently tried to permit the flow of food,
medicine, humanitarian assistance and other necessities
to the greatest extent possible.
While Israel has tried, and will continue to try, to
facilitate humanitarian assistance to the greatest extent
possible, Palestinian terrorists have consistently
exploited any Israeli attempt to ease the conditions of
the Palestinian people. Terrorists have viewed
measures intended to increase freedom of movement as
opportunities to infiltrate Israeli cities. They have used
the immunity granted to medical and humanitarian
vehicles to smuggle weapons and explosives. It is clear
from these examples that terrorists pose a threat not
only to those they target, but also to those they hide
behind.
It is therefore entirely disingenuous to suggest, as
certain speakers have, that Israeli policies are the
source of the hardships facing the Palestinian people.
As is obvious to anyone willing to make an
honest assessment of Palestinian economic and social
development over the past decade, in periods in which
the Palestinian leadership was actively confronting
terrorist organizations and engaging in serious
negotiations with Israel, the living conditions of the
Palestinian people steadily improved. It was only with
the breakdown of the peace process and the Palestinian
resort to a deliberate campaign of terrorism aimed at
the citizens of Israel that conditions began to decline.
While it is politically useful for the Palestinians
to place the blame for their current predicament solely
on Israel’s shoulders, such allegations will do little to
offer any relief to Palestinian civilians that do not
participate in acts of terror. If the international
community is serious about alleviating the
humanitarian plight of the Palestinian people, the
single most important thing it can do is to insist that
the Palestinian leadership end its campaign of violence,
terror and incitement, as called for in Security Council
resolutions.
I wish to emphasize once again that while Israel
is joining the consensus on this draft resolution out of
our concern for the Palestinian people, Israel’s
participation should not be construed as implying any

12

position regarding the present status of the territories
referred to as “the occupied territory”. This term is not
used in the agreements between the parties, nor does it
reflect, in Israel’s view, the legal status of the disputed
territory in the West Bank and Gaza which, pursuant to
signed agreements, are a matter to be directly
negotiated between the two sides.
We remain hopeful that despite the tension that
persists in the region, we will soon be able to return to
a process of negotiations aimed at achieving a lasting
political settlement for the benefit of all the peoples of
the region.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly will now take a decision on draft resolutions
A/57/L.43/Rev.1, as orally revised, A/57/L.51,
A/57/L.54,
A/57/L.57,
A/57/L.60,
A/57/L.62,
A/57/L.63, A/57/L.64, A/57/L.65 and A/57/L.66.
We turn first to draft resolution A/57/L.43/Rev.1,
as orally revised, entitled “Special assistance for the
economic recovery and reconstruction of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo”. I wish to inform
the Assembly that the following countries have joined
the list of sponsors of the draft resolution: Finland,
Germany and Mali.
May I take it that the General Assembly decides
to adopt draft resolution A/57/L.43/Rev.1, as orally
revised?
Draft resolution A/57/L.43/Rev.1, as
revised, was adopted (resolution 57/146).

orally

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Draft
resolution A/57/L.51 is entitled “Assistance to the
Palestinian people”. The following countries have
joined the list of sponsors of the draft resolution:
Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Gambia, Mali,
Mozambique and Niger.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/57/L.51?
Draft resolution A/57/L.51
(resolution 57/147).

was

adopted

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Draft
resolution A/57/L.54 is entitled “Humanitarian
assistance to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia”. The
following country has joined the list of sponsors of the
draft resolution: Cuba.

A/57/PV.75

May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/57/L.54?
Draft resolution A/57/L.54
(resolution 57/148).

was

adopted

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Draft
resolution
A/57/L.57
is
entitled
“Emergency
humanitarian assistance to Ethiopia”. The following
countries have joined the list of sponsors of the draft
resolution: Armenia, Belgium, Gabon, Kuwait, Mali
and Turkey.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/57/L.57?
Draft resolution A/57/L.57
(resolution 57/149).

was

adopted

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Draft
resolution A/57/L.60 is entitled “Strengthening the
effectiveness and coordination of international urban
search and rescue assistance”. The following countries
have joined the list of sponsors: Bangladesh, Brazil,
France, Gabon, Ireland, Israel, Madagascar and
Tanzania.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/57/L.60?
Draft resolution A/57/L.60
(resolution 57/150).

was

adopted

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Draft
resolution A/57/L.62 is entitled “Assistance for the
rehabilitation and reconstruction of Liberia”. The
following countries have joined the list of sponsors of
the draft resolution: Belgium and Italy.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/57/L.62?
Draft resolution A/57/L.62
(resolution 57/151).

was

adopted

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Draft
resolution A/57/L.63 is entitled “International
cooperation on humanitarian assistance in the field of
natural disasters, from relief to development”. The
following countries have joined the list of sponsors of
the draft resolution: Austria, Belgium, Brazil Ecuador,
France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Madagascar,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Portugal, Romania, Sweden,
Tajikistan, Tanzania and the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia.

May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/57/L.63?
Draft resolution A/57/L.63
(resolution 57/152).

was

adopted

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Draft
resolution A/57/L.64 is entitled “Strengthening of the
coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance of
the United Nations”. The following country has joined
the list of sponsors of the draft resolution: Madagascar.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/57/L.64?
Draft resolution A/57/L.64
(resolution 57/153).

was

adopted

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Draft
resolution A/57/L.65 is entitled “Assistance for
humanitarian relief and the economic and social
rehabilitation of Somalia”. The following countries
have joined the list of sponsors of the draft resolution:
Bangladesh, Belgium, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Madagascar, Niger and Syria. May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/57/L.65?
Draft resolution A/57/L.65
(resolution 57/154).

was

adopted

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Draft
resolution A/57/L.66 is entitled “Safety and security of
humanitarian personnel and protection of United
Nations
personnel”.
Additional
sponsors
are
Bangladesh, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Colombia,
Croatia, Estonia, Gabon, Gambia, Honduras, Latvia,
Lithuania, Mozambique, Nicaragua, Paraguay, Sierra
Leone, South Africa, Tajikistan, Ukraine.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/57/L.66?
Draft resolution A/57/L.66
(resolution 57/155).

was

adopted

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Before
giving the floor to speakers in explanation of vote after
the adoption of the draft resolutions, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to ten
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Mr. Amer (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation associated itself with the
general consensus regarding the adoption of draft
resolution A/57/L.66 on the safety and security of

13

A/57/PV.75

humanitarian personnel and protection of United
Nations personnel. However, our position should not be
interpreted as agreeing to what is contained in
operative paragraph 14 of that resolution.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We
have heard the last speaker in the explanation of vote
of the adoption.
I should like to take this opportunity to thank
Ambassador Wurth of Luxembourg, on behalf of the
General Assembly, for undertaking the task of holding
consultations and negotiations on the resolutions
adopted on this agenda item.
Mr. Hussein (Ethiopia): The adoption by
consensus of the draft resolution for emergency
humanitarian assistance to Ethiopia under agenda item
21 (b), “Special economic assistance to individual
countries or regions”, has a significant message to my
people and Government. I am grateful to note that
Ethiopia enjoys the full support of Member States.
In this regard, I would like to thank the
delegation of Denmark, in its capacity as the President
of the European Union, for its utmost contribution
during the informal consultations. Likewise, I would
like to thank the delegations of the United States, the
Russian Federation, India, China, Qatar and of the
Member States of the Arab region and the African
Union. I would also like to thank the secretariat of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for
their valuable assistance.
It would be remiss of me if I failed to mention the
contribution of Ambassador Hubert Wurth, the
Permanent Representative of Luxembourg, for his able
leadership in coordinating this resolution. I am fully
confident that it will be fully implemented.
Ms. Abdelhady-Nasser (Palestine): To begin, I
wish to convey my delegation’s appreciation with
regard to the adoption by consensus of the resolution
on assistance to the Palestinian people. Emergency
economic and humanitarian assistance to the
Palestinian people is indeed a matter of urgency for
addressing the dire humanitarian crisis that has taken
root in the occupied Palestinian territory.
The root cause of this humanitarian crisis is the
Israeli policies and practices being imposed on the
Palestinian people under occupation. The severe
decline in the socio-economic conditions of the
Palestinian people is fundamentally a result of an

14

oppressive occupation now in its thirty-fifth year. For
more than 35 years, the occupying Power has
prevented the socio-economic development and
progress of the population under its occupation. Since
September, with the escalation of the Israeli military
attacks against Palestinian cities, towns and villages
and refugee camps, development has not only been
halted, it has been destroyed.
Israeli policies and practices of collective
punishment against the Palestinian people, including
the imposition of the severest restrictions on the
freedom of movement of persons and goods —
including humanitarian and medical help, which the
Israeli Government purports to cooperate with and
facilitate — have severely and detrimentally impacted
all facets of Palestinian life — economic, social,
political, health, educational and cultural.
It is thus Israel’s policies and practices in
imposing its occupation that are the root source of the
humanitarian suffering in the occupied Palestinian
territory. While we are always grateful for the
assistance of the international community in addressing
the humanitarian needs of our people, we do at the
same time reaffirm the need to address the root source
of this humanitarian crisis in all its aspects.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): May I
take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to
conclude its consideration of sub-items (a) and (c) of
agenda item 21?
It was so decided.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 21.
Agenda item 22 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
Draft resolution (A/57/L.23/Rev.1)
(d) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Council of Europe
Draft resolution A/57/L.55/Rev.1

A/57/PV.75

(n) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization of American States
Draft resolution A/57/L.55/Rev.1
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish):
Members will recall that the Assembly held a debate on
agenda item 22 and its sub-items (a) to (s) at its 53rd to
56th plenary meetings, on 20 and 21 November. In this
connection, the Assembly has before it two draft
resolutions, A/57/L.23/Rev.1 and A/57/L.55/Rev.1.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Grenada to introduce draft resolution A/57/L.55/Rev.1.
Mr. Stanislaus (Grenada): The necessary
changes having been made — mutatis mutandis — I
have the honour to introduce, on behalf of all the
sponsors, draft resolution A/57/L.55/Rev.1, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization of American States”. I should like to
announce that, since the publication of the draft
resolution, Peru has also become a sponsor.
The
growing
interconnectedness
and
interdependence of economies and societies, brought
about by the rapid rise in information and
communication technologies, make cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
such as the Organization of American States (OAS),
even more necessary and desirable.
The English poet and clergyman, John Donne
(1572-1631), was not far from the mark when he wrote
his famous saying in old English: “No man is an island,
entire of itself; every man is a piece of the continent, a
part of the main ...”. (Meditation XVII)
At that time, he was referring to the relationship
between England and the continent, which by presentday measurement was a minuscule part of today’s
known world. The point Donne was making was that
what happens to each of us affects all of us. How true
of the global village in which we now live.
The draft resolution lists the areas of activities in
which the United Nations and the OAS have been
cooperating during the past biennium 2001-2002. Some
ongoing areas of cooperation cover a wide range,
including sustainable development; trade, investment,
technology and entrepreneurial development; drug
control; promotion and protection of human rights and
democratic rights; and education and health.

I would like to highlight three specific areas
mentioned in the draft resolution. The first area is our
grave concern with the spread of the HIV/AIDS
pandemic in the region, and indeed in the entire world.
The draft resolution stresses the need for increased
financial resources and affordable drugs; but there are
other important factors in the fight against this menace,
especially in the area of education. And here I would
like to commend the very simple, but effective slogan
provided by the UNAIDS office at Headquarters —
namely, the ABC of AIDS prevention and care. A
stands for Abstinence, B stands for Be faithful, and C
stands for Condomize.
My second point relates to Haiti. The United
Nations/OAS International Civilian Support Mission in
Haiti completed its mandate in March 2001. We now
have, since June 2002, the OAS Special Mission for
Strengthening Democracy in Haiti, as well as the
continuing involvement of the Group of Friends in
support of mediation efforts in Haiti. While we
welcome both these efforts, we believe that the
situation in Haiti requires more positive and sustained
assistance from the international community,
encompassing a wide spectrum of activities dedicated
to improving the economic, social, juridical and
administrative structures in Haiti.
My third point relates to the convening of a
special conference on security in Mexico City in May
2003. A number of preparatory meetings will take
place before the conference, and we are looking
forward to a successful conference from which specific
recommendations will be made, taking into account
recent issues and developments, especially in the
aftermath of 9/11.
The draft resolution seeks the furtherance of
cooperation and collaboration between the United
Nations and the OAS, as contained in the Secretary
General’s report (document A/57/267). It involves
United Nations bodies and agencies in the promotion
and enhancement of OAS activities.
Thus, the sponsors express the hope that this draft
resolution will be adopted by consensus.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We
shall now proceed to consider draft resolutions
A/57/L.23/Rev.1 and A/57/L.55/Rev.1.
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of vote before the vote, may I remind delegations that

15

A/57/PV.75

explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.

while not specifying the countries concerned with the
jurisdiction of such a paragraph.

Mr. Ragab (Egypt): It is customary for the
United Nations General Assembly to adopt annually a
number of resolutions related to the cooperation
between the United Nations and certain regional
organizations, among which is the draft resolution this
body is about to consider today.

In conclusion, our call for a separate vote on
certain paragraphs should not be perceived as
undermining the principle objective of the draft
resolution: cooperation between the United Nations and
the Council of Europe. The Council of Europe is an
organization whose contributions to international
efforts and endeavours we regard with the highest
esteem and appreciation.

Throughout the years, these resolutions continue
to be characterized by their generous scope of
reference and language. However, the authors of this
year’s draft resolution contained in document
A/57/L.23/Rev.1, entitled “Cooperation between the
United Nations and the Council of Europe”, have
deviated from such practice by choosing to introduce
the controversial reference to the death penalty,
explicitly, in operative paragraph 6, and, implicitly, in
operative paragraph 12. In a resolute effort to bridge
the differences and achieve consensus on the
aforementioned draft resolution, the Permanent
Mission of Egypt to the United Nations, along with a
number of other interested and concerned delegations,
clearly voiced these concerns to the sponsors of the
resolution during the informal consultations conducted
under the able leadership of His Excellency the
Ambassador and Permanent Representative of Malta.
The Permanent Mission of Egypt to the United
Nations has always been supportive of all resolutions
related to cooperation between the United Nations and
other regional organizations. Such resolutions enhance
the prospects of international cooperation and
coordination
between
different
bodies
and
organizations and further help in the achievement of
the principles and objectives of the United Nations
Charter. Yet, the inclusion of controversial concepts
into a resolution otherwise adopted by consensus has
resulted in a difference of opinion when considering
the different interpretations of certain paragraphs.
Thus, the Permanent Mission of Egypt to the
United Nations is not in a position to join consensus on
this draft resolution and has called for a separate vote
on both operative paragraphs 6 and 12.
It is worth noting that the draft resolution
contains other paragraphs that constitute additional
difficulties, such as the fourth preambular paragraph,
which stresses “the importance of adherence to the
standards and principles of the Council of Europe”,

16

Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): At the outset, let
me state that Singapore fully supports cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and other
organizations; certainly, we support cooperation
between the United Nations and the Council of Europe.
Hence, we deeply regret the fact we have had to call
for a vote on the draft resolution contained in
document A/57/L.23/Rev.1.
We are doing so because we are deeply troubled
by attempts to slip in contentious issues under the
innocuous guise of a draft resolution that is intended to
focus on cooperation with the United Nations. The
fundamental principle that the General Assembly
should work under is that we should not include nonconsensual elements in a consensual draft resolution.
There is clearly no international consensus on the issue
of the death penalty.
Operative paragraph 6 — as the representative of
Egypt pointed out, speaking just before me — refers to
Protocol No. 13 to the European Convention for the
Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental
Freedoms, which is focused on the abolition of the
death penalty in all circumstances.
We are even more troubled by operative
paragraph 12, even though it looks harmless. It merely
takes note of the “Guidelines on Human Rights and the
Fight against Terrorism”. However, chapter X of the
“Guidelines” state that
“under no circumstances may a person convicted
of terrorist activities be sentenced to the death
penalty; in the event of such a sentence being
imposed, it may not be carried out”.
This is clearly unacceptable to us. Terrorists who kill
hundreds or thousands of people should not be exempt
from the penalty that applies to other criminals. Our
fear as we look at this draft resolution is that there may
well be other controversial elements hidden in it that

A/57/PV.75

we, as a small delegation, are in some ways illequipped to detect. For that reason, we want to thank
the delegation of the large country that drew our
attention to chapter X of the “Guidelines” referred to in
paragraph 12.
We also recognize that the main sponsors have
attempted to address our concerns by proposing that a
neutral term be used, such as the words “takes note”.
We appreciate the efforts made by the sponsors to take
our concerns on board. They have argued that “takes
note” is a neutral term that connotes neither approval
nor disapproval of these paragraphs.
In response, we would like to make two points.
First, like the representative of Egypt, I would once
again like to draw the Assembly’s attention to the
fourth preambular paragraph, which reads:
“Stressing the importance of adherence to the
standards and principles of the Council of Europe
and its contribution to the solution of conflicts
throughout the whole of Europe”.
It is strange that we, the 191 Member States,
should be called upon to adhere to the standards and
principles of the Council of Europe. We respect its
standards and principles, but we have our own, too.
Indeed, were it not for the fact that this particular
clause was included in a resolution adopted by
consensus last year, we would also have objected to the
paragraph this year. But the fact that this preambular
paragraph exists and is linked to operative paragraphs 6
and 12 means that we can no longer accept even the
phrases “notes” and “takes note” included in those
paragraphs.
The second point is that “takes note” is
unacceptable to us precisely because it is neutral. We
actually cannot merely take note because we would
have to take note with disapproval of the elements
contained in paragraphs 6 and 12.
Let me also mention here in passing that we
regret the fact that the draft resolution on cooperation
between the United Nations and the Council of Europe
is growing longer and longer each year. Two years ago,
there were 11 operative paragraphs in the resolution on
this item. This year, there are 24 — more than double
the number when this item first appeared on the agenda
two years ago. We would therefore respectfully like to
suggest that next year, to avoid a repetition of the
unfortunate situation we are in today, we revert to the

usual practice and adopt a short and sharp resolution
which focuses only on the issues of cooperation and
does not include any non-consensual elements.
This year, unfortunately, as the draft resolution
contains elements which are not germane to
cooperation between the United Nations and the
Council of Europe and which reflect positions that are
contrary to our national point of view, we will have no
choice but to vote against operative paragraphs 6 and
12. Should those paragraphs remain in the text, we will
abstain in the voting on the whole draft resolution. Any
vote in favour of the draft resolution would amount to a
dishonest stand on our part, which we are unable to
take on such important issues as the death penalty.
We would like to state for the record that
Singapore cannot and will not join consensus on any
draft resolution that refers to the death penalty issue,
no matter how indirectly it is done.
Ms. Miller (Jamaica): My delegation is well
aware of the important role that has been played by the
Council of Europe in a number of areas of concern to
the mandate of the United Nations. We therefore fully
support
ongoing
cooperation
between
both
organizations.
While, in previous years, Jamaica has been
pleased to join consensus on the resolution on
cooperation between the United Nations and the
Council of Europe, we regret that we will be unable to
join in any consensus on this occasion, in view of the
inclusion of elements which fail to command the
support of some Member States, including my own.
Jamaica is particularly concerned with the reference in
paragraph 6 to Protocol 13 to the Convention for the
Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental
Freedoms concerning the abolition of the death penalty.
While we appreciate the attempts to amend the original
language of the draft, which highlighted the support of
the Council for the abolition of the death penalty
worldwide, we would have preferred if the sponsors of
the draft had withdrawn all references to the death
penalty in paragraph 6 and refrained from including in
a traditionally consensual United Nations draft
resolution issues internal to the Council of Europe and
which have neither a clear bearing on cooperation with
the United Nations system nor consensus within the
Organization’s membership.
The General Assembly need not be reminded that
that the laws of a number of States Members of this

17

A/57/PV.75

Organization still provide for the death penalty, which
is recognized as a legitimate and constitutionally
sanctioned penalty for the most severe crimes. It must
therefore not be expected that these States should
collectively endorse a draft resolution which contains
divisive and non-consensual elements that imply a
singular lack of appreciation for their judicial and
legislative processes, developed and applied in
compliance with their international legal obligations.
We believe that the principles of the sovereignty
and equality of States under the Charter would dictate
that each State be respected in the legitimate exercise
of its domestic jurisdiction in matters of criminal law.
Each State should therefore be entitled to take steps in
accordance with international norms which it deems
necessary to protect its citizens in the context of its
social, cultural and economic realities.
While Jamaica will vote in favour of paragraph
12 — since, in our view, it cannot be presumed to be
prescriptive and was not exhortatory in its original
intent — we will be forced to vote against paragraph 6
and will abstain in the voting on the draft resolution as
a whole.
Mr. Marsh (United States of America): Like
previous speakers who have so ably described the
situation in which they find themselves, the United
States is unable to join the consensus on this draft
resolution. I should like to refer to three operative
paragraphs.
With reference to operative paragraph 4, the
United States seeks a position of abstention. The Rome
Statute, and indeed the International Criminal Court
emanating from it, are matters that we consider to be
controversial. Thus, the United States, together with
the majority of Members of the General Assembly,
have not ratified the Statute. The implication of
endorsement in that paragraph is therefore an
overstatement, not representing a consensual position
of United Nations Members.
Concerning operative paragraph 6, because the
United States has steadfastly supported both the
Council of Europe and the principle of United Nations
cooperation with that body, it is particularly
disappointing to find that the basically simple intent of
the draft resolution has become distorted. Any attempt
to make this text into a vehicle for advocacy of
narrower objectives must not prevail. Abolition of
capital punishment may be an ultimate goal worthy of

18

attention, but this draft resolution is not the place for it.
Instead, each State may consider the matter for itself,
in accordance with its own constitutional processes. It
is not the place of the United Nations to commend or to
condemn activities of the Council of Europe in this
highly controversial field, nor may a resolution that is
tantamount to a directive addressed to the United
Nations Secretariat prescribe its cooperation in a field
unacceptable to many Member States. The United
States will vote against this paragraph and urges its
fellow members of the General Assembly to do so as
well.
Finally, with reference to operative paragraph 12,
the reasoning that impels the United States to vote
against operative paragraph 6 reinforces the conviction
that we should vote “no” in this case. Let us act now to
eliminate this reference to capital punishment, a subject
that has been in deep dispute within the General
Assembly for the past several years.
Mr. Cheah Sam Kip (Malaysia): Under normal
circumstances, Malaysia would support the draft
resolution on cooperation between the United Nations
and the Council of Europe. We have always believed in
the forging of cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations. Such cooperation attests to
the importance that regional organizations attach to the
United Nations and to its centrality in multilateralism.
Although the draft resolution has many positive
elements, Malaysia finds difficulty in supporting it as a
whole. We are particularly concerned at the
implications of operative paragraphs 6 and 12, which
pertain to the death penalty. We are of the firm
conviction that States have the sovereign right to
determine their own criminal justice systems and to
enact their own laws concerning punishment. Malaysia
has laws on capital punishment. We believe that these
two operative paragraphs would be inconsistent with
Malaysia’s criminal justice system. Therefore,
Malaysia will vote against the two operative
paragraphs and will abstain from voting on the draft
resolution as a whole.
Mr. Kanu (Sierra Leone): Sierra Leone attaches
great importance to cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations. It is undeniable
that regional organizations play an extremely
significant role in the maintenance of international
peace and security, in conformity with the principles
and purposes of the United Nations. In the light of that

A/57/PV.75

fact, Sierra Leone views cooperation between the
United Nations and the Council of Europe as very
important.
In the past, Sierra Leone has gone along with the
consensus on draft resolutions regarding cooperation
between the United Nations and the Council of Europe.
Sierra Leone views such cooperation as very important
in the fulfilment of the principles and purposes of the
United Nations. This year, like previous speakers, we
find it difficult to go along with the consensus on this
resolution. Sierra Leone still has provisions for capital
punishment in its laws. Consequently, we find it
difficult to support operative paragraphs 6 and 12 of
the draft resolution, which call explicitly and implicitly
for the abolition of the death penalty.
It is argued by some that noting this aspect of the
draft resolution — operative paragraph 12 — should
not create any problems. That may be true with regard
to a non-controversial draft resolution; noting a
position may not be problematic. But in the case of a
draft resolution of this nature, which has certain
controversial provisions, “noting” may be tantamount
to acquiescence. For that reason, Sierra Leone will find
it difficult to go along with the consensus. We will vote
against operative paragraphs 6 and 12. With regard to
the draft resolution as a whole, we will find it difficult
to support it; therefore, we will abstain.
Mr. Sinaga (Indonesia): My delegation would
like to recall that Indonesia has always fully supported
cooperation between the United Nations and the
Council of Europe. We observe with regret, however,
that this draft resolution is not being adopted by
consensus this year, owing largely to the inclusion of
new elements.
As a result of the informal consultations
generously held by the representative of Malta, my
delegation can understand the argument behind the
inclusion of a provision recognizing the legal
developments that took place in Europe this year. I
should like to refer to operative paragraph 6, which
reads: “Notes the opening for signature on 3 May 2002
in Vilnius of ‘Protocol No. 13 to the Convention for the
Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental
Freedoms’...”. In that respect, the paragraph is not
controversial. But the substance of Protocol No. 13
concerns “the abolition of the death penalty under all
circumstances”. I think that is the beginning of the

controversy, because the death penalty is still applied
in many States.
While it supports cooperation between the United
Nations and the Council of Europe, my delegation will
abstain from voting on the draft resolution as a whole.
However, Indonesia hopes that a consensus on this
important matter will be possible in the coming year.
Mr. Al-Sulaiti (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation has requested to speak in explanation of
vote before a decision is taken on this draft resolution
in order to make the following points.
The State of Qatar constantly supports
cooperation between the United Nations and the
Council of Europe, just as we support cooperation
between the United Nations and other regional
organizations, in conformity with the principles and
purposes of the Charter of the United Nations. We are
convinced that such cooperation, based on
multilateralism, enriches the United Nations. We are
mindful of the importance of continued cooperation
between the United Nations and the Council of Europe,
and we have joined the list of States that have
requested a reconsideration of the letter presented by
the Permanent Representative of Singapore to his
counterpart, the Permanent Representative of Malta.
Preambular paragraph 4 and operative paragraphs 6
and 12 do not take into account our concerns and
opposition, even when we explained that such a
sensitive text contradicts our national legislation.
Therefore, we will vote against paragraphs 6 and 12,
and will abstain from supporting the text in its entirety.
Mr. Al-Jomae (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
My delegation would first like to recall that Saudi
Arabia supports cooperation between the United
Nations and other regional organizations. However, the
draft
resolution
contained
in
document
A/57/L.23/Rev.1, entitled “Cooperation between the
United Nations and the Council of Europe”, contains in
its operative paragraph 6 mention of the death penalty.
There is also mention in paragraph 12 of the guidelines
on human rights adopted by the Council of Europe that
relate to the abolition of the death penalty. Saudi
Arabia cannot join in such a consensus. We object to
those two paragraphs, namely 6 and 12, and will
abstain from supporting the draft resolution as a whole.
Mr. Al-Hinai (Oman): My delegation has had no
difficulties in the past in supporting resolutions on
cooperation between the United Nations and the

19

A/57/PV.75

Council of Europe. Regrettably, a new element — one
on the abolition of the death penalty — was introduced
in the draft resolution this year. This runs counter to
our laws and my delegation cannot support it. This was
introduced in spite of an appeal to the sponsors of draft
resolution A/57/L.23/Rev.1 to accommodate our
concerns, which would have allowed my delegation to
join in the consensus. Unfortunately, this was not to be.
My delegation will, therefore, not support operative
paragraphs 6 and 12. Least there be any doubt, my
delegation wholeheartedly supports cooperation
between the United Nations and the Council of Europe
and would have gladly supported the draft resolution.
If operative paragraphs 6 and 12 are retained, my
delegation will regrettably abstain on the draft
resolution as a whole.
Mr. Muvunyi (Rwanda): The Government of the
Republic of Rwanda does not accept paragraphs 6 and
12 of draft resolution A/57/L.23/Rev.1 entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Council of Europe”, because genocide and terrorism
are the worst crimes against humanity and
development. It is unconstitutional in my country and
unacceptable to fail to carry out the death penalty. I
believe that other countries have their own
constitutions and that is a matter of sovereignty.
Therefore, the abolition of the death penalty cannot be
made into a common denominator for all national
constitutions.
The Government of Rwanda believes that it
would be shameful to the survivors of the genocide if
the death penalty were not carried out against those
guilty of genocide. The Rwanda genocide of 1994 took
away more than 1 million lives in less than a hundred
days. The genocide was the result of a culture of
impunity, and that is why Rwanda carries out the death
penalty against those guilty of genocide. This
punishment became educative, as those who had
committed genocide started confessing and repenting;
before then, they had refused to give any information
as to how the genocide was planned and carried out.
Our efforts to eliminate impunity are
incompatible with paragraphs 6 and 12 of the draft
resolution. The Council of Europe is not well informed
with regard to the situation on the ground in other
countries. It seems that the Council of Europe seeks to
grant amnesty and bestow its blessing on genocide and
terrorism, as if the Europeans were not concerned
about victims on other continents. While Rwanda

20

attaches great importance to cooperation between the
United Nations and the Council of Europe, we cannot
endorse impunity. Therefore, Rwanda will not stop
carrying out the death penalty, because those who
commit genocide and terrorism are criminals. I do not
understand why the Council of Europe seeks to grant
amnesty to terrorists and those who have committed
genocide as they carry out their dirty missions.
Let me remind the representatives of the Council
of Europe that they failed to prevent genocide in
Rwanda, just as today they are failing to prevent
terrorism. As regards terrorism, the Council of
Europe has forgotten the victims of the terrorist
activities of 11 September 2001 in New York and
Washington, D.C., as well as those of earlier attacks in
Nairobi and Dar es Salaam on the United States
embassies in Africa. Those attacks were followed by
attacks in Bali and recently in Mombasa that took more
innocent lives. Crimes of terrorism must be punished
by a death sentence. In our view, the Council of Europe
is sympathetic to genocide and terrorism, both of which
are the consequences of impunity. In order to eliminate
impunity and eradicate crimes of genocide and
terrorism there is an urgent need to impose the death
penalty on criminals who cause the death of innocent
civilians. For this reason, there should be no consensus
on this draft resolution.
Finally, it is my wish that the death penalty be
carried out against rapists of young children, if we seek
to be serious about defending human rights. Moreover,
the abolition of the death penalty in some countries
would be to commit suicide. Rwanda is going to vote
against the two paragraphs, 6 and 12, and then abstain
on the draft resolution as a whole.
Mr. Beyendeza (Uganda): Let me make it clear
that my delegation fully supports cooperation between
the United Nations and the Council of Europe.
However, my delegation has a problem with paragraphs
6 and 12 of the draft resolution for reasons already
pointed out by others who have spoken before me.
More importantly, my country still maintains the death
penalty in our laws, and it would take a parliamentary
act to change such a legal status. Until this is done, my
delegation will vote against paragraphs 6 and 12 and
abstain if the resolution as a whole still carries those
paragraphs.
Mr. Mubarez (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation, like many others, is keen on supporting

A/57/PV.75

cooperation between the United Nations and the
Council of Europe. The draft resolution contained in
A/57/L.23/Rev.1 does not take into account the
concerns expressed by certain delegations with regard
to the abolition of the death penalty, which is still in
force in those countries, including my own. My
delegation will therefore vote against paragraphs 6 and
12 of the draft resolution and abstain from voting for
the draft resolution as a whole.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We
have heard the last speaker in explanation of vote
before the voting.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolutions A/57/L.23/Rev.1 and A/57/L.55/Rev.1.
We turn first to draft resolution A/57/L.23/Rev.1,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Council of Europe”. I should like to inform the
Assembly that Canada and Suriname have also become
sponsors of the draft resolution.
Separate votes have been requested on operative
paragraph 4, operative paragraph 6 and operative
paragraph 12 of draft resolution A/57/L.23/Rev.1.
Are there any objections to those requests?
There are none. We shall therefore proceed
accordingly.
I shall first put to the vote operative paragraph 4
of draft resolution A/57/L.23/Rev.1.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Barbados,
Belarus,
Belgium, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Cambodia,
Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Morocco, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands,

New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
South Africa, Spain, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden,
Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Trinidad and Tobago,
Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela,
Yugoslavia, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
None.
Abstaining:
Bangladesh, Belize, Burundi, Cameroon, Cuba,
Egypt,
El
Salvador,
Ethiopia,
Gambia,
Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Israel,
Kazakhstan, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Madagascar, Malawi, Myanmar, Pakistan, Papua
New Guinea, Qatar, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Sri
Lanka, Swaziland, Togo, Tonga, Tunisia, United
States of America, Vanuatu, Yemen.
Operative paragraph 4 was retained by 109 votes
to none, with 36 abstentions.
[Subsequently the delegation of Eritrea informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.]
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I shall
now put to the vote operative paragraph 6 of draft
resolution A/57/L.23/Rev.1.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Belgium, Bolivia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Mexico, Monaco, Nepal, Netherlands, New

21

A/57/PV.75

Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Paraguay,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Samoa,
San Marino, Senegal, Slovakia, Slovenia, South
Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern
Ireland,
Uruguay,
Venezuela,
Yugoslavia.
Against:
Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh,
Barbados,
Belize,
Brunei
Darussalam,
Burundi,
Comoros,
Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti,
Dominica, Egypt, Ethiopia, Gambia, Grenada,
Guinea, Guyana, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Jamaica, Kenya, Kuwait, Lesotho,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mongolia, Nauru, Nigeria, Oman,
Papua New Guinea, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Sudan, Swaziland, Tonga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, United States of
America, Vanuatu, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Abstaining:
Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon, China, El
Salvador, Ghana, Guatemala, Haiti, India, Israel,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Madagascar,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco, Myanmar,
Namibia, Pakistan, Peru, Republic of Korea, Sri
Lanka, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Viet Nam.
Operative paragraph 6 was retained by 71 votes
to 54, with 32 abstentions.
[Subsequently the delegations of Eritrea and
Malawi informed the Secretariat that they had
intended to abstain.]
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I shall
now put to the vote operative paragraph 12 of draft
resolution A/57/L.23/Rev.1.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

22

In favour:
Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Belgium, Bolivia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary,
Iceland,
Ireland,
Italy,
Jamaica,
Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Panama,
Paraguay, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Samoa, San
Marino, Senegal, Slovakia, Slovenia, South
Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern
Ireland,
Uruguay,
Venezuela,
Yugoslavia.
Against:
Antigua and Barbuda, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belize, Brunei Darussalam, Burundi,
Comoros, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Djibouti, Dominica, Egypt, Ethiopia,
Gambia, Grenada, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Israel, Kenya, Kuwait,
Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mongolia, Nigeria, Oman,
Papua New Guinea, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Sudan, Swaziland, Tonga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, United States of
America, Vanuatu, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Abstaining:
Bahamas, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon,
China, El Salvador, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea,
Haiti, Honduras, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Lao
People’s
Democratic
Republic,
Lebanon,
Madagascar,
Mali,
Mauritania,
Morocco,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Pakistan, Peru,
Philippines, Republic of Korea, Sri Lanka,
Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo,
Tunisia.
Operative paragraph 12 was retained by 71 votes
to 52, with 33 abstentions.

A/57/PV.75

[Subsequently the delegations of Eritrea and
Malawi informed the Secretariat that they had
intended to abstain.]
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I shall
now put to the vote draft resolution A/57/L.23/Rev.1 as
a whole.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan,
Algeria,
Andorra,
Angola,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan, Belarus, Belgium, Bolivia, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, China,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic,
Denmark,
Djibouti,
Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malta, Mauritius,
Mexico, Monaco, Morocco, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Samoa, San
Marino, Senegal, Slovakia, Slovenia, South
Africa, Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern
Ireland,
Uruguay,
Venezuela, Yugoslavia, Zambia.
Against:
None.
Abstaining:
Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh,
Barbados,
Belize,
Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Comoros,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Dominica, Egypt, Ethiopia, Gambia, Ghana,
Grenada, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lesotho, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Mauritania, Mongolia, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nauru, Oman, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea,

Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland, Togo,
Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda, United
Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
United States of America, Vanuatu, Yemen,
Zimbabwe.
Draft resolution A/57/L.23/Rev.1 was adopted by
92 votes to none, with 65 abstentions (resolution
57/156).
[Subsequently the delegation of Eritrea informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.]
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly will now take a decision on draft resolution
A/57/L.55/Rev.1, entitled “Cooperation between the
United Nations and the Organization of American
States”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/57/L.55/Rev.1?
Draft resolution A/57/L.55/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 57/157).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now
call on those representatives who wish to speak in
explanation of vote or position on the resolutions just
adopted.
May I remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Manalo (Philippines): My delegation regrets
the fact that consensus was not reached on draft
resolution A/57/L.23/Rev.1, which we have just
adopted. We had strongly hoped for a consensus
resolution because of the importance that my
delegation and my Government attach to cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and other
organizations such as the Council of Europe. In this
regard, we fully support cooperation between the
United Nations and the Council of Europe and have
supported similar resolutions in the past.
We thank Ambassador Balzan and the delegation
of Malta as well as the other sponsors for their
efforts to try to reach consensus. Nevertheless, my
delegation — regrettably — abstained in the voting on
the draft resolution this year because of difficulties

23

A/57/PV.75

with some of the language contained in operative
paragraph 12 and in the fourth preambular paragraph.
On the latter paragraph, I wish to make it clear
that we fully respect the standards and principles of the
Council of Europe, but we are uncertain as to the
implications of adhering to them as stated in the
resolution.
Finally, my delegation reiterates its full and
continuing support for cooperation between the United
Nations and the Council of Europe.
Mr. Cheon Wook (Republic of Korea): My
delegation abstained in the voting on operative
paragraphs 6 and 12 in the resolution on cooperation
between the United Nations and the Council of Europe.
We believe that the inclusion of references to
regional conventions and guidelines that rule in a
certain way on a divisive issue at the global level is
inappropriate in a resolution that calls for cooperation
between this global body and a regional organization.
However, we voted in favour of the resolution as
a whole because we are fully supportive of the
cooperation between the United Nations and the
Council of Europe, and we can go along with the
modified language of the two paragraphs in question.
We hope that the spirit of cooperation which the
resolution tries to strengthen will not be harmed by the
non-consensual manner in which it was adopted this
time, and that in future delegations will work together
so that the resolution can reclaim the consensus support
it had traditionally enjoyed.
Mr. Amer (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation has always supported
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
as well as other organizations. My delegation joined
the consensus on all the resolutions we have adopted in
the past few days. Of course, we would have liked this
draft resolution, which relates to cooperation between
the United Nations and the Council of Europe, also to
be adopted by consensus. That was the case at previous
sessions, and we were among those countries that
supported such an approach.
However, at this session, my delegation was not
able to support the draft resolution, because it now
includes elements that are irrelevant to the objectives
that we are trying to attain through cooperation
between the United Nations and the Council of Europe.

24

We would like in particular to highlight operative
paragraph 6, which concerns the abolition of the death
penalty under all circumstances, as well as operative
paragraph 12, which mentions the “Guidelines on
Human Rights and the Fight against Terrorism”
elaborated by the Council of Europe, item 10 of which
also mentions the abolition of the death penalty under
all circumstances.
The abolition of the death penalty is a
controversial question for many States, for religious
and cultural reasons. It is not easy to move beyond
these questions when General Assembly resolutions are
involved. We wish that the sponsors of the draft
resolution had taken the positions of these States into
account. Since this was not the case, my delegation had
no choice but to vote against operative paragraphs 6
and 12.
My delegation was also obliged to abstain in the
voting on draft resolution A/57/L.23/Rev.1 as a whole.
This is an expression of our rejection of any attempt to
impose on us practices that run counter to our laws and
beliefs.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): There
are a number of speakers remaining on my list. I would
therefore urge all delegation to speak as briefly as
possible in view of the lateness of the hour.
Mr. Fallouh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation voted in favour of the draft
resolution entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Council of Europe” because we believe
that such cooperation is important and that we should
strengthen the means and scope of cooperation between
the two organizations, in a similar approach to the one
taken to cooperation between the United Nations and
other regional organizations.
However, Syria believes that resolutions on
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and
international
organizations
should
stress
coordination among these organizations and the United
Nations. We should not go into the specifics of the
policies of these organizations, which are primarily
linked to their mandates in accordance with their laws
and practices. To include the policies of such
organizations in this kind of resolution, in order to
oblige Member States, directly or indirectly, to espouse
approaches or concepts that run counter to their
national legislation and their religious or cultural
practices, is in no way justifiable.

A/57/PV.75

In this context, we feel that the content of
operative paragraphs 6 and 12 have nothing to do with
the objectives of this draft resolution. Everyone is
aware that all peoples and States have their own,
particular characteristics and humanitarian and cultural
heritage. It is therefore difficult to impose the
experiences and practices of some States on other
States under different or varied names. For all these
reasons, my delegation abstained in the vote on
operative paragraphs 6 and 12. We hope that this kind
of language will not be included in future draft
resolutions of this kind.
Ms. Shoman (Belize): My delegation is taking
the floor on behalf of the following countries —
Antigua and Barbuda, Barbados, Grenada, Guyana,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Trinidad and Tobago and my own country, Belize, in
explanation of vote after the vote on resolution
A/57/L.23/Rev.1, entitled “Cooperation between the
United Nations and the Council of Europe”.
As do other Members of the United Nations, my
delegation attaches great importance to the cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and other
organizations and has supported resolutions that
promote such cooperation.
With respect to operative paragraphs six and 12
of resolution A/57/L.23/Rev.1, Belize, like other
delegations, cannot in principle support references to
issues that are significantly contentious and divisive for
the general membership of the United Nations in a
resolution on cooperation. For that reason, we have
voted for the deletion of the paragraphs and have,
regrettably, abstained on the resolution as a whole. We
regret that efforts to reach a consensus on this occasion
were unsuccessful. However, we trust that it will be
possible to return to the tradition of consensus that has
attended the cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and other organizations.
Mr. Al-Awadi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation associates itself with other delegations in
expressing our rejection, in particular, of operative
paragraphs 6 and 12, of draft resolution
A/57/L.23/Rev.1, on cooperation between the United
Nations and the Council of Europe, which was adopted
today. My delegation fully supports the efforts of the
Council of Europe to strengthen international
cooperation. We also support the activities of the
United Nations in all areas, in particular, with respect

to the Charter and the resolutions of the United
Nations.
It is regrettable that we have to say that we
cannot join the consensus, as we have done every year,
in the vote on this draft resolution. We have supported
it in previous years because we are convinced of the
importance of cooperation between the Council of
Europe and the United Nations. Operative paragraphs 6
and 12, concerning the abolition of the death penalty,
run counter to my country’s national laws and
legislation concerning the death penalty, adopted
according to the precepts of the Islamic religion. That
is why we abstained in the vote on the draft resolution
and voted against its operative paragraphs 6 and 12.
Finally, we would like to thank the delegation of
Malta for its efforts to achieve a consensus. In the
future, we will continue to give our support to the
Council of Europe and its efforts to strengthen
international cooperation.
Mr. Arrouchi (Morocco) (spoke in French): The
delegation of the Kingdom of Morocco voted in favour
of the draft resolution on cooperation between the
United Nations and the Council of Europe, subject to
Moroccan legislation and the penalties it prescribes for
violations of it.
Mr. Mustafa (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation supports the principle of cooperation
between the Council of Europe and the United Nations.
Furthermore, Sudan supports all areas of cooperation
between the United Nations and the other regional
organizations.
My delegation regrets that we were unable to
adopt this draft resolution by consensus. My delegation
voted against operative paragraphs 6 and 12 contained
in the draft resolution A/57/L.23/Rev.1 and abstained
in the vote on the draft resolution as a whole. We did
this for the following reasons. First, this draft
resolution, as many delegations have said, dealt with a
subject on which there was agreement: cooperation
between the United Nations and the Council of Europe.
However, a certain number of controversial elements
were added. The Assembly knows that the abolition of
the death penalty remains a most delicate question for
some countries. The positions expressed in the
Assembly on this question have been divergent.
Secondly, including controversial questions such
as the abolition of the death penalty, guidelines on

25

A/57/PV.75

human rights and the fight against terrorism in a draft
resolution that specifically concerns a subject of
agreement has only complicated our task of adopting
this draft resolution as a whole. My delegation feels
that controversial questions of this kind should be
resolved in a different forum.
Thirdly, it would have been possible to keep the
international community and States informed of the
opening for signature of Protocol 13 to the Convention
for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental
Freedoms concerning the abolition of the death penalty
in all circumstances by resorting to other established
methods followed in diplomacy. This would have led to
averting controversial issues and to focusing on
strengthening of cooperation and coordination between
the United Nations and regional organizations in
various activities.
Finally, my delegation would like to express its
thanks to the delegation of Malta for its praiseworthy
efforts to achieve consensus. It hopes that all draft
resolutions under this item will be adopted by
consensus in the future.
Mr. Bishnoi (India): My explanation is with
regard to A/57/L.23/Rev.1, on cooperation between the
United Nations and the Council of Europe. India has
extremely warm and friendly relations with the
members of the Council of Europe. We are, indeed,
gratified that these relations continue to be further
strengthened and deepened. Under these circumstances,
we regret that the draft resolution on cooperation
between the United Nations and the Council of Europe
had to be put to a vote. The United Nations has
arrangements for cooperation with various regional and
other organizations. Resolutions dealing with
cooperation with various individual organizations have
traditionally been adopted by consensus. We abstained
from voting on the resolution as a whole, given the
inclusion of elements which do not enjoy consensus.
We agreed that the sponsors did not find it possible to
take on board completely the concerns which had been
voiced by us and by other delegations. This vote will,
we feel, establish a precedent for the future.
Mr. Tomoshige (Japan): The Government of
Japan, as an observer of the Council of Europe, greatly
appreciates the important activities of that body and
wishes to further cooperate with its various activities.
For this reason, my delegation voted for draft
resolution A/57/L.23/Rev.1.

26

With regard to operative paragraphs 6 and 12,
however, there are different views on the issue of the
death penalty. While Japan retains capital punishment,
the Government of Japan believes that whether to
retain or abolish capital punishment should be carefully
studied by each State, taking fully into account the
opinion of its people and the nature of the most serious
crimes committed in each jurisdiction. Therefore, my
delegation strongly believes that the decision of each
State in this regard should be respected. My delegation
hopes that this resolution will be adopted on a
consensus basis in the future.
Mr. Abebe (Ethiopia): Ethiopia notes the
cooperation between the United Nations and the
Council of Europe over the last couple of decades with
great satisfaction. We are looking forward to the
strengthening of this cooperation on more solid and
concrete grounds to achieve the common goals and
objectives of the two organizations.
My delegation regrets that consensus was not
achieved
on
the
resolution
contained
in
A/57/L.23/Rev.1. Ethiopia voted against operative
paragraph 6 and 12 of the resolution, which deals with
the abolition of the death penalty. This issue does not
command consensus among the United Nations
membership and it contradicts our domestic laws. We
abstained in the vote on the resolution as a whole, as it
contained these two controversial paragraphs, namely
operative paragraphs 6 and 12.
Mr. Mwakawago (United Republic of Tanzania):
Two hours ago, the General Assembly adopted 11 draft
resolutions. And a few moments ago, before the draft
resolution on cooperation between the United Nations
and the Council of Europe, another resolution, a
twelfth one, was adopted by consensus. There was no
controversial clause in any of them.
My delegation would like to explain our vote on
the important draft resolution A/57/L.23/Rev.1, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Council of Europe”. My delegation voted against
operative paragraphs 6 and 12, which make reference
to the death penalty. My delegation has been pained by
the inclusion of the controversial measure that has no
consensus in the General Assembly. We have made our
position known in the informal consultations, ably
chaired by the Permanent Representative of Malta.
The draft resolution on cooperation between the
United Nations and the Council of Europe has always

A/57/PV.75

received consensual support. This year, to our
consternation, our development partners have chosen to
introduce a very divisive issue that is making it
problematic for my delegation to provide its support.
For those reasons we abstained.

consensus. This decision is based on the principle that
the explicit and implicit references to the abolition of
death penalty in operative paragraphs 6 and 12
respectively are indirectly interfering with the national
legal processes of some Member States.

All resolutions on cooperation are by tradition
and precedent adopted by consensus. One important
feature of all of them has been the embodiment of noncontroversial clauses. The United Republic of Tanzania
enjoys excellent relations with the Council of Europe,
and indeed with all members of the European Union. It
is therefore with deep regret that my delegation has
voted against those paragraphs and as a consequence
abstained in the vote on the resolution as a whole.

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We
have heard the last speaker in explanation of vote after
the vote.

In conclusion, I would like to report that the
death penalty is incorporated into our laws. It is our
hope that in the future resolutions that are normally
adopted by consensus will not be held hostage by the
introduction of controversial paragraphs.
Mr. Wang Donghua (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation has all along supported
strengthened cooperation between the United Nations
and the various regional organizations, including the
Council of Europe. We hope that such cooperation can
produce concrete results on the basis of pragmatism
and mutual respect. It is because of this reason that the
Chinese delegation voted in favour of the resolution
contained in document A/57/L.23/Rev.1.
However, this does not mean that the Chinese
delegation supports operative paragraphs 6 and 12.
These two paragraphs contain certain elements, that is,
they call for the abolition of the death penalty in all
circumstances. Such elements have nothing to do with
the question of cooperation between the United Nations
and the Council of Europe. These are highly
controversial issues within the United Nations, and to
introduce such elements in this draft resolution will not
enhance cooperation between the United Nations and
the Council of Europe. Therefore my delegation
abstained in the vote on these two paragraphs. It is our
hope that the General Assembly will be able to reach a
consensus in adopting the resolution in the future.
Mr. Drammeh (Gambia): My delegation is
always keen to support cooperation between the United
Nations and any regional organization. However, given
the inclusion of external elements in draft resolution
A/57/L.23/Rev.1, my delegation voted as shown in the
records and regrets not being able to join the

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Czech Republic on a point of order.
Mr. Kára (Czech Republic): I take the floor to
inform the General Assembly that a few days ago my
country signed the list of sponsors for the draft
resolution on cooperation between the United Nations
and the Council of Europe. Therefore, I ask that the
Czech Republic be considered as a sponsor of draft
resolution L.23/Rev.1.
The Acting President: I call on delegations
wishing to make statements after the adoption of the
resolution.
Mr. Balzan (Malta): I have listened carefully to
the explanation of positions expressed prior to and after
the votes were taken on resolution A/57/L.23/Rev.1,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Council of Europe”.
It is very much regretted that, notwithstanding
several genuine attempts to amend the language in
order to facilitate acceptance by all delegations, we
were not able to adopt the resolution by consensus.
In expressing my full respect for all the views
expressed, and the positions taken by different
delegations, may I reassure this body that it was not the
intention of the Council of Europe or of the sponsors of
the resolution, to convert a cooperation resolution into
a debate on specific issues, controversial or otherwise.
The resolution took note of factual events that occurred
with the Council of Europe’s ambit, as well as its
contribution towards enhancing cooperation with the
United Nations.
I reiterate that the Council of Europe attaches
great importance and significance to its cooperation
with the United Nations and looks forward to its
further enhancement.
In conclusion, Mr. President, allow me to express
my sincere thanks to all delegations that participated in
the negotiating process. My heartfelt thanks are also

27

A/57/PV.75

addressed to the sponsors and delegations that
expressed their support for the Council of Europe’s
work, particularly that of cooperation with the United
Nations.
Ms. Loemban Tobing-Klein (Suriname): In a
brief general statement, Suriname, as a traditional
strong supporter of cooperation between the United
Nations and the Council of Europe, wishes to state that
we have also wholeheartedly supported the resolution
as a whole and as a sponsor, but we want to express
full
solidarity
and
understanding
with
the
representatives who have serious and valid concerns
against operative paragraphs 6 and 12 by abstaining on
these paragraphs and by doing so, expressing the hope
that it will be possible to achieve full consensus on this
important resolution in the near future, as has been the
case in previous years.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): May I
take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to
conclude its consideration of sub-items (d) and (n) of
agenda item 22?

28

I see no objection.
It was so decided.
Postponement of the date of recess
The President in the Chair.
The President: I should like to draw members’
attention to the date of recess of the current session.
Members will recall that, at its 68th plenary meeting on
6 December 2002, the General Assembly decided that
the fifty-seventh session would recess on Wednesday,
18 December 2002. However, in view of the work that
remains to be done for this part of the session, I should
like to propose to the Assembly that it postpone the
date of recess of the current session to Friday, 20
December 2002.
If there is no objection, may I take it that the
Assembly agrees to this proposal?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.
