S/PV.8644

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8644th meeting

Thursday, 24 October 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Mabhongo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(South Africa)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Van Vlierberge
Mr. Yao Shaojun
Mr. Moriko
Ms. Batista Díaz
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Mr. Michon
Mr. Licharz
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Almunayekh
Ms. Bustamante
Mr. Lewicki
Mr. Repkin
Mr. Clay
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Abyei (S/2019/817)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-33439 (E)
*1933439*

S/PV.8644

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Abyei (S/2019/817)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of South Sudan and the Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in the meeting: Mr. JeanPierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peace
Operations; and Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Horn of Africa.
Mr. Onanga-Anyanga is joining the meeting via
video-teleconference from Addis Ababa.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/817, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Abyei.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lacroix.
Mr. Lacroix: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on the latest
developments pertaining to the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA), including its
support to the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism (JBVMM). I will provide a brief update on
the situation since the publication of the SecretaryGeneral’s report before the Council (S/2019/817), as well
as the key recommendations contained therein on the
way forward with regard to UNISFA and the JBVMM.
The continued partnership between the Sudan
and South Sudan, notwithstanding the recent change
of Government in Khartoum, presents a unique
opportunity to move the political process forward
on the border issues. Further to the reciprocal visits
of President Salva Kiir Mayardit and Prime Minister
Abdalla Hamdok to their respective capitals in the past
two months, since 14 October Juba has hosted peace
2/18

24/10/2019

talks between the Sudanese transitional authority
and armed opposition groups. On 21 October, the
negotiating parties signed a political agreement, which
includes a renewed ceasefire. The delegation of the
Security Council also met with President Kiir and
Mr. Riek Machar in Juba a few days ago, in support
of the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan, of which the Sudan is a guarantor.
Building on that momentum, we have seen some
positive steps with regard to the border arrangements.
On 2 and 13 October in Juba, South Sudan and the
Sudan convened, respectively, two ordinary sessions
of the Joint Political and Security Mechanism. Both
parties reaffirmed their commitment to implementing
the Cooperation Agreement between the Republic of
the Sudan and the Republic of South Sudan, signed
on 27 September 2012, and, inter alia, withdrawing
all the forces, including the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement in Opposition, from the Safe Demilitarized
Border Zone, with immediate effect, as well as their
commitment to setting up border crossing corridors,
reopening the Kosti-Renk Nile river corridor and
Meiram-Aweil road corridor, and establishing customs
and immigration posts. The Joint Political and Security
Mechanism also urged UNISFA to accelerate the
opening of sector headquarters in Malakal and Buram.
In addition, from 11 to 13 October, the ad hoc
committee for the disputed 14 Mile Area visited
the JBVMM’s sector headquarters in Gok Machar
and its team site at Sumayah/War-Abar to assess the
redeployment of forces and the opening of the MeiramAweil border crossing. The 14 Mile ad hoc committee is
to hold one more meeting before the next meeting of the
Joint Political and Security Mechanism in Khartoum,
which is scheduled to take place on 4 December.
Meanwhile, those positive developments have not
extended to a settlement with regard to the final status
of Abyei. No meetings of the Abyei Joint Oversight
Committee have taken place since November 2017.
No progress has been made on the establishment of
joint governance institutions such as police, court and
corrections institutions. While the Government of the
Sudan has indicated its willingness to participate in
a joint planning exercise for the establishment of the
Abyei police service, South Sudan has not responded
to such an initiative. That is of paramount concern,
since the general security situation in Abyei remains
fragile, with persisting intercommunal tensions, the
19-33439

24/10/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

increase in criminality and the sporadic presence of
armed elements in the area. The community protection
committees, which act as the alternative local security
response mechanism, continue to suffer from a lack of
logistical, administrative and financial resources.
In accordance with paragraph 34 of resolution
2469 (2019), in August and September the Secretariat
conducted an assessment mission, in conjunction with
a military and police capability study. The overall
objectives of those exercises were to assess the capacity
of UNISFA to implement its mandate and support for the
JBVMM, and to propose recommendations regarding
its structure, capabilities, and posture to fulfil all its
mandated tasks, based on the current and projected
security situation.
With respect to UNISFA support to the JBVMM,
in the light of the recent efforts taken by the Sudan
and South Sudan on border issues, we welcome the
decision of the Security Council to allow a one-month
technical roll-over of the mandate of the Mission
until 15 November. Furthermore, in his letter to the
Security Council dated 20 September (S/2019/768), the
Secretary-General proposed a six-month extension of
UNISFA’s support to the JBVMM. The JBVMM plays an
important role as a monitoring and confidence-building
measure between the parties. We stand ready to take
every possible effort in order to enable the JBVMM to
reach its full operating capability, provided that the two
countries abide by their commitment to implementing
the outcomes of the border management discussions.
As for the reconfiguration of UNISFA, the military
and police capabilities studies have recommended that
the Mission update its operational concept and improve
its capabilities with regard to peacekeeping intelligence
and the protection of civilians by readjusting its
enablers. Specifically, the proposed actions included
upgrading its mobility with night-flying assets,
enhancing its engineering and medical capabilities and
deploying personnel with the appropriate skills. The
new operational concept is expected to take six months
to implement.
Informed by those recommendations, the two
options presented to the Council include, first, to
comply with the reduction of troops set out in resolution
2469 (2019), and, secondly, to seek the postponement of
the second phase of the reduction of the additional 295
troops until the end of the dry season, in April 2020. The
second option would be preferable, as it would provide

S/PV. 8644

UNISFA with the sufficient forces to fulfil its mandate,
given the recent security and political developments on
the ground. In any event, further efforts will be made
to implement the police-related provisions of resolution
2469 (2019), including the deployment of at least one
formed police unit and 140 individual police officers
by January 2020.
The review mission also stressed the urgent need
to deploy civilian personnel with expertise in political
and civil affairs to Mission headquarters, JBVMM
headquarters and the liaison offices in Khartoum,
Juba and Addis Ababa. A small office should also be
established under the Community Liaison Office to
focus on criminality, justice and detention issues. As for
the request by the Council to appoint a civilian deputy
head of mission for UNISFA, the Sudan maintains its
objection on the grounds that such an appointment
would be inconsistent with the 2011 Agreement.
We witnessed an unprecedented opportunity to
resolve the border-related issues between the Sudan
and South Sudan. Both countries have never been
closer to achieving sustainable peace with each other
and with their armed oppositions as they continue to
support respective peace processes. Building on the
recent positive developments in their bilateral relations,
the two sides need to resume direct talks immediately
to resolve outstanding provisions of the agreements in
relation to the final status of Abyei and border issues.
We continue to work closely with the African Union, in
particular the African Union High-level Implementation
Panel, in support of a political process between the two
parties. In the meantime, UNISFA and the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism continue to
play a key role in stabilizing the security situation on
the ground. Their presence has had a deterrent effect,
filling the gap deriving from the absence of the formal
governance institutions and supporting community
reconciliation and law and order efforts.
In that context, the Secretary-General has
recommended that the role and capacity of UNISFA
to engage in local mediation, provide political support
for dialogue between the two parties and fulfil
protection-related tasks should be strengthened. At this
critical juncture of transition in both countries, it is
critical that the only international mechanism of writing
in the border area be equipped with the appropriate
mandate, capabilities and assets. That would also send
a strong signal to the parties that the United Nations
remains committed to maintaining stability in the

19-334393/18

S/PV.8644

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Area. In that regard, we seek the support of the Security
Council for the Secretary-General’s recommendations
as set out in the report before the Council and to extend
the mandate of UNISFA and its support to the Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism by an
additional period of six months.
The President: I
Mr. Onanga-Anyanga.

now

give

the

floor

to

Mr. Onanga-Anyanga: I thank you, Sir, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on progress
in the implementation of resolution 2046 (2012)
concerning outstanding bilateral issues between the
Sudan and South Sudan and the conflict in South
Kordofan and Blue Nile states.
Before proceeding further, allow me to congratulate
members of the Council upon their recent visit to the
region. In our previous reports to the Council over
the past year, we drew the Council’s attention to the
improved relationship between the Sudan and South
Sudan. The change of Government in the Sudan
earlier this year provided new impetus for this positive
trend. Eager to open a new chapter in relations and to
secure peace across the Sudan, the new transitional
leadership in Khartoum encouraged President Kiir
Mayardit to intensify his mediation efforts between the
Government in Khartoum and Sudanese armed groups.
President Kiir readily accepted the invitation and has
since dedicated considerable effort to advancing this
noble cause.
With this new partnership in place, the past five
months have seen a flurry of high-level visits between
Khartoum and Juba. In July, General Burhan and his
deputy on the Transitional Military Council, General
Mohamed Hamdam Dagalo, also known as Hemetti,
visited Juba. Two months later, General Hemetti, this
time as Deputy Chair of the Sovereign Council, and the
new Prime Minister, Abdalla Hamdok, paid separate
visits to South Sudan. Both held meetings with Sudanese
armed groups in Juba in addition to their formal calls
on President Kiir.
In the course of August and September, Juba hosted
talks with and between the armed movements from
Darfur and the two areas. The talks resulted in the Darfuri
armed groups, except the Sudan Liberation Army,
led by Abdul Wahid Al-Nur, and the Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement-North (SPLM-N), under Malik
Agar, uniting under the new umbrella of the Sudanese
Revolutionary Front. The South Sudanese mediation
4/18

24/10/2019

initiative culminated in the signing, on 11 September, of
the Juba Declaration on Confidence-building Measures
and preparations for negotiations between the Sudanese
armed movements and the Sudanese Sovereign Council.
With those agreements in hand, General Hemetti also
engaged with SPLM-N leader Abdul Aziz Al-Hilu, who
made a gesture of good faith by renewing the SPLMNorth unilateral ceasefire for another three months
and expressing his readiness to join future rounds of
negotiation in Juba.
So far, the Sudanese opposition appears comfortable
with President Kiir facilitating the negotiations with
Khartoum. Nevertheless, several other countries
have expressed an interest in hosting coming phases
of the negotiations and some Sudanese stakeholders
have asked that Juba consult with other neighbouring
countries as they pursue their own mediation efforts.
As agreed in the Juba Declaration, the Sudanese
Government launched substantive talks with the
Sudanese armed movements on 14 October, which
are expected to continue until 14 December. On
21 October, the Sovereign Council signed an initial
agreement renewing the cessation of hostilities and
opening humanitarian access from within and outside
the Sudan to areas held by armed groups. That marks
significant progress, as previous peace negotiations
between the parties had consistently stumbled on the
issue of humanitarian access roads to those areas. Talks
between the Council and the SPLM-North and Abdul
Aziz Al-Hilu to reach a similar agreement have so far
been fruitless. However, both parties have committed
to continuing negotiations in November, when the next
phase of talks is expected to resume. The next round of
negotiations is expected to focus, among other things,
on a permanent ceasefire, the delivery of humanitarian
assistance, the opening of political space and the return
of refugees.
In another expression of the involvement of the
Sudan and South Sudan in each other’s peace processes,
General Hemetti’s September visit also allowed South
Sudan’s First Vice-President designate, Riek Machar,
to travel to Juba for a long-awaited face-to-face meeting
with President Kiir. That was repeated on 19 October,
when the Government of the Sudan again facilitated
Mr. Machar’s travel to Juba for a meeting with President
Kiir and the Security Council delegation.
Prime Minister Hamdok’s visit to Juba in
September, his first visit outside of the Sudan after
19-33439

24/10/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

his nomination, was devoted to bilateral relations.
Discussions between he and President Kiir focused
on the peace processes in both countries, trade, oil,
border issues and the free movement of people. In July,
the two sides discussed technical and financial issues
relating to oil. Furthermore, police chiefs from the
two countries met in August to explore cooperation,
information exchange and related matters. Consistent
with his vision for peace and reform in the Sudan, Prime
Minister Hamdok stated that he wanted to use his first
visit to repair the damage caused by the former regime
and restore the traditional ties among what he sees as
one people living in two States. In his view, that was the
first step towards finding a mutually agreed solution
to the disputed border areas and Abyei. In that spirit,
President Kiir and Prime Minister Hamdok discussed
border crossing points and agreed that the opening of
six corridors would be considered soon.
The list of pending issues between Khartoum
and Juba is long, as most of the commitments signed
in 2012 have yet to be implemented. The exception is
the agreement on oil, under which South Sudan has so
far paid the Sudan approximately $2.4 billion of the
$3.02 billion transitional financial arrangement agreed
in 2012. On 7 October, South Sudan said it intended to
ask Khartoum at the end of October for an extension of
the December 2019 deadline to complete the payment
of the arrangement. It is also worth noting that the
delegation led by Prime Minister Hamdok met its South
Sudanese counterparts in the areas of foreign affairs,
the interior, trade and industry, and energy and mining
to discuss pending issues. In a joint statement, the two
Foreign Ministers noted that the operationalization
of the agreements required sustainable peace in both
countries, hence the commitment by each Government
to support peace in the other’s country.
Following Prime Minister Hamdok’s visit to
Juba, I am pleased to report that the Joint Security
Committee, led by the Army Chiefs of Staff of the two
countries, met in Juba on 4 and 5 October and discussed
a number of pending issues, including the opening of
additional border crossing points, the redeployment of
forces from the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone and
the full deployment of the Joint Border Verification
and Monitoring Mechanism. The Joint Border
Commission has also been meeting in Khartoum
since 13 October, after a hiatus of several months.
During my visits to Juba and Khartoum in July and
September, respectively, I encouraged authorities to

S/PV. 8644

tackle all outstanding issues outlined in the cooperation
agreement in a spirit of openness and collaboration,
including by revitalizing and participating in the joint
implementation mechanisms.
As I conclude my remarks, let me say a word on the
conflict in South Kordofan and Blue Nile states. The two
areas were relatively calm during the reporting period,
due in part to the dramatic changes in Khartoum and
the declarations announcing the cessation of hostilities
made by the Government and the Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement-North. The standoff in the Nuba
Mountains in South Kordofan continues, with forces
loyal to Abdel Aziz Al-Hilu maintaining their positions.
The Government is in a stronger position in Blue Nile
state, with the opposition divided between followers of
Al-Hilu and those who support Malik Agar, who was
recently been elected deputy chairperson of the Sudan
Revolutionary Front.
It is fair to say that there are encouraging signs
of progress in relations between the Sudan and South
Sudan, with a positive influence on peace processes
in both countries. My Office will continue to closely
follow developments in the weeks and months ahead,
in close collaboration with the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, the African Union and
other relevant stakeholders.
The President: I thank Mr. Onanga-Anyanga for
his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and Special Envoy
Onanga-Anyanga for their briefings on the latest
developments on the ground in Abyei and along the
South Sudan-Sudan border.
The United States would like to extend particular
thanks to Ethiopia for its contributions to the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA).
Without Ethiopia’s efforts, the relatively stable situation
in Abyei would not be possible. The United States
recognizes that Abyei is a strategic crossroads between
the Sudan and South Sudan, and resolving Abyei’s
political status is needed for a complete and lasting
peace in the region. While the internal political shifts
in the Sudan and South Sudan provide some momentum
towards resolving ongoing disputes, unfortunately

19-334395/18

S/PV.8644

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

those developments have yet to prompt action to resolve
Abyei’s final status.
We remain concerned that UNISFA is not being
allowed to fully implement its mandate. We call on
both parties to ensure that UNISFA can operate as an
effective and efficient peacekeeping mission, including
by granting visas for United Nations police and allowing
the appointment of a civilian deputy.
While insecurity remains contained in Abyei, the
situation is fragile, as evidenced by attacks on UNISFA
personnel, rising criminality and ongoing incidents of
cattle raiding and kidnapping. That is all unacceptable.
In recognition of the vital role that women play
in securing peace and security, we support UNISFA’s
efforts to encourage local peace committees to include
women leaders. Their absence limits prospects for
achieving a lasting peace.
The United States welcomes UNISFA’s efforts
to stabilize Abyei through supporting local peace
communities, establishing new checkpoints, resolving
local conflicts and disarming the population. We also
commend the work of non-governmental organizations
and United Nations agencies undertaking work in
support of local populations in Abyei.
We endorse the Secretary-General’s call for
Special Envoy Onanga-Anyanga and the African
Union to increase their efforts to secure a resolution
of the political conflicts in Abyei. We look forward to
learning more on that.
The United States remains committed to peace and
security in Abyei. Supporting peace there will enable
long-term stability for both the Sudan and South Sudan.
Mr. Michon (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I wish to thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix and
Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga for their briefings.
I would like to begin by commending the bilateral
rapprochement between the Sudan and South Sudan,
particularly President Salva Kiir Mayardit’s leading
role in launching the Sudanese peace talks that took
place last week. We are also pleased that, during their
meeting in Juba on 12 September, Prime Minister
Hamdok and President Kiir decided to strengthen
their bilateral relations, especially with regard to their
shared border. The will of the Sudanese Prime Minister
to restore relations between the border populations is
very encouraging. This new situation inspires hope that
6/18

24/10/2019

the Abyei issue will finally be addressed with a view
to achieving a political solution negotiated between the
two Governments, which is the only way to prevent this
dispute from becoming an endless frozen conflict. The
holding of a meeting of the Joint Political and Security
Mechanism on 2 October constitutes a step forward
in that direction. We hope that both countries will
continue along that path.
We call upon the Special Envoy for the Horn of
Africa to fully support the resumption of the political
dialogue on Abyei and the demarcation of the border.
We also encourage the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel for Sudan to throw its full weight
behind convincing the parties to move forward.
In this encouraging context, it is essential that the
decisions of the Security Council regarding the mandate
of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA) finally be implemented. France encourages
the Sudanese authorities to authorize, as soon as
possible, the deployment of police contingents, as
decided by the Council last year. The new police forces
should enable UNISFA to curb crime, particularly in
the Amiet common market, and prevent the escalation
of intercommunal tensions that we have witnessed,
which are often linked to cattle raiding. It is also
important that South Sudan cooperate in good faith
in the joint establishment of the Abyei police service
and that the two countries convene a meeting of the
Joint Committee.
Finally, we support the strengthening of the civilian
component of the mission. We support the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation to deploy a political section
within UNISFA. That is essential to allow the mission
to actively support the dialogue between the parties,
particularly at the local level. It would also enable the
mission to better prevent local conflicts and enhance
cooperation with the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel. We also ask that the Sudan, in
the same spirit, accept the appointment of a civilian
deputy head of mission, as decided by the Council
in May.
With regard to a broader UNISFA mandate, we
understand the rationale suggested by the Secretariat,
which advocates giving the mission and the Sudanese
authorities more time to implement UNISFA’s
reconfiguration, which was decided last year. We are
ready to positively consider that recommendation with
the other members of the Security Council.
19-33439

24/10/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

In conclusion, I would like to commend, as did my
American colleague, the work of the Ethiopian troops
that stabilize the situation in Abyei and along the border
between the Sudan and South Sudan on a daily basis.
Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Allow me, at the outset, to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Jean Pierre Lacroix and the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for the Horn of Africa, Mr. Parfait
Onanga-Anyanga, for their enlightening briefings.
We are aware of the current political situation in
the Sudan and South Sudan, and the issue of Abyei is
inextricably linked to it. Belgium continues to follow
developments very closely.
We wish the new Sudanese authorities every
success in the essential tasks that they will have to
carry out, as set out in the Constitutional Declaration
of 17 August. We welcome the priorities outlined by
the Prime Minister, Mr. Abdalla Hamdok, during
his interventions here in New York during the highlevel week.
In South Sudan, we urge stakeholders to make
rapid progress on key issues in the implementation
of the peace process, in particular the establishment
of security arrangements, the status of Juba, the
finalization of internal boundaries and the full release of
implementation funds announced by the Government.
We note that the security situation in the Abyei
area remains fragile, with intercommunal tensions,
an increase in criminal incidents, and the presence
of armed groups in the region. Widespread poverty,
unemployment, insecurity in the surrounding areas of
the Abyei region and the lack of functional governance
and rule of law institutions only exacerbate the
situation. Some 200,000 vulnerable people continue to
need humanitarian assistance.
We share the Secretary-General’s assessment that
the continued presence of the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) remains crucial. We
take note of the two options proposed by the SecretaryGeneral in his report (S/2019/817) and look forward to
a fruitful discussion in the Council.
I would like to highlight two points: the need for a
political solution and the role of UNISFA in that respect.
Stability in the Abyei region remains our
key objective. The main responsibility for the
implementation of the 2011 and 2012 agreements rests

S/PV. 8644

with the Governments of both countries. However, it
must be noted that only very little progress has been
made in fulfilling the commitments agreed by the
parties since last April. The Security Council should
encourage the Governments of the Sudan and South
Sudan to continue the dialogue and, in the longer term,
develop a political solution that would allow for the
settlement of the final status of the Abyei area and other
border disputes.
As the name of the mission indicates, UNISFA
was established as an interim security force in 2011.
The Council must ensure that the dispute between the
Sudan and South Sudan with regard to Abyei and the
border region does not become another deadlocked
conflict. We therefore call on the parties to facilitate
the mission’s operations, including the issuance of visas
and the strengthening of the civilian component of the
mission, with a view to facilitating the revitalization of
the political process in order to be able to work towards
an exit-strategy framework in a timely manner.
There is no option other than dialogue to resolve
the Abyei issue. The presence of UNISFA remains
crucial but it cannot replace the role of the State. The
Council must ensure that the mission has the necessary
resources to help address the causes of the conflict
and ensure the long-term stability of the Sudan and
South Sudan.
Ms. Batista (Dominican Republic) (spoke in
Spanish): We would also like to thank the briefers of
this morning’s meeting.
We recognize that the security situation in the
Abyei Area remains generally contained although we
are concerned about sporadic intercommunal tensions
and the presence of armed elements, as well as the
high crime rate. We hope that those negative events
do not diminish the relative calm. To that end, it is
indispensable that the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei (UNISFA) maintain its rapid response
capacity and continue its protection of civilian activities.
The meetings of the Abyei Joint Oversight
Committee should be resumed and the meetings of the
Joint Political and Security Mechanism should continue.
The absence of those bodies in the Area affects the lives,
safety and well-being of more than 200,000 vulnerable
people, with increasing humanitarian needs, which are
worsened by the impact of the floods that have affected
the farming areas.

19-334397/18

S/PV.8644

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Regarding the reconfiguration of UNISFA, we
see as positive the increase in the police component
and the proposal for the strengthening of political
support, which will help to alleviate the increasing
levels of criminality, the effective management of
intercommunal relations and the general maintenance
of peace in the Area.
In that regard, we call on the authorities in Khartoum
to expedite the issuance of visas for police personnel in
order to strengthen their deployment, in particular in
vulnerable areas such as the Amiet common market,
which has seen various incidents of public disorder.
A vital element in normalizing relations between the
Sudan and South Sudan is the Joint Border Verification
and Monitoring Mechanism. Its significance to
UNISFA fulfilling its mandate for the protection of
civilians and peacekeeping is undeniable. We hope
and are optimistic that the political processes in both
countries and the current rapprochement between their
capitals will provide momentum to ultimately resolve
the pending border issues.
Another extremely significant aspect that we would
like to emphasize is UNISFA’s commitment to gender
initiatives. We applaud the implementation of activities
to raise awareness of the importance of women’s
representation in joint peace committees and the
establishment of a traditional leaders gender champion
network for the promotion of resolution 1325 (2000).
We also commend the work done by UNISFA to address
sexual and gender-based violence and children’s rights.
In conclusion, the presence of UNISFA and its
support to the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism have been instrumental in stabilizing the
Abyei Area. However, it is crucial that both the Sudan
and South Sudan do more as soon as possible to fulfil
their commitments and that the Council continue to
seek ways to make UNISFA’s operations more effective.
Mr. Moriko (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation welcomes the holding of this meeting
and congratulates Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, and
Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Horn of Africa, for their
detailed briefings on the developments in the situation
in Abyei.
Côte d’Ivoire notes with satisfaction the
rapprochement between the Sudan and South Sudan
8/18

24/10/2019

and the willingness shown by both countries to
strengthen their cooperation. We welcome the fact that
the first foreign visit of the Sudanese Prime Minister,
Mr. Abdalla Hamdok, was to Juba.
Apart from its symbolic nature, the visit paved
the way for a lasting peace through discussions on
strengthening relations between the two countries
and promoting peaceful coexistence between their
populations along the border. My delegation sincerely
hopes that the visit will be followed by further initiatives
to strengthen mutual trust.
My country welcomes the significant role of the
President of South Sudan in the talks between the
Government of the Sudan and armed groups, which is
fully in line with the normalization of relations between
the Sudan and South Sudan.
However, despite that positive development and
the leaders’ stated determination to commit to the path
of peace, my delegation remains concerned about the
lack of progress in implementing the 2011 and 2012
agreements on interim administrative and security
arrangements in the Abyei Area as well as cooperation
between the two countries.
My country believes that, given the stalemate in
the political process, it is essential to actively engage
both Governments in further discussions, under the
auspices of the African Union’s High-level Panel and
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, to resolve
outstanding important issues, including those related
to border demarcation and the establishment of a joint
administration in Abyei.
While the stabilizing role of the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA), whose
activities on the ground contribute to promoting
reconciliation and peace in the Abyei Area and along
the border, is unanimously welcomed by the members
of the Council, it must be recognized that immense
challenges remain in the region.
In that regard, the resurgence of criminal activities,
the presence of armed groups and the continuing
intercommunal tensions remain a source of concern
for my delegation. These impediments call for urgent
action by the authorities of both countries, which have
the primary responsibility for protecting civilians and
ensuring the safety of populations along the border,
in conjunction with UNISFA. In that regard, it urges
them, inter alia, to proceed expeditiously with the
19-33439

24/10/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

establishment of the Abyei joint police force and to
facilitate the implementation of the provisions of the
relevant Security Council resolutions, including those
dealing with the deployment of police officers and
formed police units, in order to prevent a security
vacuum in the area.
My delegation recalls the correlation between
peace and development in order to emphasize the
need to implement development and capacity-building
projects. It is also necessary to ensure the provision of
basic social services for the population, which cannot
be achieved without the establishment of functional
joint institutions in Abyei.
In that context, my country welcomes the
establishment by the United Nations country teams in
the Sudan and South Sudan of a joint United NationsAbyei capacity-building programme in the areas of the
rule of law and peacebuilding, improving access to
basic social services, gender equality and combating
sexual and gender-based violence. The initiative
warrants the highest attention and therefore requires
the international community’s ongoing mobilization in
order to ensure adequate funding.
Мy delegation is of the opinion that, in view of the
renewal of UNISFA’s mandate, it is important to make
adjustments, taking into account trends observed on
the ground in order to optimize the efficiency of the
Force and preserve the gains of its eight-year presence
in Abyei. In that regard, my delegation takes note of the
recommendations made by the Secretary-General in his
report (S/2019/817) and reaffirms its commitment to
pursuing constructive discussions with all stakeholders
in the upcoming negotiations for the renewal of
UNISFA’s mandate, as well as its support to the Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire urges all actors in
the conflict to capitalize on the positive momentum
of recent months between the Sudan and South Sudan
with a view to finding a lasting solution to the status
of Abyei.
Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and
Special Envoy Onanga-Anyanga.
At present, the situation in the Abyei Area remains
generally stable. The political situation in the Sudan
and South Sudan has witnessed positive progress.
The two sides have strengthened their interaction

S/PV. 8644

and cooperation on Abyei and have been actively
cooperating with the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei (UNISFA) in the performance of its
mandate. China welcomes such developments.
The Secretary-General notes in his report
(S/2019/817) that the Abyei Area still faces many
challenges and that the security situation remains
fragile. The proper resolution of the issue of Abyei
is of vital importance to the stability of the Sudan,
South Sudan and the entire region. We must continue
to promote cooperation between the Governments
of the Sudan and South Sudan and seek a political
settlement to the issue of Abyei. The Security Council
should continue to fully respect the leadership role
of the Sudan and South Sudan on the Abyei issue,
listen carefully to the views of both sides, continue
to support regional and subregional organizations,
such as the African Union and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, and carry out good offices
in support of African countries providing African
solutions to African problems. The Governments of the
Sudan and South Sudan should continue to cooperate
on the establishment of administrative, judicial and
public security institutions in the Abyei Area as soon
as possible so as to ease intercommunal tensions. The
international community should give active support in
that regard.
We must continue to support UNISFA in
implementing its mandate. The mission has an
important role in maintaining the stability of the Abyei
Area. China welcomes the efforts of Ethiopia, as one of
the troop-contributing countries, notes the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation and supports the extension
of UNISFA’s mandate.
On the issue of UNISFA’s reconfiguration, the
Security Council should listen carefully to the views
of the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan,
the African Union and troop-contributing countries.
The Secretariat should strengthen communication and
coordination with relevant parties, give the peacekeeping
force a greater role and promote the proper settlement
of the Abyei issue. China stands ready to work with
African countries and the international community to
contribute to resolving the Abyei issue and promote
peace, stability and development in Africa.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): Let me begin by thanking
Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix and

19-334399/18

S/PV.8644

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Special Envoy Parfait Onanga-Anyanga for their
important briefings.
My statement
key messages.

today

will

focus

on

three

First, the presence of the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) is essential to
stability in Abyei and along the border region between
the Sudan and South Sudan. The security situation in
Abyei remains volatile, characterized by increased
criminality and the sporadic presence of armed
elements, in contravention of resolution 1990 (2011).
We condemn all attacks against UNISFA peacekeepers.
However, no act of intercommunal violence
was recorded during the reporting period. That
speaks volumes about UNISFA’s role in promoting
dialogue, confidence-building and local conflict
resolution among communities in Abyei. We attach
great importance to UNISFA’s provision of capacitybuilding to the community protection committees in
the absence of the Abyei police service and its support
to traditional justice mechanisms. My delegation also
acknowledges UNISFA’s support to the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism (JBVMM),
which is an indispensable tool for border-related issues
and deterrence against potential spoilers.
Secondly, we must continue encouraging the
Sudan and South Sudan to accelerate the discussion on
outstanding issues. Progress on the implementation of
the 20 June 2011 Agreement between the Government
of Sudan and the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement
on temporary arrangements for the administration and
security of the Abyei Area, particularly the formation
of joint interim institutions, has been somewhat limited.
On the JBVMM front, the Sudan and South
Sudan have not been able to achieve the benchmarks
set in resolution 2465 (2019), including the complete
withdrawal from the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone.
Momentum for a decisive step forward is now growing,
building on the countries’ renewed commitment to
promoting progress on border issues, including during
Prime Minister Hamdok’s visit to Juba. My delegation
welcomes the breakthrough at the Joint Border
Commission meeting two days ago. The Security
Council should support the Sudan and South Sudan
in making the best use of that momentum to make
further progress, as well as support the work of regional
initiatives, including the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel.
10/18

24/10/2019

Thirdly, we need to proceed cautiously with
the reconfiguration of UNISFA. It must take into
consideration domestic political challenges in the
Sudan and South Sudan and build on positive bilateral
relations between the two countries. UNISFA’s
reconfiguration must be geared towards enabling the
Mission to effectively respond to the challenges on the
ground and match them with appropriate personnel and
capability support. We concur that there is a need to
maintain the Mission’s capacity at this stage in order
to guard against potential spoilers and urge the two
countries to provide full support to UNISFA in the
deployment of personnel. My delegation sees merit
in the Secretary-General’s proposal to reconfigure
UNISFA with the aim of reinvigorating the political
process through the deployment of civilian capacity.
If UNISFA’s reconfiguration is to be effective, it is
important to secure the support of both the Sudan and
South Sudan while also taking into account the views
of troop- and police-contributing countries.
I would like to close by commending Ethiopia
for its valuable contribution to UNISFA. Indonesia is
heartened to see positive relations between the Sudan
and South Sudan, whereby both countries actively
support each other’s peace process. My delegation
reaffirms its long-standing support for the Sudan and
South Sudan in finding a peaceful solution to their
outstanding issues.
Mr. Repkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Under-Secretary-General JeanPierre Lacroix and Special Envoy Parfait OnangaAnyanga for their briefings on the progress in the
peace process between the Sudan and South Sudan and
on the activities of the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei (UNISFA). We note the contribution
of Ethiopian peacekeepers to the effective work of the
United Nations presence.
We have consistently emphasized that the joint
efforts of the parties are essential to making progress
towards achieving a settlement between the Sudan
and South Sudan. We look forward to seeing work on
demarcation between Khartoum and Juba resumed as
soon as possible. There is an international legal basis
for that in the form of the existing Security Council
and African Union resolutions and the package of
bilateral agreements concluded between the two
countries in Addis Ababa in September 2012. We hope
that the relevant work of the African Union High19-33439

24/10/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV. 8644

Level Implementation Panel with the Sudanese parties
will continue.

Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) and the
current situation in Abyei.

We note that the improvement in inter-Sudanese
relations that began at the end of last year has continued.
Khartoum’s participation with the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development in revitalizing the South
Sudan peace agreement was a significant contribution
to the peace process in the country, as have been the
significant mediation efforts of President Salva Kiir
aimed at launching negotiations between the Sudanese
authorities and the various groups in Darfur. It will
be crucial to make use of the positive momentum in
bilateral relations to resolve the Abyei issue as well.

Germany welcomes the political developments in
Khartoum and Juba and between them both, and we
congratulate those who have contributed constructively
to those developments, including the African Union
and, especially, the peoples of both countries, who have
expressed their desire for democratic change and an
end to this cycle of conflict.

We note that there has been some improvement in
the situation in Abyei. An intercommunal dialogue is
being established and progress is being made in the
demarcation of border corridors. We believe that the
work of UNISFA is vital to maintaining constructive
relations with the local communities. The measures
taken by the United Nations to establish intercommunal
cooperation in issues related to ensuring law
enforcement and regarding economic activity around
the common market in Amiet need support, since
without that the restoration of trust and intercommunal
reconciliation will be impossible.
We believe that the Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism is integral to the incident
prevention system between the parties. Ending
UNISFA’s support to it could have an extremely negative
impact on the prospects for a full settlement of the
situation in Abyei. We are all well aware of the factors
preventing Khartoum and Juba from accelerating
the settlement of the final status of Abyei, and in the
circumstances, UNISFA’s continued presence in the
region remains urgent. In that connection, we support
the Secretary-General’s proposal (S/2019/817) to extend
UNISFA’s mandate by six months, including its support
for the Verification and Monitoring Mechanism. At the
same time, we believe that the Secretariat’s proposal for
a civilian component for the Mission should take into
account the views of Khartoum and Juba, in line with
the basic principles of peacekeeping.
Mr. Licharz (Germany): We thank UnderSecretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix and Special
Envoy Parfait Onanga-Anyanga for their briefings.
Like the briefers, I would also like to address the overall
political situation before discussing the United Nations

The overall political developments have yet to
translate into progress in reaching a final political
solution for Abyei. Despite the two meetings of the
Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism
that Under-Secretary-General Lacroix discussed, a
political solution and the implementation of resolution
2046 (2018) are still lacking. We therefore call on
both the Sudan and South Sudan to actively engage in
finding a solution, which must be carried out by the
countries themselves. The international community
can and will support them, but it cannot be a substitute
for that solution.
In the absence of a political solution, UNISFA
continues to play a crucial role in stabilizing the Abyei
area. In that regard, I would like to reiterate the gratitude
that other colleagues have expressed to Ethiopia for
contributing high-quality peacekeepers. We agree with
the Secretary-General’s recommendation (S/2019/817)
that the mandate of UNISFA, including its support for
the Verification and Monitoring Mechanism, should
be extended by six months. However, as we have said
before, the Mission should be calibrated in order to
enable it to respond effectively to the changing realities
on the ground. It is essential to ensure that it has the
capacity to address the rising crime rate, support
community-level peace efforts, mediation and dialogue
and advance support for the African Union Commission,
the African Union High-Level Implementation Panel
and the two parties concerned. In order to address the
rising crime rate and the overall security situation, I
would like to underline the urgent need to strengthen
the police component.
We note with concern that the recommended
adaptations of the mandate established by the Council
in November 2018 and in May this year have not
yet been implemented. We strongly urge the new
Government of the Sudan to issue visas without further
delay, especially to enable the mandated increase in
UNISFA’s police personnel, and to begin work on the

19-3343911/18

S/PV.8644

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

191 applications that are still outstanding, including
for a civilian Deputy Head of Mission. We also see a
continued need to strengthen the Mission’s civilian
component in order to support the efforts of the Abyei
communities to achieve reconciliation and create
enduring peaceful relations, particularly by supporting
initiatives for the full and effective participation
of women at all stages of the peace process. As the
Secretary-General recommended, it will be essential
to deploy political affairs officers to the Mission
headquarters as well as its liaison offices in Khartoum,
Juba and Addis Ababa, which will enable the Mission
to support the political process more effectively and
improve UNISFA’s communication and awarenessraising capabilities. The Mission mandate should
ensure continued effective human rights monitoring,
including of any sexual and gender-based violence and
violations and abuses of human rights, including those
committed against women and children.
In summary, Germany welcomes the overall
progress that has been made in the political process.
We urge and encourage the parties to work towards a
political solution for their border region. We continue
to support UNISFA and its mandate, and we call for
implementing its adaptation in order to address the
current challenges.
Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation wishes to thank Mr. JeanPierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peace
Operations, and Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Horn of Africa,
for their informative briefings.
Equatorial Guinea would like to express its
gratitude to the United Nations Interim Security Force
for Abyei (UNISFA) and the Joint Border Verification
and Monitoring Mechanism for the stabilizing role they
have played in the Abyei region through their continued
efforts to communicate and mediate among the various
communities in the region, which demonstrate the
Mission’s commitment to ensuring the welfare of the
population of Abyei and the border region. In that
regard, the Verification and Monitoring Mechanism
continues to be an essential tool for decisions on
border issues.
We commend the efforts being made and
encouraging steps being taken by the leaders of both
the Sudan and South Sudan with a view to improving
their relations and paving the way for new momentum
12/18

24/10/2019

for both countries. We also welcomed the visit to
Khartoum in August by President Salva Kiir of South
Sudan to attend the ceremony of the historic signing
of the political and constitutional declarations marking
the start of transitional rule in the Sudan, as well as
the visit to Juba on 12 September by Mr. Abdalla
Hamdok, the new Prime Minister of the Sudan, aimed
at improving bilateral relations with regard to borders
and trade. We applaud the commitment to restoring
relations among people living in the border region as a
first step towards resolving the border disputes between
the Sudan and South Sudan. We ask the Council to take
advantage of this opportunity to extend its support to
both countries in their efforts to overcome their years
of conflict and division.
Notwithstanding the progress made, we are
concerned about the general security situation in Abyei,
which remains fragile, as well as the continuing tensions
among communities, the increase in crime, the scattered
presence of armed elements in the area, the levels of
widespread poverty and unemployment, the lack of any
legal agreement or unity between the two parties on
dealing with criminals detained in the Abyei area, and
the failure of both parties to sign the memorandum of
understanding on establishing procedures for dealing
with such criminals, despite several reminders that
have been issued since November 2016.
My country remains extremely concerned about
the lack of progress towards establishing a political
process, owing to the latest political developments in
the Sudan and South Sudan, to conclude negotiations
related to the border between the two countries.
That should not overshadow the importance of the
stabilizing role that UNISFA and the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism continue to
play along the borders between the two countries. In
that regard, we hope that this stalemate will be broken
with the establishment of the transitional Government
in Khartoum and its pledge to end all remaining
conflicts in the Sudan. We urge the two parties to
pursue their talks to overcome their disagreements
over disputed and claimed areas along the border, in
accordance with resolution 2416 (2018), taking into
account the concept of flexible borders agreed in 2012
in order to reach agreement on the final demarcation of
the common border.
We believe that the 2011 agreements remain the only
way to achieve lasting stability in the Abyei region and
the Sudan-South Sudan border. Therefore, all parties
19-33439

24/10/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

involved must clearly reaffirm their commitment to
those agreements and make the necessary efforts to
take measures that will lead to peace and stability as
soon as possible.
In conclusion, we congratulate all those who
have facilitated progress in the Abyei Area, such as
the African Union, UNISFA and the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism, which
have shown commendable determination in the
pursuit of peace and security in the border area. We
urge them to maintain the necessary momentum and
spirit of compromise for the implementation of the
signed agreements.
We urge the transitional Government in Khartoum
to hold talks with South Sudan and with regional,
continental and international partners, particularly
UNISFA, in order to expeditiously address the country’s
challenges with regard to Abyei, in particular, and
relations with South Sudan, in general.
Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations, and
Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Horn of Africa, for their
invaluable briefings.
In the context of our debate today, I would like to
focus on three issues: the work of the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA), the desired
bilateral cooperation and the way forward.
With regard to the work of UNISFA, we
condemn all attacks on UNISFA and peacekeepers by
whomsoever. We emphasize the importance of the full
deployment of UNISFA, in keeping with resolution
2469 (2019), and we appreciate the tireless efforts made
by mission personnel to maintain peace in Abyei. We
also welcome the technical extension two weeks ago,
through resolution 2492 (2019), to define a clearer and
more consistent mandate for UNISFA. At the same
time, the parties concerned — the Sudan, South Sudan
and Ethiopia — must accept that mandate. We also call
for the adoption of a gradual and thoughtful approach
in the mission’s development so as to ensure the
security of Abyei, its inhabitants and all peacekeepers
working there.
With regard to bilateral cooperation, we welcome
the agreement reached by the Joint Technical
Committee for Border Demarcation on the remaining

S/PV. 8644

border disputes, as well as on the resumption of river
navigation through the borders and its use for the
delivery of humanitarian assistance. We hope that
cooperation will increase until all the provisions of
the relevant Council resolutions are met. We hope,
too, that Abyei will be more than merely a place of
convergence and coexistence for its inhabitants. We
hope that it becomes a symbol of fraternity between the
two neighbouring countries, especially in the light of
the constructive political roles played by Khartoum and
Juba in the respective countries’ political processes.
With regard to the way forward, we all know that the
Sudan and South Sudan are going through a transitional
phase. This is an opportunity to achieve positive and
constructive progress. The next phase will require the
Council to be patient, temper its demands and give
adequate latitude to both countries. As we mentioned
several months ago, that could contribute to even more
progress, including in the three joint institutions in
Abyei. The Secretary-General’s good offices, through
his Special Envoy, could also be helpful.
In conclusion, the State of Kuwait is fully prepared
to cooperate with the two neighbouring countries, the
Security Council and the Secretariat in order to reach
a definitive settlement of the situation in Abyei and to
maintain security in the Sudan, South Sudan and the
entire region.
Mr. Clay (United Kingdom): The Sudan and
South Sudan are at critical junctures in their political
transitions. We hope to see both Governments seize
the opportunities this offers for forging a lasting and
comprehensive peace in Abyei and Blue Nile and South
Kordofan states. We are therefore encouraged by the
recent talks between the Governments of the Sudan and
South Sudan and express our hope that this momentum
in bilateral relations will continue. Strengthened
dialogue is key to securing a lasting resolution to the
situation in Abyei.
We remain concerned that armed forces from both
sides continue to occupy the Safe Demilitarized Border
Zone. We therefore commend the recent commitment
of both Governments to withdrawing all forces
from the Zone and we urge swift implementation of
that commitment.
The United Kingdom welcomes the first round of
preliminary peace talks between the Government of
the Sudan and the armed movements. We encourage
all parties to return to talks on 21 November, ready to

19-3343913/18

S/PV.8644

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

engage constructively and without preconditions. We
also welcome the Government of the Sudan’s moves
to remove bureaucratic impediments on humanitarian
actors. We hope that this decision will be implemented
in full, enabling unfettered humanitarian access across
the Sudan, including in Abyei and the Two Areas.
Against that changing backdrop, we welcome the
continuing progress outlined in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2019/817) at the mission level, including on
human rights and judicial capacity-building. However,
we recognize the persistent operational challenges
the mission faces, including delays in issuing visas
and entry clearances for mission assets. We regret
that the civilian Deputy Head of Mission has not yet
been deployed, given the importance of this role in
supporting progress on the political track.
Like others around the table, we commend the
Government of Ethiopia for its contribution to the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA). We
condemn all attacks on mission personnel and reiterate
our condolences to the Government of Ethiopia and the
family of the peacekeeper who lost his life on 16 July.
As the security situation in Abyei remains fragile,
with an increase in criminality and the sporadic
presence of armed elements, we share the SecretaryGeneral’s assessment that UNISFA continues to
have a vital role to play in maintaining stability. The
Council should ensure that the mission is adequately
resourced to deliver on its mandates, including through
strengthened civilian and police capabilities. That is
vital if Abyei and the Two Areas are to benefit from
the opportunities for peace created by recent political
developments at the national level.
Ms. Bustamante (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful for the holding of this meeting and thank
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix and Mr. Parfait OnangaAnyanga for their important briefings today.
We highlight the overtures made by the new
authorities of Khartoum and their counterparts in Yuba.
The reciprocal visits by senior officials of both countries
in August and September give us reason to be hopeful
of their determination to improve bilateral relations.
We welcome the meeting of the Joint Political
and Security Mechanism held on 2 October and hope
that its subsequent meetings will report on important
progress, such as the withdrawal of forces from the
Safe Demilitarized Border Zone and the establishment
14/18

24/10/2019

of border crossing corridors. We underscore the critical
role of the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism in regulating relations between the two
countries. We also acknowledge the stabilizing role of
the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA) in Abyei and along the border between the
Sudan and South Sudan. At the same time, we stress that
the primary responsibility for resolving outstanding
issues on the shared border lies with the Governments
of the Sudan and South Sudan.
We note with concern that women continue to
be underrepresented at all levels of decision-making
in Abyei. In that regard, we appreciate UNISFA’s
mediation efforts with traditional and administrative
leaders, with a view to protecting women’s rights
and fostering their participation in decision-making.
We welcome the initiative of the United Nations joint
programme initiative for Abyei by the country teams
in the Sudan and South Sudan, which is aimed at
strengthening local institutional capacity and the rule
of law, fostering peacebuilding and development,
promoting gender equality and combating sexual
violence, among other things.
We reiterate the urgent need for the establishment
of the Abyei police service. We call on the Government
of South Sudan to continue joint planning for its
establishment and on the Government of the Sudan
to expedite the issuance of visas to UNISFA police
personnel so that the rule of law can be fully established
in Abyei.
We appreciate the efforts of humanitarian personnel
in addressing the humanitarian situation in Abyei by
providing food assistance, health services and through
community livelihood activities and capacity-building.
We encourage the international community to continue
to provide the necessary resources for development
projects and the establishment of basic services.
We are confident that, despite the limited
progress on issues related to border demarcation,
the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan will
capitalize on recent developments in the region to
move forward with concrete measures leading to the
resolution of the issue of the status of Abyei and the
establishment of the shared border.
Lastly, we believe that it is of the utmost importance
that the Security Council continue to support the parties.
In that regard, we stress the need to maintain UNISFA’s
presence in the Abyei Area, adapt its mandates to the
19-33439

24/10/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

situation on the ground and create the necessary space
for reaching a viable political solution to the conflict.
Mr. Lewicki (Poland): Let me also thank UnderSecretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix and Special
Envoy of the Secretary-Genera, Mr. Parfait OnangaAnyanga, for their informative briefings.
Poland welcomes the recent efforts by the leadership
of the Sudan and South Sudan to enhance bilateral
relations between the two countries. We encourage the
Sudanese and South Sudanese authorities to continue
building on the rapprochement that we have witnessed
over the past months and work together to achieve a
lasting solution to the status of the Abyei Area.
Despite those encouraging developments, we note
with regret that very little progress has been made on the
issues of border demarcation and the process leading to
the final status of Abyei, especially with regard to the
establishment of joint institutions in the Abyei Area.
We are concerned that the lack of genuine
cooperation between the Sudan and South Sudan will
perpetuate the administrative vacuum that exists in
Abyei. The security situation in the Area remains fragile,
with criminality on the rise. The absence of effective
formal authorities in Abyei is resulting in limited law
enforcement and the lack of good governance and the
rule of law. Widespread poverty and unemployment,
as well as the lack of basic social services, are only
contributing to the volatility of the situation.
In that context, I would like to praise the role of
the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA). My country continues to believe that the
relatively stable security situation in Abyei can be
attributed to a large extent to the mission’s efforts
and the sacrifices made daily by its personnel on the
ground. We believe, however, that the presence of
UNISFA cannot be a substitute for the role of the State.
We remain convinced that every peacekeeping
mission needs to adapt to the changing realities on
the ground. That also applies to UNISFA, which has
to be able to adjust its tasks to the current situation in
Abyei. We voted in favour of UNISFA’s new mandate
last year, which reinforced the police component within
the Mission and enhanced its civilian capacities. Today
we note with regret that the increase in police personnel
has yet to be implemented and that the civilian Deputy
Head of Mission has yet to be appointed. We call
on the Sudan authorities to facilitate the mission’s

S/PV. 8644

reconfiguration. We support the renewal of UNISFA’s
mandate for another six months and remain in favour of
strengthening the political posture of the mission and
enhancing its capacity to support the political process
in Abyei Area.
I stress that the primary responsibility for the
implementation of the 2011 Agreement between the
Government of the Sudan and the Government of South
Sudan on Border Security and the Joint Political and
Security Mechanism and the 2012 Agreements on
Cooperation and Security Arrangements lies with the
Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan. Poland
believes that the Security Council should remain
unified in its message and encourage both Governments
to swiftly establish the joint mechanisms with full
capabilities, normalize border agreements and, in
terms of the long-term perspective, elaborate a political
solution that will lead to lasting peace in Abyei. There
is no way for the Sudan and South Sudan to resolve
the question of Abyei other than through dialogue,
including intercommunal dialogue and reconciliation,
and a genuine and inclusive political process, involving
women and youth.
Finally, let me draw the Council’s attention to my
colleague, Poland’s Political Coordinator, sitting behind
me. As everyone knows, to a large extent, the Council’s
work rests on the Coordinator’s shoulders. It is Kamil
Krzysztof Mielus’ last day at the Mission in New
York — at least for the time being. I hope that Council
members share my belief that Kamil has contributed
greatly the work of the Council. I therefore shout out
and offer my kudos to Kamil for his work and daily
commitment. I thank him.
The President: I congratulate the representative of
Poland, Mr. Mielus, and wish him well in discharging
his future duties.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of South Africa.
We would also like to add our voice to express
our appreciation to our briefers, Mr. Lacroix and
Mr. Onanga-Anyanga, for their insightful observations.
We also appreciate the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/817) and the continued support for the work
being undertaken by United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei (UNISFA). South Africa notes and
welcomes the positive political developments that have
taken place in both the Sudan and South Sudan, including
those highlighted in the report of the Secretary-General.

19-3343915/18

S/PV.8644

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

24/10/2019

I will speak to only two issues — the political situation
and the developments concerning UNISFA.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

With regard to the political situation, South Africa
is encouraged by the positive strides being made by the
Sudan and South Sudan in improving their relations. The
support provided reciprocally to one another’s peace
processes is indicative of the trajectory that the two
countries have taken. It is our hope that these countries
can maintain the momentum towards the achievement
of peace, stability and economic development.

I give the floor to the representative of the Sudan.

We welcome the efforts undertaken by South Sudan
last week in hosting peace talks for the Sudan and
armed groups. This continued rapprochement by the
two countries is fundamental in rebuilding mutual trust
and addressing all outstanding issues. We urge both
countries to redouble their efforts in mustering resolve
and to implement all the provisions of the Agreement
of 20 June 2011, particularly concerning the final status
of Abyei.
Turning to the developments pertaining to UNISFA,
South Africa welcomes the Security Council’s decision
to renew the support provided by UNISFA to the Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism of the
Sudan and South Sudan under resolution 2492 (2019).
My delegation appreciates and welcomes the
importance of the stabilizing role that UNISFA and the
Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism in
particular continue to play along the borders between the
Sudan and South Sudan. We recognize the critical and
strategic importance of Abyei Area for both countries
as well as its potential for being a destabilizing point if
not closely monitored.
We therefore encourage the Sudan and South Sudan
to resume talks to implement their agreements on border
issues and work towards meeting the benchmarks
previously set by the Security Council. South Africa
further supports the convening of the Joint Political and
Security Mechanism meeting in October 2019, through
the coordination of the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel.
In conclusion, South Africa takes note of the
recommendation made by the Secretary-General in his
report of 15 October 2019 to the Security Council.
As the Council returns from Juba, we hope that
both parties remain steadfast in their commitment to
peace and stability. Similarly, the Council’s continued
support for UNISFA remains paramount.
16/18

Mr. Ahmed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my appreciation and
thanks to Mr. Lacroix and Mr. Onanga-Anyanga for
their comprehensive briefings. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2019/817).
I take this opportunity to reiterate the full
commitment of my country to cooperating with the
United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA), so that it can implement its mandate pursuant
to resolution 1990 (2011) and subsequent resolutions
and carry out its functions in a way that contributes to
strengthening security and stability in Abyei and along
the border between the two countries.
I want to stress once again that the Agreement
of 20 June 2011, on temporary arrangements for
the administration and security of the Abyei area, is
the basis for a comprehensive settlement of the final
status of Abyei. The agreement stated that no change
would be made concerning what has been agreed upon
without the approval of the three signatory parties:
the Government of the Sudan, the Government of the
Republic of South Sudan and the Federal Democratic
Republic of Ethiopia.
UNISFA is a security force in nature. It was
deployed to carry out specific functions for an interim
period, as agreed by all parties and as ratified by
the Council, taking into consideration that Abyei is
part of Sudanese territory and that the Sudan has
full sovereignty thereover, pursuant to the 2005
Comprehensive Peace Agreement.
We have gathered here today to discuss the
situation in Abyei in the light of recent significant
changes in the Sudan followed by a major change in
the relationship between the two countries, particularly
in the context of the mediation of the Sudan between
the parties to the conflict in South Sudan and the fact
that the Sudan hosted the negotiations that led to the
signing of the peace agreement. Negotiations began
recently between the Sudanese parties to achieve peace
in the Sudan, sponsored and hosted by the Government
of the Republic of South Sudan. This round of talks
led to important and positive results that strengthened
the chances of reaching a just, comprehensive and
sustainable peace.
19-33439

24/10/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The efforts of the two countries — the Sudan and
South Sudan — to assist each other in achieving peace
and stability must be supported. These endeavours
are in the interest of the two fraternal peoples and
will lead to strengthening cooperation between the
two countries, which could represent a solid basis for
seeking a solution for Abyei through the implementation
of previous agreements.
Several meetings were held recently at which joint
bodies and commissions between the Sudan and South
Sudan addressed pending issues concerning Abyei. The
Joint Political and Security Mechanism in Juba held
its meeting earlier this month and discussed measures
that were implemented in order to establish joint
administrative mechanisms and to evacuate both forces
from the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone, as well as
complete the opening of border crossing points.
Both parties reaffirmed their commitment to the
agreements of 27 September 2012 and to the immediate
reopening of the Kosti-Renk crossing point. The Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism also
held a meeting and issued a full description of the
border areas agreed upon by the two countries, and it
agreed to meet again to complete its work on disputed
and claimed areas.
I would like to reaffirm the importance of
the Security Council considering these important
developments when extending the mandate of UNISFA
next month. It is also important for the upcoming
mandate to support the positive developments between
the two countries, leading to the final status of Abyei,
free of any measure that could undermine these
developments and efforts on the ground.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize the
determination of the Government of the Sudan to
cooperate with the Government of the Republic
of South Sudan and all partners to reach a lasting
and comprehensive solution leading to security and
stability for Abyei and the region, while giving the
people of Abyei the opportunity to live the decent life
that they deserve. We also assert our full readiness for
and openness to any initiative aimed at reaching our
main objective: resolving the final status of Abyei. I
would also like to thank all those who contributed
to facilitating the work of UNISFA, particularly the
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, the African
Union Commission and the United Nations.

S/PV. 8644

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Sudan.
Mrs. Adeng (South Sudan): We would like to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October. Our delegation is ready to cooperate and
work with you during your tenure. We would also like
to welcome and recognize the presence of the UnderSecretary-General for Peace Operations and the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Horn of Africa.
We wish also to welcome the members of the
Council back from their recent field visit. That visit
to South Sudan shows their support for the people of
South Sudan and for the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan, to whose full
implementation my Government is fully committed.
On behalf of the Government of the Republic of
South Sudan, we would like to welcome the briefing
and the recommendations of the Secretary-General on
the situation in Abyei. We want to urge that the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA)
presence extend beyond the current areas of operations
in the Abyei box in order to allow for the return of the
civilian population to their homes. That objective will
not be achieved if the troop ceiling is reduced.
We are hopeful that the new Government of
the Republic of the Sudan, which has expressed its
commitment to resolving any outstanding issues related
to the 2005 Comprehensive Peace Agreement, will work
together with my Government to finalize the status of
Abyei. We also welcome the Secretary-General’s call for
the appointment of a civilian deputy head of Mission,
which would enhance the ongoing efforts of the local
chiefs and the people of Abyei towards reconciliation
and development.
My Government would like to bring to the attention
of the Council, in regard to visa issuance, the fact that
article 34 of the two status-of-forces agreements signed
by the United Nations — with the Sudan on 1 October
2012 and with South Sudan on 12 November 2012,
respectively — states that either South Sudan or the
Sudan can issue visas. My Government stands ready
to facilitate and issue entry visas for those who need to
enter Abyei.
We would also like to recognize the tireless efforts
of the Government of the Federal Democratic Republic
of Ethiopia, the United Nations, the African Union

19-3343917/18

S/PV.8644

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

High-Level Implementation Panel and the Sudan in the
positive collaboration they have demonstrated for the
support of UNISFA and the Joint Border Verification
and Monitoring Mechanism (JBVMM) mandates.
We assure the Council that our Government and the
Government of the Sudan have been fully engaged in the
implementation of the mandate. For our Government,
Abyei has been a priority and we appreciate the efforts
and contributions of the regional and international

18/18

24/10/2019

communities. We strongly believe that the continuous
support for UNISFA and the JBVMM will allow for
more progress to be achieved on the benchmarks.
I would like to conclude by reiterating that
the Government of the Republic of South Sudan is
committed to working closely with the Security Council
to implement this mandate.
The meeting rose at 11.30 a.m.

19-33439
