S/PV.8848

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8848th meeting

Monday, 30 August 2021, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Shringla . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(India)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Lipand
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kiboino
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Mr. Ousman
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. Miguel
Mr. Laouani
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield
Mrs. Tra Phuong Nguyen

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-23945 (E)
*2123945*

S/PV.8848

The situation in Afghanistan

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2021/762, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by France, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States
of America.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Estonia, France, India, Ireland, Kenya, Mexico,
Niger, Norway, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Tunisia, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Viet Nam
Against:
None
Abstaining:
China, Russian Federation
The President: The draft resolution received
13 votes in favour, none against and 2 abstentions.
The draft resolution has been adopted as
resolution 2593 (2021).
I shall now give the floor to those members of
the Council who wish to make statements following
the voting.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): Today’s resolution 2593 (2021) establishes
three clear expectations regarding the future of
Afghanistan. First, the Security Council expects the
Taliban to live up to its commitment to facilitating safe
passage for Afghans and foreign nationals who want
to leave Afghanistan, whether it be today, tomorrow
or after 31 August. Consistent with the right to leave
any country, including one’s own, everybody must
be allowed to safely leave Afghanistan for whatever
2/7

30/08/2021

reason, whenever they want, by air or by land. That is
of the utmost importance to us.
Sadly, the United States is grieving the loss of 13
young service members who made the ultimate sacrifice
while diligently working to help people depart the
country in safety. We are also mourning the hundreds
of Afghans who were killed or injured during the attack
outside of the Kabul airport. They went to the airport
in search of a better life. The international community
and those in Afghanistan must honour their memory
by doing everything they can to continue to help those
who wish to leave.
As of this morning, the United States has facilitated
the evacuation of more than 122,000 American
citizens, foreign nationals and at-risk Afghans out of
Afghanistan since the end of July. Many have made
that possible — our courageous service members, our
tireless diplomats and dozens of countries, including
many on the Security Council. Our allies and partners
around the world have contributed to the airlift,
serving as transit countries and some resettling Afghan
refugees permanently. We are grateful to all who have
joined forces in this remarkable effort.
Secondly, the resolution makes crystal clear the
Security Council’s enduring commitment to assisting
those who remain in Afghanistan. It underscores that
all parties need to facilitate humanitarian assistance
and that humanitarian actors must be given full, safe
and unhindered access to continue service delivery to
those in need. The Afghan people are suffering not just
from conflict and massive internal displacement, but
also from a nationwide drought and the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
United Nations agencies warn that humanitarian
needs in the coming months will be vast. The Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
estimates that nearly a half million Afghans have been
internally displaced this year alone. The World Food
Programme estimates that, without food assistance,
14 million people in Afghanistan are at risk of starving.
UNICEF has reported that COVID-19 vaccinations
have dropped off by 80 per cent in recent weeks.
Vital humanitarian assistance must flow to people in
desperate need.
Thirdly, the resolution reiterates in strong terms
several of the Council’s enduring calls regarding the
situation in Afghanistan. Today we have spoken once
again on the urgent need to tackle the serious threat of
21-23945

30/08/2021

The situation in Afghanistan

terrorism in Afghanistan. Last week’s horrific attack
in Kabul demonstrated the very real threat posed by
terrorist groups such as the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham-Khorasan Province. President Biden has
made clear that we will do what is necessary to defend
our security and our people. The entire international
community is committed to ensuring that Afghanistan
is never again a safe haven for terrorism.
Through this resolution, the Security Council has
also reiterated the vital importance of respect for the
rights of Afghanistan’s people, including its women,
girls and minorities. We will not waver on that point.
Respect for the rights of all the people of Afghanistan
goes hand in hand with the need for parties to engage
in an inclusive negotiated settlement to bring stability
to Afghanistan, which the Council also emphasizes
through today’s resolution.
As Afghanistan enters the next chapter, it is
imperative that the international community remain
unified and resolute, including in holding the
Taliban accountable for its commitments. One such
commitment, which the Taliban has made publicly and
privately, is that those who wish to leave Afghanistan
will be able to do so. Today’s resolution signals just how
seriously the Security Council takes that commitment,
along with the commitment to allowing humanitarian
aid to flow and to preventing terrorism. Through
today’s resolution, the Security Council has issued a
set of calls that are clear, necessary and in the interest
of Afghanistan’s people. Moving forward, we must
address the most pressing security threats, stand up for
the rights of the Afghan people and lay the groundwork
for a stable and inclusive Afghanistan. The people of
Afghanistan deserve nothing less.
Ms. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in French):
I welcome today’s adoption of resolution 2593 (2021). I
regret the fact that the text could not garner the support
of all of the members of the Security Council. The eyes
of all Afghans are on the Council. They expected clear
support from the international community. This lack of
unity is a disappointment for us and for them. However,
I have no doubt that Council members all share the
same primary objective — that of enabling the Afghan
people to regain stability and security.
Nevertheless, we have adopted an important text
that now needs to be implemented on the ground. As
the security and humanitarian situations continue to
deteriorate, the resolution that the Council just adopted

S/PV. 8848

clearly sets out a series of expectations for the Taliban,
the first of which concerns all Afghans who feel
threatened and wish to leave the country. The Taliban
has undertaken certain commitments in that regard,
and we ask that it adhere to them.
The resolution calls for no effort to be spared in
order to secure the airport and surrounding areas.
Creating that safe and protected passage is a sine qua
non so as to ensure that threatened Afghans who wish to
leave can do so in total security, as well as to ensure that
humanitarian assistance can reach all those who need it
via both the airport and land borders. Indeed, that is
the second requirement set in the resolution, namely, to
guarantee the continuation of humanitarian operations.
Every minute counts for the thousands of Afghans who
are waiting for food and care. All parties must respect
their obligations under international humanitarian law.
The third requirement set out in resolution 2593
(2021) concerns the fight against terrorism. In that
regard, I reiterate our firmest condemnation of the
recent attacks. As we have said before in the Chamber,
we will continue to fight tirelessly against that scourge.
The Taliban have also undertaken commitments in that
regard, which it must uphold. It must also contribute
effectively to the fight against terrorism, in particular
the financing of terrorism, in addition to severing all
ties with Al-Qaida.
Finally, the resolution we just adopted serves to
remind us all of our obligations under international
humanitarian law and human rights law, especially when
it comes to the protection of civilians, humanitarian
access and the rights of women. For women, the
horizon is now considerably darker. It is our duty to
restore their hope. The gains made in the past 20 years
must be preserved. Afghan women have been on the
front lines in recent years calling for their rights. their
full participation is essential for any political solution.
I would like to underscore that France reaffirms
its expectations for the establishment, through
negotiations, of a transitional Government that meets
the aspirations of the Afghan people. Over the next few
days, we look forward to seeing greater coordination of
all efforts on the ground, in particular with the United
Nations, to ensure that the resolution is put into practice.
I would like to applaud the essential role played by
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). I commend the courage of its teams, as well
as those of all United Nations agencies, particularly

21-239453/7

S/PV.8848

The situation in Afghanistan

those in the humanitarian sphere. We will continue
to support UNAMA’s work and pay close attention to
making sure that the Mission continues to benefit from
a sufficiently robust mandate to pursue its fundamental
role on the ground.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
Today the Security Council has spoken clearly on the
situation in Afghanistan and has set out its minimum
expectations of the Taliban.
First, the immediate priority is to ensure that all
those who wish to leave Afghanistan can do so safely.
We have been clear that the Taliban must adhere to its
own stated commitments to ensure safe passage beyond
31 August.
Secondly, Afghanistan can never again become
a safe haven for terrorists. We have unequivocally
condemned the attack on Kabul airport last week,
and we reiterate our condolences and sympathy to the
bereaved and injured. A coordinated approach will be
vital to counter any extremist threat emanating from
Afghanistan, and we call on the Taliban to uphold its
commitments set out in the Doha agreement.
Thirdly, the humanitarian situation requires urgent
attention. We are coordinating closely with partners to
strengthen efforts to support humanitarian assistance
and ensure unimpeded access for humanitarian workers
and organizations.
Finally, the gains of the past 20 years must be
protected, and human rights, including those of
women, children and minorities, must be safeguarded.
Resolution 2593 (2021) lays down a marker that the
international community will be watching closely.
Today’s resolution is an important step towards
a unified, international response to the situation in
Afghanistan. We will continue to build on it to ensure
that the Council holds the Taliban accountable as
regards its commitments. The Taliban will be judged by
the international community on the basis of its actions
on the ground, not its words.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): We welcome the
adoption today of the resolution on Afghanistan
(resolution 2593 (2021)). I want to express our
appreciation to France, the United Kingdom and the
United States for their efforts in bringing it forward.
Ireland voted in favour of the resolution because we
believe in the importance of the Security Council’s voice
4/7

30/08/2021

at this critical juncture for Afghanistan. We would, of
course, have preferred to send a united message.
Our thoughts today are with those Afghans who
are desperately trying to reach safety outside their
homeland; with the women and children who know their
fundamental rights are now at risk; and with all Afghans
suffering from humanitarian need, including those who
are hungry and without safe access to water. That is
where our collective attention needs to be focused. We
cannot look the other way. That is why the focus in the
resolution on ensuring full, safe and unhindered access
to the United Nations and all humanitarian actors to
deliver life-saving and life-sustaining humanitarian aid
is so important.
We also welcome the emphasis on upholding human
rights and the clear and unequivocal reaffirmation
of the importance of the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women in any negotiated political
settlement. We would of course have preferred stronger
language on respect for human rights, particularly
given the situation now faced by the women and girls
of Afghanistan. On 19 August, Ireland and Mexico
jointly urged the Council to place the utmost priority on
women and girls. Ireland calls on all parties to uphold
their obligations under international humanitarian,
refugee and human rights law.
I repeat what I said in the Chamber on 16 August:
telling the international community what it wants to
hear will fool no one (see S/PV.8834). We have noted
the public statement by the Taliban. We will judge the
Taliban by its actions, and not by its words.
Right now, the international community must
continue to demand that all those who need to leave
Afghanistan — whether they be Afghans or foreign
nationals — be free to do so in a safe, secure and orderly
way. We reiterate our firm view that such access at any
air or land crossing must be without preconditions.
Ireland will not be found wanting in our
determination to work alongside fellow Security
Council members to ensure that we maintain laser
focus on the situation in Afghanistan, including as
Ireland assumes the Council presidency for the month
of September.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation firmly condemns
the terrorist attacks that took place on 26 August near
Kabul airport, killing hundreds of people. We express
21-23945

30/08/2021

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV. 8848

our condolences to the friends and families of the
victims, and we wish those injured a swift recovery.

replaced by the Resolute Support training mission,
reported to the Council.

Meanwhile, we had to abstain in the voting on the
resolution on Afghanistan (resolution 2593 (2021)).
We did so because the authors of the text ignored our
principled concerns.

For our part, the Russian Federation has consistently
called for a peaceful, safe and prosperous Afghanistan
on whose territory there would be no terrorist or drug
threat. We will continue our support for the Afghan
people with a view to achieving that goal.

First, despite the fact that the resolution was
proposed against the backdrop of a terrible terrorist
attack, the authors categorically refused to mention
internationally recognized terrorist organizations —
­ the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and the Eastern
Turkistan Islamic Movement — in the paragraph
on counter-terrorism. We see this as a reluctance
to acknowledge the obvious and a desire to divide
terrorists into “ours and theirs”, that is, to downplay the
terrorist threat coming from those groups.
Secondly, during the negotiations we underscored
the unacceptability of the negative impacts on the
Afghan economy of the evacuation of qualified Afghan
specialists. Given that brain drain, the country will not
be able to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals.
Those elements, which are important to the Afghan
people, were not reflected in the text.
Thirdly, the authors ignored our proposals to include
in the document references to the harmful influence of
the freezing of Afghan financial assets on the economic
and humanitarian situation in the country, as well as
the vital need to provide humanitarian assistance to
Afghanistan strictly in accordance with the guiding
principles of the United Nations as enshrined in General
Assembly resolution 46/182.
We understand the reasons that motivated the
authors to try to use the authority of the Security
Council to adopt the resolution in this form and within
such a tight time frame, but perhaps, if we had had more
time, the result of the voting would have been different.
At the same time, we see here an attempt to shift
the blame for the collapse of the 20-year presence of
the United States and their allies in the region onto
the Taliban and the countries in the region that will
have to deal with the consequences of this long-term
campaign. That irresponsible action on the part of the
Western coalition and its attitude vis-à-vis the events in
Afghanistan is not surprising given, among other things,
the purely formal way in which NATO’s International
Security Assistance Force, which subsequently was

Mr. Lipand (Estonia): In the light of the uncertain
developments in Afghanistan and the urgent and
precarious security situation at Kabul airport, Estonia
gave its support to resolution 2593 (2021) today.
The humanitarian situation in Afghanistan
is deteriorating. Humanitarian organizations and
the United Nations have committed to staying and
to delivering relief and assistance, but they need
unimpeded access and assurances that their staff and
aid providers can work and deliver assistance without
interference or threats to their safety. That includes the
need for a functioning and secure airport in Kabul that
enables people and goods to move as necessary.
Furthermore, although a lot about the situation in
Afghanistan is currently unclear, the past two weeks
have shown that there are many aspects on which
there is agreement. I would highlight four: we all have
called for strengthened efforts to provide humanitarian
assistance to Afghanistan; we have all acknowledged
that for peace to be sustainable and inclusive, a
negotiated political settlement must be reached, with the
full, equal and meaningful participation of women; we
have together underscored the importance of adherence
to international norms and standards on human rights,
in particular for women, children and minorities; and
we all have reaffirmed the importance of combating
terrorism in Afghanistan.
With that in mind, I want to simply conclude that
we look forward to building upon those aspects, in the
interest of all the people of Afghanistan.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The domestic situation in Afghanistan has undergone
fundamental changes. In the light of the developments
on the ground, the Security Council has held intensive
consultations with the aim of finding an effective
solution that would help Afghanistan restore peace,
stability and order, in line with the general expectations
of the international community.
At the same time, given the fragile and sensitive
situation in the country as well as the many looming

21-239455/7

S/PV.8848

The situation in Afghanistan

uncertainties, any action taken by the Security Council
should help ease rather than intensify tensions and
conflict, so that Afghanistan can make a smooth
transition rather than relapse into turmoil.
The countries concerned circulated the draft
resolution last Friday evening, demanding that action
be taken on Monday. China has serious doubts about
the necessity and urgency of the adoption of resolution
2593 (2021) and about the balance of its content.
Nonetheless, China still participated constructively
in the consultations and put forward important
and reasonable amendments together with Russia.
Unfortunately, our amendments were not fully adopted.
China has always been opposed to a sponsor’s
imposing or forcibly pushing a draft resolution. Based
on the aforementioned considerations, China abstained
in the voting on the resolution.
The recent chaos in Afghanistan is directly related
to the hasty and disorderly withdrawal of foreign
troops. We hope that the countries concerned will
realize that the withdrawal does not mean an end of
their responsibility but the beginning of a process of
reflection and correction.
The countries concerned should learn lessons
from this; truly respect the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of Afghanistan; and genuinely
respect the right of the Afghan people to determine their
own future. It is hoped that the countries concerned
will effectively change their wrong-minded practice
of imposing their own will on others and put an end
to the hegemonic practice of imposing pressures and
sanctions or even using force at every turn.
Those countries should be responsible for what
they have done in the past 20 years and fulfil their
commitments to the peaceful rebuilding of Afghanistan.
They cannot claim to care about the Afghan people’s
welfare while imposing unilateral sanctions or claim to
support accelerated economic and social development
in the country while seizing and freezing Afghans’
overseas assets.
They have left an immense catastrophe in their
wake in Afghanistan - one that they created - shifting
the blame and responsibility to neighbouring countries
and the Security Council. The actions of foreign troops
in Afghanistan over the past 20 years, including the
criminal activities carried out by the United States and
Australian forces involving the indiscriminate killing
6/7

30/08/2021

of civilians, must not be glossed over and must continue
to be investigated.
The United States’ recent retaliatory attack on
the Islamic State resulted in the deaths of innocent
civilians. We call on the United States to refrain
from indiscriminately attacking or bombing civilianpopulated areas in Afghanistan.
In the face of the fundamental changes in the
domestic situation in Afghanistan, the international
community must engage with the Taliban and actively
provide it with guidance. The international community
should provide Afghanistan with urgently needed
assistance with respect to the economy, livelihoods and
humanitarian needs in order to help the new authorities
preserve the normal functioning of Government
institutions as well as public order and stability, address
the issues of currency depreciation and price increases,
and embark on the path of peaceful reconstruction as
soon as possible.
China has always attached great importance to
Afghanistan’s fight against terrorism. We strongly
condemn the recent terrorist attack in Kabul. That
terrorist attack once again proved that the war in
Afghanistan did not achieve the goal of eliminating
terrorist forces in Afghanistan. The hasty withdrawal of
foreign troops is likely to have provided opportunities
for various terrorist organizations to make a comeback.
We hope that the security of Kabul airport can
be guaranteed, that the evacuation of the relevant
personnel can proceed smoothly and that all parties
concerned can strengthen their coordination so as to
jointly prevent fresh terrorist attacks.
Afghanistan must never again become the source
of or a hotbed of terrorism. That is the bottom line
that the country must adhere to in any future political
settlement. It is hoped that the Taliban will honestly
fulfil its commitments and completely cut off ties with
all terrorist organizations.
In resolutely cracking down on international
terrorist forces such as the Islamic State, Al-Qaida and
the Eastern Turkistan Islamic Movement, countries
should follow international law and Security Council
resolutions so as to prevent any chaos caused by
terrorists gathering in Afghanistan. On counterterrorism issues, there must be no double standards or
selective approaches.
21-23945

30/08/2021

The situation in Afghanistan

The mandate for the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan will expire on 17 September.
China looks forward to continuing to engage in
constructive consultations with members of the Security
Council and to conducting in-depth discussions with a
view to achieving a broad consensus on such issues as
the United Nations presence in Afghanistan in the next
phase. Our objective is to help the country achieve peace
and reconciliation and start its reconstruction process.
As a member of the Security Council and one of
Afghanistan’s important neighbours, China has all
along followed the principle of non-interference in
internal affairs and always pursued a friendly policy
for all Afghan people. We are ready to continue to
develop good-neighbourly and cooperative relations
with Afghanistan and play a constructive role in the
peaceful reconstruction of the country.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.

S/PV. 8848

Before adjourning the meeting, as this is the last
scheduled meeting of the Security Council for the
month of August, I would like to express the sincere
appreciation of the delegation of India to the members of
the Council — and to the Council’s secretariat — for all
the support they have extended to us during the month.
It has indeed been a busy month — and one in
which we have rallied to seek consensus on several
important issues within our purview. We could not have
done it without the hard work, support and cooperation
of every delegation and the representatives of the
Secretariat, including the technical support personnel,
conference service officers, interpreters, translators,
verbatim reporters and security personnel.
As we end our presidency, I know I speak on behalf
of the Council in wishing the delegation of Ireland good
luck in the month of September.
The meeting rose at 3.40 p.m.

21-239457/7
