36

General Assembly-Twenty-third Session

2462 (XXIII). Multilateral food aid
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2096 (XX) of 20 December
1965 and 2300 (XXII) of 12 December 1967 on the
programme of studies on multilateral food aid,
Recalling also the Declaration on the World Food
Problem"º adopted by the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development at its second session,
Talling note of the report of the Secretary-GeneraJ,úl
preparecl in co-operation with the Director-General of
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the Unitecl
Nations and in consultation with the executive heads
of the other agencies and programmes concernecl.
Talling note also of the report of the Advisory Committee on the Application of Science and Technology
to Development entitled Feeding the Expanding World
Population: lnternational Action to Avert the hn¡,ending Protein Crisis, 112
Bearing iH mind the discussion on multilateral food
aid at the fourteenth session of the Conference of the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations and at the forty-third session of its Committee
on Commodity Problems,
Awaire of the encouraging recent improvements in the
food production prospects of sorne developing countries
with a food deficit, especially through programmes
based on the wider adoption of high-yielding cereal
varieties,
Bearing in m.ind also, however, that it is essential to
keep under review within the framework of the Second
United Nations Development Decade the progress made
towards the solution of the world food prohlem and,
in this context, the capacity of primary-exporting countries and developed countries to sustain an expanded
programme of food aid, due account being taken of the
special circumstances of food-importing donor countries,
1. Reafjirms that the ultimate solution of the food
problem of the developing countries líes in increased
production in the developing countries with a food
deficit, in the context of their general economic development, with the co-operation of the developed
countries;
2. Recognizes that, in view of the continuing need
for food transfers as a measure of temporary assistance
to the developing countries until they have solved their
food problems and for a degree of planning to ensure
that the supplies required are available, and taking into
account moreover the existence of surpluses, an opportunity now exists for food aid operations to become
more purposeful and efficient, and to this end stresses
the importance of :
(a) Food aid for humanitarian purposes as well as
a contribution to economic and social progress in countries with a food deficit and for emergency requirements, including the need to overcome the problem of
nutritional deficiency;
( b) Assistance to the developing countries in their
efforts to increase food production through the modernization of the agricultura! sector;
GO See Proceedings of the United Nations Conferencc on
Trade and Developn1ent, Second Session, vol. I and Corr.1
and Add.l, Report and Annexes (United Nations pub!ication
Sales No.: E.68.II.D.14), annex I, declaration 9 (II).
'
n Official Records of the Economic and Social Co1mcil,
Res11med Forty-fifth Session, Annexes, agenda ítem 2 document E/4538.
·
G2 United Nations pub!ication. Sales No.: E.68.XIII.2.

(e) The principie that the henefits of food aid should
accrue mainly to the developing countries with a food
cleficit, bearing in mind their limited purchasing capacity, with appropriate regard to the tracle intere~ts of
the food-exporting countries, especially the developing
countries, in conformity with the principies of smplus
clisposal of the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the U nitecl N ations ;
( d) Ti1e role of international arrangements designed,
where appropriate, to combine the pursuit of ohjectives
of commodity price stabilization at an equitable and
remunerative leve!, with measures to provicle food aid
for developing countries ;
3. C onsiders that the special competencc aml experience of the \Vorld Foocl Programme should he
brought to bear in co-operation with interesterl organizations of the U nited N ations system in the further
adaptation of multilateral food aid operations to meet
the needs which arise;
4. Urges States Members of the United I\'ations
and memhers and associate memhers of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations to
make every effort to attain the target for voluntary
contributions to the \Vorlcl Food Programme:
5. Invites the Director-General of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. in consultation with the executive heacls of other interestecl
organizations, to give consideration to the possible
ways, including the suggestions contained in the Secre,
tary-General's report, of making appraisals of prospective food deficits and food aicl needs and of ensuring
that sufficient food-stuffs are available to cope with unforeseen mgent situations, and to report as appropriate
to the Council of the Food ancl Agriculture Organization of the Unitecl Nations ancl to the Economic ancl
Social Council ;
6. Requests the United Nations/FAO IntergO\·ern,
mental Committee of the "World Food Programme:
(a) To review the relevant parts of the SecretaryGeneral's report and other recent studies on the subject
of food aid prepared within the T.Jnited Nations sys:em;
( b) To submit recommendations. especially with a
view to assisting in the preparation of the Second
United Nations Development Decade, on thnse aspect~
of the food aid question which in its view might o-uide
the activities of Member States and of the com¡;;.tent
international organizations in helping to solve the
world food problem ;
(e) To consider in this respect ways and mea ns of
improving its own food aicl programme commensurate
with prospective needs in this field, with due regarcl
to experience gained to date, inclucling allocations to the
World Food Programme under the Food Aid Convention of the International Grains Arrangernent.;; 3 taking
into account the relevant proposals contained in the
in the Secretary-General's report and the neecl to utilize
effectivelv donations of food-stuffs which hecome available at short notice. subject to the rules of proceclnre
of the World Food Programme;
( d) To continue its examination of the consiclerations
involved in the question of inclucling forms of aid in
kind other than food in the resources of the \V orle!
Food Programme, the potential availahility of such
pledges and the manner in which reqnests might be
assessed ;
~3 See lnternational 1-Vheat Conferencr, 1967 (United Kations
pub!ication, Sales No.: E.68.II.D.5).

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

with the final report being submitted to the Economic
and Social Council at its forty-ninth session;
9. Invites the Secretary-General of the United
Nations and the Director-General of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, in
consultation with the executive. heads of other interested
agencies and programmes, to keep under review, in the
context of the Second United Nations Development
Decade, the evolution of the food prohlem in developing cotmtries and the progress made towards its solution, bearing in mind that this would require an integrated approach.
1751st plenary meeting,
20 December 1968.

7. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations and the Director-General of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United N ations, in
consultation with other interestecl agencies and programmes, to provicle assistance as rec¡uirec\ to the
United Nations/FAO Intergovernmental Committee in
the discharge of its mandate;
8. Further requests that a progress repon of the
United Nations/FAO Intergovernmental Committee
falling within the terms of the present resolution be
presented, if possible, for consitleration to the Council
of the Food ancl Agricultnre Organization of the
United Nations at its fifty-seconcl session ancl the
Econom!c ancl Social Council at its forty-seventh session,

*

*
Other

*

deciaions

Report of the Economic and Social Council

(ltem 12)
At its 1751st plenary meeting, 011 20 December 1968. the General Assembly
took note of paragraph 25 of the report of the Second Committee 54 concerning
the propo 0 ed amendment to the rules of proceclure of the General Assembly.
At the same meeting, the General Assembly took note. of paragraph 40 of
the report of the Second CommitteeH concerning the organization of work of thc
Committe.e.

Revision of the lists of States eligible for membership in the Trade and
Development Board

(ltem 34)
At its 1741st plenary meeting, 011 13 December 1968, the General Assembly
took note of the decision of the United N ations Conference on Trade and Development,5¡¡ as set forth in paragraph 13 of the report of the Second Committee,fi 6
to revise the lists annexed to General Assembly resolution 1995 (XIX) of 30
December 1964 to include the following States:

In Iist A: BoTSWANA, GAMBIA, LESOTHO, MALAWI, MALDI\'E IsLANDS, MAvRITius, SINGAPORE, SouTHERN YEMEN ancl ZAMBIA.

In Iist B: MALTA.
In Iist e: BARBADOS and GuYAXA .

•

•

•

As a result oj the above decision, thc list of States eligible for membcrsh-ip
m thc Trade a.nd Dcvelo¡,111ent Board will be as follows:
A.

LI>T OF STATES JNDICATED IN PARAGRAPH 5 (a) OF GENERAL ASSEMBLY
RESOLUTION

Afghanistan
Algeria
Botswana
Burma
Burundi
Cambodia

11

1995 (XIX)

Cameroon
Central African Republic
Ceylon
Chad
China
Congo (Brazzaville)

Con~o (Democratic Republic
of)

Dahomey
Ethiopia
Gabon
Gambia

54 Official Rccords of the General Asse111bly, Twents-third Susion, A1111c.rcs, agenda
item 12. document A/7426.
55 See Proccedings of the United Nations Conferrnce on Trade and Der•rlopment, Suond
Sessio11, vol. I and Corr.l and Add.l, Reporl and Annexes (United :Nations publication,
Sales No.: E.68.II.D.14), p. 57.
56 Officinl Rccords of the General Assembly, Twenty-third Srssion, A,mucs, agenda
ítem 34, ,]ocument A/7383/ Add.l.
