UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/26777
22 November 1993
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

REPORT OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL IN CONNECTION WITH THE
SECURITY COUNCIL’S COMPREHENSIVE REASSESSMENT OF THE
UNITED NATIONS OPERATION IN CYPRUS

INTRODUCTION
1.
The present report was called for by the Security Council in its resolution
831 (1993) of 27 May 1993. That resolution included the following:
"7. Decides to conduct a comprehensive reassessment of UNFICYP at the
time of the consideration of the Force’s mandate in December 1993,
including of the implications of progress on confidence-building measures
and towards a political settlement for the future of the Force;
"8. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report one month
before that reassessment, to cover all aspects of the situation, including
confidence-building measures, progress in political negotiations and
possible progressive steps towards an observer force based on the proposal
described in paragraph 12 of the Secretary-General’s report (S/25492 of
30 March 1993)."
2.
In paragraphs 20 and 21 of my report of 14 September 1993 (S/26438),
concerning my mission of good offices in Cyprus, I, inter alia, described how I
would proceed in the subsequent months with regard to the Varosha/Nicosia
International Airport package of confidence-building measures, including through
the dispatch to the island of two teams of experts. I went on to state the
following:
"I shall convey the outcome of my efforts during the coming two months,
including the results of both teams’ work to the Security Council in the
report which the Council, in its resolution of 27 May 1993, requested me to
submit by mid-November" (para. 22).
By a letter dated 20 September 1993 (S/26475), the President of the Security
Council informed me that the Council members had endorsed fully the
above-mentioned report.
3.
The Security Council will also recall that the General Assembly, in its
resolution 47/236 of 14 September 1993, reaffirmed the role of the Assembly, as
set out in Article 17 of the Charter of the United Nations, as the organ to
consider and approve the budget of the Organization, as well as the

93-64627 (E)

241193

/...

S/26777
English
Page 2

apportionment of its expenses among Member States. The same resolution endorsed
the observations and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions of 26 August 1993
(A/47/1004). It raised a number of questions concerning the budget and
administration of the Force and included the following paragraph:
"The Committee notes that in its resolution 831 (1993) of 27 May 1993, the
Security Council decided to conduct a comprehensive reassessment of UNFICYP
at the time of the consideration of the Force’s mandate in December 1993.
The Committee requests the Secretary-General, following that reassessment,
to report to the General Assembly on the administrative and financial
aspects of such decisions as the Security Council may take" (para. 10).
I will, therefore, report to the General Assembly when the Security Council has
completed its comprehensive reassessment of the Force.
4.
Consistent with Security Council resolution 831 (1993), the regular
six-monthly report in connection with the Security Council’s renewal of the
mandate of the United Nations operation in Cyprus has been incorporated into the
present report. While the current mandate expires on 15 December 1993, the
statistics cited as current in the present report are valid as of
mid-November 1993.
5.

The present report is divided into the following three parts:

(a) Part I. Overview of the United Nations Operation in Cyprus,
describing the functions of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus
(UNFICYP) as mandated by the Security Council; the strength, organization and
deployment of the Force; the Secretary-General’s good offices mission in Cyprus;
and the cost and financing of the United Nations operation in Cyprus;
(b) Part II. Detailed operations during the current mandate period
(16 June-15 December 1993), including the maintenance of the cease-fire and the
status quo; restoration of normal conditions and humanitarian functions; and the
Committee on Missing Persons;
(c)

Part III.

I.

Observations.

OVERVIEW OF THE UNITED NATIONS OPERATION IN CYPRUS
A.

Mandate and functions of the Force

6.
The mandate of UNFICYP was originally defined by the Security Council in
its resolution 186 (1964) of 4 March 1964 as follows:
"In the interest of preserving international peace and security, to use its
best efforts to prevent a recurrence of fighting and, as necessary, to
contribute to the maintenance and restoration of law and order and a return
to normal conditions."
That mandate has been repeatedly reaffirmed by the Council, most recently in its
resolution 839 (1993) of 11 June 1993. Following the events of 15 July 1974 and
/...

S/26777
English
Page 3

thereafter, the Council adopted a number of resolutions, some of which have
affected the functioning of UNFICYP and, in some cases, have required the Force
to perform certain additional or modified functions relating, in particular, to
the maintenance of the cease-fire. 1/
7.

The functions of UNFICYP in pursuance of its mandate are twofold:

(a) Maintenance of the military status quo and prevention of a recurrence
of fighting;
(b) Humanitarian and economic activities to promote a return to normal
conditions.

1.

Maintenance of the military status quo

8.
Since August 1974, UNFICYP has been deployed between the cease-fire lines
of the National Guard and of the Turkish and Turkish Cypriot forces. This area,
known as the buffer zone, extends across the island for some 180 kilometres from
the Kokkina enclave and Kato Pyrgos in the north-west to the Dherinia area in
the south-east. The area between the two lines varies in width from
7 kilometres to only a few metres.
9.
The functions of UNFICYP are based on the requirements of the cease-fire
called for by the Security Council in 1974. In keeping with these requirements,
it is the position of the United Nations that the opposing forces should remain
behind their respective cease-fire lines and that neither can exercise authority
or jurisdiction beyond its own cease-fire line.
10.

UNFICYP considers the main categories of cease-fire violations to be:

(a) Any move of military elements forward of their cease-fire line into
the buffer zone;
(b) The discharge of any type of weapons or explosives, without prior
notification, along the cease-fire lines or up to a distance of 1,000 metres
behind them;
(c) Building of new or strengthening of existing military positions within
400 metres of the opposing cease-fire line;
(d) Building of new or strengthening of existing military positions more
than 400 metres from the opposing cease-fire line if UNFICYP considers this
incompatible with the spirit of the cease-fire;
(e) Overflights of the buffer zone by military or civilian aircraft, or
flights by military aircraft, of either side, within 1,000 metres of the buffer
zone;
(f) Troop deployment and training exercises in an area closer than
1,000 metres from their cease-fire line without prior notification;

/...

S/26777
English
Page 4

(g) Provocative acts between the two sides, such as shouting abuse,
indecent gestures or throwing stones.
11. Strict adherence to the military status quo in the buffer zone and along
both cease-fire lines is essential to prevent a recurrence of fighting. UNFICYP
seeks to maintain the status quo by monitoring of the cease-fire lines and the
buffer zone and by swift reaction to any violation. To this end, UNFICYP
maintains constant surveillance from 21 observation posts, daylight hours
surveillance from 3 and periodic surveillance from 19. All these posts are used
for overnight accommodation of UNFICYP military personnel. UNFICYP also
maintains periodic surveillance from a further 108 observation points; carries
out vehicle, foot and air patrols; maintains surveillance of the seaward
extension of the cease-fire lines; investigates and acts upon violations of the
cease-fire and ensures that the status quo is restored; defuses cases of
tension, especially through the prompt deployment of troops; and maintains
constant liaison and communications with all command levels of the military
forces on both sides. UNFICYP also monitors the status quo in the fenced area
of Varosha and in the village of Strovilia, which is a tiny Greek Cypriot
community isolated from the area to the south of the buffer zone by the Dhekelia
Sovereign Base Area.
12. There is no formal agreement between UNFICYP and the two sides on the
complete delineation of the buffer zone as recorded by UNFICYP, nor on the use
and control of the buffer zone. As a result, UNFICYP finds itself supervising,
by loose mutual consent, two constantly disputed cease-fire lines. The parties
each continue to this day in their attempts to advance their cease-fire line
through persistent movements forward and encroachments into the buffer zone. In
the prevailing climate of distrust, even minor moves on one side may be
interpreted as a provocation and prompt a reaction by the other. UNFICYP troops
deployed along the buffer zone have to be fully familiar with every detail of
the existing arrangements, maintain constant observation and be prepared to
react should any step be taken that could be construed as a violation of the
military status quo.
13. UNFICYP is confronted with hundreds of incidents each year (791 during the
first nine months of 1993). When violations are observed, they are immediately
dealt with at the local level. UNFICYP’s reaction depends on the nature of the
violation and may include investigation, the deployment of troops, verbal and
written protests and follow-up action to ensure that the violation has been
corrected or will not recur. An essential element in preventing serious
escalations of incidents is to maintain constant liaison at all levels with the
forces on both sides.
14. UNFICYP’s task is most complicated where the cease-fire lines are close to
each other, particularly in Nicosia and its suburbs. Tense situations often
occur where the buffer zone is only a few metres wide and opposing forces
confront each other across a narrow UNFICYP patrol track. Soldiers on both
sides have been prone to deliberate acts of provocation, including shouting
abuse, weapon cocking, throwing stones and making obscene gestures. This
invites retaliation in kind and can easily escalate if UNFICYP does not
interpose itself quickly to calm tensions and maintain a physical presence until
tempers have cooled. In past years such incidents, as well as other instances
of lack of discipline, have resulted in fatalities from shootings.
/...

S/26777
English
Page 5

15. UNFICYP has for a number of years attempted to persuade the two sides to
pull their troops further back in areas where they are only metres apart. In
May 1989, UNFICYP succeeded in concluding an unmanning agreement with the two
sides, whereby they agreed to withdraw their forces from selected positions in
Nicosia (S/20663, para. 14). Security Council resolution 789 (1992) of
25 November 1992 urged that the military authorities on each side cooperate with
UNFICYP to extend the unmanning agreement of 1989 to all areas of the United
Nations-controlled buffer zone where the two sides are in close proximity.
UNFICYP’s efforts in this connection have not been fruitful. This proposal has
also been included in the package of confidence-building measures, which the
Security Council has urged all concerned to implement.
16. In addition to maintaining the military status quo, UNFICYP must also
preserve the integrity of the buffer zone from unauthorized entry or activities
by civilians. As a result, UNFICYP has from time to time become involved in
crowd control. Civilian demonstrations near the cease-fire line on the Greek
Cypriot side have often degenerated into individual or mass attempts to enter
the buffer zone with the declared purpose of crossing to the other side.
Sometimes, such demonstrations have been accompanied by considerable violence on
the part of demonstrators, including attacks on UNFICYP personnel and property.
While the primary responsibility for preventing demonstrators from crossing the
cease-fire line rests with the civilian police authorities concerned, experience
has shown that UNFICYP troops and United Nations Civilian Police (UNCIVPOL) must
be deployed in considerable numbers to prevent demonstrators from entering the
buffer zone. In addition, each year UNCIVPOL investigates hundreds of other
incidents (249 during the first nine months of 1993) occurring in the buffer
zone, such as unauthorized entry by civilians, traffic accidents, fires, thefts,
shootings, hunting with firearms, rubbish dumping and other unauthorized
activities.

2.

Economic and humanitarian activities

17. The second function entrusted to UNFICYP by the Security Council is to
promote a return to normal conditions. Towards this end it carries out a number
of economic and humanitarian activities. The economic activities are largely
related to agriculture and industry inside the buffer zone and to public
utilities that cross the buffer zone. The humanitarian activities are largely
concerned with Greek and Turkish Cypriots living among the other community.
18. The buffer zone covers about 3 per cent of the island and includes some of
the most valuable agricultural land. With a view to promoting the restoration
of normal conditions, UNFICYP encourages and facilitates farming and other
economic activities in the buffer zone. Farming and other economic activities
are allowed, provided that ownership can be proven and that the activities
present no security threat to either side or to UNFICYP. Farming permits are
issued to proven owners of land, the great majority of whom are Greek Cypriots.
As a result of active UNFICYP policy, farming has been extended almost to the
limit of available land. UNFICYP has drawn up farming security lines to limit
farming by individuals of one community to land that is at least 400 metres from
the cease-fire line of the other side. UNFICYP keeps the farming area under
constant supervision from observation posts or through patrols. There are also

/...

S/26777
English
Page 6

in the buffer zone a number of industries, mines and quarries that have been
reactivated through UNFICYP’s support and frequent patrolling.
19. Another important function of UNFICYP concerns public utilities,
particularly in the sensitive sectors of water and electricity. Electric power
in the northern part of the island continues to be supplied by the southern
part, although a large generating station located in the north is at an advanced
stage of construction. Water sources originating on one side or the other flow
across the cease-fire lines and sometimes back, criss-crossing the buffer zone.
Therefore, UNFICYP has a major responsibility in patrolling the lines and pipes,
in helping to maintain them and in resolving disputes over the allocation of
water or electricity as well as in providing liaison between the relevant
authorities on the two sides.
20. UNFICYP military and UNCIVPOL patrols and escorts also perform and support
public health and safety work in the buffer zone by activities such as malaria
control, prevention of illicit garbage and sewage disposal, fire fighting and
issuing burning permits.
21. UNFICYP discharges important functions with regard to the welfare and
well-being of the Greek Cypriots and Maronites living in the northern part of
the island and undertakes regular visits to Turkish Cypriots residing in the
southern part. UNFICYP also provides support to the relief operations
coordinated by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and
discharges certain functions handed over by the International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC) at the time of the withdrawal of its delegation from Cyprus in
June 1977. 2/
22. UNFICYP’s principal activities in the performance of its humanitarian
functions can be numerous. From June 1992-May 1993, 7 persons were transferred
permanently and 1,329 temporarily across the buffer zone at Nicosia; 64 meetings
of divided families were arranged at the Ledra Palace Hotel in the buffer zone
at Nicosia; weekly deliveries of food, medicines, clothing and fuel to Greek
Cypriots living in the northern part of the island were made; transportation for
patients in the northern part to hospitals in the southern part was arranged
231 times; and 24 visits to prisoners by family members living on the other side
were arranged.
23. In recent years, the Secretary-General has referred in successive reports
to the desirability of having the two sides cooperate more directly in the
humanitarian field, instead of relying on UNFICYP to serve as go-between. Some
modest progress has been registered with the establishment in July 1993 of an
UNFICYP humanitarian exchange point at the Ledra Palace Hotel in Nicosia.
Money, pension cheques, medicines and requests for foreign visas are exchanged
directly there by the two sides, bringing to an end UNFICYP’s former practice of
delivering such items across the buffer zone. This positive development has
both reduced the demands on UNFICYP during a period of manpower constraints and
improved intercommunal communications.
24. From the foregoing, it is clear that the mandate given to UNFICYP by the
Security Council has remained the same since the last comprehensive review of
UNFICYP was undertaken in November 1990, as essentially have the functions of
the Force deriving from that mandate.
/...

S/26777
English
Page 7

B.

Strength, organization and deployment of the Force
1.

Strength and organization

25. The operational elements of UNFICYP comprise a headquarters, a Military
Police company, an aviation flight capacity and three battalions, each
responsible for a sector of the buffer zone. The three battalions, deployed
from west to east, are contributed by Argentina, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and Austria. This deployment is shown on the
accompanying map. A military camp command unit is expected to be deployed by
January 1994 to give the necessary military and administrative support to the
United Nations protected area where UNFICYP headquarters is located. In
addition, a United Nations international civilian staff is responsible for
various functions at UNFICYP headquarters and, following the departure of the
United Kingdom Support Regiment, for Force-wide support functions. Finally,
locally employed personnel work at UNFICYP headquarters, sector headquarters and
company camps.
26.

The table below shows UNFICYP’s strength on 15 November 1993:

Military personnel
Argentina

Austria

HQ UNFICYP
Infantry battalion
Military police element

5
364
6

375

HQ UNFICYP
Infantry battalion, UNAB
Military observers
Military police element

6
336
4
8

354

Canada

HQ UNFICYP

6

6

Denmark

HQ UNFICYP

1

1

Finland

HQ UNFICYP

1

1

Hungary

Military observers

4

4

Ireland

HQ UNFICYP
Military observers
Military police element

6
4
2

12

HQ UNFICYP
Army aviation flight
Military police element
Infantry battalion
Supply detachment

9
19
4
377
6

415

United Kingdom
of Great Britain
and Northern
Ireland

Total military

1 168

/...

S/26777
English
Page 8

Civilian Police personnel
Australia

20

Ireland

15
Total Civilian Police a/
Total UNFICYP

35
1 203

________________________
a/

Two CIVPOL to be employed in UNFICYP headquarters.

This strength of 1,203 is 120 less than the recently authorized strength for
UNFICYP of 1,323. 3/ The shortfall is composed of personnel for an armoured car
squadron that has yet to be formed, 19 members of the Camp Command Unit, which
will replace elements of the former Support Regiment, 4 Canadian military
policemen due to arrive in January 1994 and a reduction of 3 civilian police
posts. The current total of 1,203 compares with 2,132 at the end of 1990 and
with 2,078 at the end of November 1992.
27. UNFICYP deploys its on-line force in observation posts and mobile foot and
vehicle patrols between observation posts, particularly where the posts are not
in view of each other. The Force Reserve of 55 personnel is drawn from the
3 line units and is permanently based in the United Nations protected area. It
will have six Mowag armoured personnel carriers (APCs), provided by Argentina.
The Argentinian and Austrian battalions provide two further platoons each, one
ready to move at two hours notice and one at six hours notice. The British
battalion provides one platoon only, ready to move at 2 hours notice. In terms
of mobility and readiness, this does not compare favourably with the Force
Reserve available in December 1990. That consisted of the armoured Ferret Scout
Car Squadron of over 100 men and 5 platoons each ready to move at 2 hours
notice. The two UNCIVPOL contingents provide support to all the three sectors.
28. These forces are underpinned by support elements within each contingent and
by the civilian administration that has assumed responsibility for second-line
support for the Force following withdrawal of the United Kingdom Support
Regiment. The logistic support for the Force consists of a Logistic and
Personnel Branch at headquarters with nine military personnel who, in
conjunction with the civilian administration, are responsible for coordinating
and consolidating Force-wide requirements for goods, services and equipment.
The civilianized support establishment has replaced the following elements of
the former Support Regiment: engineer detachment, signals squadron, transport
squadron, electrical and mechanical workshops and the Officers’ Mess. Those
elements that serviced UNFICYP Headquarters will be reformed as a Camp Command.
29. The long-standing cost-sharing arrangements between the United Nations and
the United Kingdom have come to an end. The volume of logistic support
available through the United Kingdom Sovereign Base Areas in accordance with the
previous United Kingdom/United Nations memorandum of understanding, has been
scaled down. These developments have resulted in a considerable increase in the
/...

S/26777
English
Page 9

civilian administration’s procurement workload and the Mission is now
introducing the United Nations standardized procurement software package to
streamline procedures and minimize the number of additional staff required. Of
particular concern is the maintenance of the patrol track in the buffer zone,
the upkeep and the Force, the resupply of observation posts and the safety of
the troops using the track, formerly carried out by the British Royal Engineers.
Alternative methods of maintaining the track are being considered.
30. The Force Commander is assisted, as is usual in peace-keeping operations,
by a senior adviser and a spokesman, who advise him respectively on policies and
actions of a political nature relating to the responsibilities of the Force and
on questions concerning relations with the press. Since the discontinuation of
the post of military press and information officer, the spokesman serves as the
sole focus for the Force’s contact with the media and also performs workinglevel political tasks formerly carried out by the holder of a post of political
affairs officer, which was discontinued. The services of both the senior
adviser and the spokesman are shared with the Secretary-General’s Deputy Special
Representative, who leads in Cyprus the Secretary-General’s mission of good
offices.

2.

Consequences of the reduction in the Force’s strength

31. In the past 12 months, the Force has undergone dramatic reductions in
strength. Its structure and deployment have similarly undergone important
changes, as has the composition of its national contingents.
32. In my report of 30 March 1993 (S/25492), I recalled that my predecessor and
I had predicted that, unless the Security Council took the decision to convert
the financing of UNFICYP to the system that had been standard for all
peace-keeping operations established since 1973, the financial burden that
troop-contributing countries were being asked to bear would eventually lead to
the collapse of the Force. The past six-month period had seen the withdrawal of
the full Danish battalion, 198 United Kingdom personnel, 63 from Austria and
61 from Canada. UNFICYP’s strength had fallen from 2,141 in May 1992 to 1,508
in March 1993. These reductions had, in the view of the Force Commander,
compromised the ability of UNFICYP to carry out its mandate. I had, none the
less, instructed him to absorb as best he could their effects and to use his
best endeavours to maintain effective control of the buffer zone and carry out
UNFICYP’s humanitarian functions.
33. There was the prospect of further withdrawals: (a) by mid-1993 the entire
Canadian battalion (which would require that the two remaining battalions from
Austria and the United Kingdom be reorganized in two sectors); (b) by the end of
1993, 176 personnel of the United Kingdom Support Regiment; (c) the 18 personnel
of the Swedish Civilian Police; and (d) the reduction of the Finnish Contingent
from 7 personnel to 1. The Council was advised that, unless the situation was
redressed, UNFICYP would cease to be viable.
34. In these circumstances, I underlined the need for UNFICYP to retain three
line sectors/battalions if the Force was to have the capacity to carry out its
mandate. I also shared the Force Commander’s assessment that UNFICYP needed the
capability of an armoured unit in situations of tension to show force when
/...

S/26777
English
Page 10

required and to be able to use an armoured reserve for reconnaissance, crowd
control or personnel rescue.
35. There was, however, no hope of attracting a new major troop contributor to
the Force unless the system of voluntary financing of UNFICYP was changed to a
more equitable arrangement and the Council accepted funding on the basis of
assessed contributions. I stressed to the Council that the real question before
it was whether to take the necessary decision with regard to the financing of
the Force or to allow UNFICYP to dissolve into a token presence.
36. In mid-June 1993, the Canadian battalion withdrew as scheduled.
Consequently, the strength of the Force dipped temporarily to approximately
1,000. The Force Commander implemented an emergency contingency plan,
reorganizing the Force temporarily into two sectors, covered by the Austrian and
United Kingdom battalions. However, this did not last long. By its resolution
831 (1993) of 27 May 1993, the Security Council supported a system of financing
the Force on the basis of a mixture of assessed and firmly pledged voluntary
contributions. I welcomed that decision, which was followed by an offer by the
Government of Argentina of a line battalion. The Force deployment was thus
restored, as of 8 October 1993, to three line sectors/battalions, i.e., the
restructured deployment recommended in my report of 30 March 1993 and endorsed
in Security Council resolution 831 (1993). With the arrival of 12 military
observers, the Force’s overall strength has stabilized at 1,203.
37. While the three-sector structure of UNFICYP has been maintained, the
strength of the Force has been reduced by 929 personnel, or 43.6 per cent, since
December 1990. There has been a similar decline in the number of personnel
making up the line battalions.

Number of military personnel making up line battalions
Dec. 1990

Nov. 1993

Actual decline

% decline

1 569

1 077

492

31.4

As a consequence, the number of observation posts from which 24-hour observation
is conducted has fallen in the same period from 52 to 21. The departure of the
United Kingdom’s Ferret Scout Car Squadron of 28 armoured reconnaissance
vehicles has been only partially mitigated by the recent deployment of
9 Argentinian APCs. The capacity of the Force to carry out its mandated
functions has therefore diminished.
38. To offset this situation, the Force Commander has taken a number of steps.
Firstly, he has reorganized the Force so that the "teeth to tail" ratio or
line/support ratio has improved. In December 1990 the line battalions comprised
73.5 per cent of the strength of the Force; the comparable figure now is
89.5 per cent. Secondly, he has deployed more of the manpower available in the
battalions onto the line. A greater proportion of personnel live there than in
the past. Thus, while many observation posts no longer have 24-hour
observation, a good number of these have become places of accommodation where
there is always an UNFICYP presence. Thirdly, there is a greater reliance than
/...

S/26777
English
Page 11

before on mobile patrolling between fixed observation posts. Fourthly, even
though only a small number of the Force’s personnel had been previously employed
in humanitarian tasks, the number of hours involved has been reduced
considerably, especially through the establishment of the humanitarian exchange
point at the Ledra Palace Hotel.

C.

The Secretary-General’s mission of good offices in Cyprus

1.

Mandate and organization of the mission of good offices

39. Good offices functions of the Secretary-General have been carried out in
respect of Cyprus since 1964. Since 1966, the Secretary-General’s special
representatives have been engaged in promoting an agreed overall settlement.
After the events of 1974, the Security Council, in its resolution 367 (1975) of
12 March 1975, requested the Secretary-General to undertake a new mission of
good offices "and to that end to convene the parties under new agreed procedures
and place himself personally at their disposal, so that the resumption, the
intensification and the progress of comprehensive negotiations, carried out in a
reciprocal spirit of understanding and of moderation under his personal auspices
and with his direction as appropriate, might thereby be facilitated". Since
then, the Secretary-General has, in connection with the extension of the mandate
of UNFICYP, reaffirmed the new mission of good offices referred to in resolution
367 (1975).
40. Also since that time and particularly in the past three years, the Security
Council has given detailed guidelines to the Secretary-General on the
implementation of his mission of good offices. I refer specifically to
resolutions 649 (1990), 716 (1991), 750 (1992), 774 (1992) and 789 (1992) as
well as the numerous presidential statements and letters issued during the same
period.
41. In the past two years, there has been an intensification of efforts to
achieve an overall settlement. The process has yielded a "set of ideas" for an
overall framework agreement, endorsed by the Security Council as the basis for
reaching a settlement but not yet accepted by both sides and an important
package of confidence-building measures, which also has won the support of the
Council, but has not yet received the backing of both sides. During this
period, the Council has repeatedly declared the status quo on the island to be
unacceptable. It has also insisted on a positive approach by both sides and
has, therefore, requested the Secretary-General to accelerate and intensify the
negotiating process.
42. From 1964 to 1993 the Secretary-General has been represented in Cyprus by a
resident Special Representative or Acting Special Representative. In support of
the intensified effort demanded by the Security Council, I decided earlier this
year to appoint a senior international political figure to serve as my Special
Representative for Cyprus, but on a non-resident basis. On 21 May 1993, I
appointed Mr. Joe Clark, the former Prime Minister of Canada, as my Special
Representative. In a letter of 24 May 1993 (S/25833), the President of the
Security Council stated that the Council welcomed that decision. In order to
ensure a capacity for continuous contact and negotiation at the highest levels
with the two sides on the island and a source of advice to me and to the Special
/...

S/26777
English
Page 12

Representative in respect of significant developments concerning the good
offices mission, I appointed Mr. Gustave Feissel as Deputy Special
Representative, resident in Cyprus at the level of Assistant Secretary-General.
The Deputy Special Representative is the only United Nations official in the
field engaged full-time in the mission of good offices.

2.

Recent developments in the mission of good offices

43. Soon after I assumed the office of Secretary-General I contacted the
leaders of the two communities. There followed intensive and lengthy meetings
at Headquarters during 1992. On 15 July 1992, I presented to each of the two
leaders the text of the set of ideas for an overall framework agreement,
including suggested territorial adjustments reflected in a map. The set of
ideas had evolved on the basis of discussions with the two sides and with Turkey
over the preceding two years. Regrettably, the extensive meetings of 1992 were
not successful, as I reported in full to the Council (S/24830). In its
resolution 789 (1992) of 25 November 1992, the Council, inter alia, called upon
the Turkish Cypriot side to adopt positions consistent with the set of ideas.
44. Also in my report of 19 November 1992 (S/24830) I remarked upon the deep
crisis of confidence between the two sides. I suggested that the prospects for
progress could be greatly enhanced if a number of confidence-building measures
were adopted by the two sides. The purpose of such measures, taken in good
faith by both sides, would be to facilitate accord on an overall framework
agreement on the basis of the entire set of ideas endorsed earlier by the
Security Council. The Security Council in its resolution 789 (1992) endorsed
that approach. Both sides, as well as Greece and Turkey, welcomed this emphasis
on confidence-building.
45. Following intensive preparatory work in Nicosia in April/May 1993 by my
Deputy Special Representative, direct meetings with the two leaders were held in
late May 1993 at United Nations Headquarters under my auspices and with the
participation of the recently appointed Special Representative, Mr. Clark.
Discussion in these meetings focused on a package of confidence-building
measures, including, in particular, provisions for (a) the reopening, under
United Nations administration, of the fenced area of Varosha as a centre for
bicommunal contact and trade and (b) the reopening of Nicosia International
Airport, under United Nations administration in cooperation with the
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), for unhindered traffic in
passengers and cargo to and from each side. Once again, progress was not
forthcoming, as discussed in my report of 1 July 1993 (S/26026). In a letter
dated 7 July 1993 (S/26050), the President of the Security Council wrote that
the Council shared my assessment that the implementation of the package would
not only significantly benefit both communities but would also have a dramatic
impact in overcoming mistrust and in facilitating an overall settlement of the
Cyprus problem. They called on both parties to cooperate fully without further
delay in reaching a prompt agreement on the package. Again, on 14 September,
after my Special Representative and Deputy Special Representative had visited
Cyprus, Greece and Turkey, I reported to the Council that progress on the
Varosha/Nicosia International Airport package of confidence-building measures
had not yet been achieved, despite the fact that the package held real and
proportionate benefits for both sides. In a letter dated 20 September 1993
/...

S/26777
English
Page 13

(S/26475), the President of the Security Council stated, inter alia, that the
Council had noted with concern that the Turkish Cypriot side had not yet shown
the necessary goodwill and cooperation required to achieve an agreement. The
Council members agreed that I could not continue my effort indefinitely; they
called on the Turkish Cypriot side to give its active support to the effort;
they recognized also the important role that Turkey could play in this effort;
and they supported my proposals to send two technical teams to Cyprus to analyse
the implications of the package.
46. A team of international economic experts was organized with the assistance
of the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
comprising six experts with extensive experience related to macro- and
microeconomic issues, including development policies, fiscal and financial
matters, industrial development, free trade zones, tourism planning, development
marketing and civil aviation development. Their mandate was to examine the
Varosha/Nicosia International Airport package of confidence-building measures so
that its benefits to both communities would be fully understood, and to consider
ways of ensuring the effective implementation of the proposals set out in the
package. During its field work in Cyprus from 14 October to 11 November, the
team held extensive discussions with a wide range of political, business, trade
union, academic and other interests on both sides and was well received by all.
47. A second team of experts, composed of four civil aviation experts and
assembled with the assistance of UNDP and ICAO was mandated to examine the
current condition of Nicosia International Airport and to identify all
requirements for making it operational. The team began three weeks of field
work in Cyprus on 31 October.
48. I have been advised by the team of international economic experts that
their field work in Cyprus has confirmed that the package holds significant and
proportionate benefits for both sides. I expect to receive the full reports of
the two teams by the middle of December. The results of the teams’ work will
then be discussed with all concerned and will be made public so that the
ramifications and benefits of the package will be fully understood. If there is
a willingness on both sides to move forward with this mutually beneficial
package, the work of the teams ought to facilitate early agreement on it. The
danger, however, is that the necessary political will to move forward will not
be forthcoming.
49. It is difficult to envisage forward movement before the elections to be
held by the Turkish Cypriot side on 12 December 1993. The Government of Turkey
has stated at the highest level, both in private and in public, that there
should be speedy developments in the search for a solution to the Cyprus problem
once those elections have taken place and has also repeatedly stated at the
highest level its support for the Varosha/Nicosia International Airport package
of confidence-building measures. Once the elections in the Turkish Cypriot
community have been completed, I shall be in touch with the Governments of
Turkey and Greece as well as with the two sides in Cyprus. It would be my
intention to report to the Security Council in February 1994 on the outcome of
those contacts.

/...

S/26777
English
Page 14

D.

Cost and financing of the Force

50. In paragraph 6 of its resolution 186 (1964), the Security Council
recommended that the costs of UNFICYP should be met by the Governments providing
contingents, by the Government of Cyprus in accordance with article 19 of the
Status-of-Forces Agreement 4/ and by voluntary contributions to UNFICYP. Under
agreements made prior to 15 June 1993, UNFICYP troop contributors individually
agreed to absorb the costs that would be incurred by them if their contingents
were serving at home (i.e., regular pay and allowances and normal expenses for
matériel). However, the cost to the United Nations for maintaining UNFICYP
included amounts to reimburse troop-contributing Governments (except the United
Kingdom) for certain of the expenses they incurred by providing troops to the
Force. The troop-contributing Governments sought reimbursement for these extra
and extraordinary costs from the United Nations. The composition of the claims
for extra and extraordinary costs differed among the troop-contributing
Governments and included a variety of unstandardized costs.
51. From March 1964 until 15 June 1993, 79 countries, including a number which
have contributed troops to the Force, have provided voluntary financial support
to UNFICYP totalling some $490.2 million in cash contributions ($474.5 million)
and pledges ($15.7 million) (see annex II).
52. For lack of sufficient voluntary contributions to UNFICYP, the latest
reimbursement to the troop-contributing Governments for extra and extraordinary
costs was made in June 1992 and covered claims for the six-month period ending
December 1981. The consistent shortfalls in meeting the costs of UNFICYP
resulted in the UNFICYP account being in arrears by over $200 million. Mindful
of this situation, the General Assembly decided in its resolution 47/236 of
14 September 1993 that the costs of the Force for the period beginning
16 June 1993 not covered by voluntary contributions should be treated as
expenses of the Organization to be borne by Member States in accordance with
Article 17 of the Charter of the United Nations and also to maintain as separate
the account established prior to 16 June 1993 for UNFICYP. The General Assembly
invited Member States to make voluntary contributions to that account and
requested that I intensify my efforts in appealing for voluntary contributions
to the account. Therefore, on 12 November 1993, I addressed a special appeal to
all States, urging them to contribute generously for this purpose.
53. On 15 April 1993 the Government of Cyprus in a letter to the
Secretary-General (S/25647, annex) conveyed an offer to contribute, on a
continuing basis, a voluntary contribution equal to one third of the annual cost
of UNFICYP. In a subsequent letter dated 10 May 1993, the Government of Cyprus
also indicated that its voluntary contribution for the 12-month period beginning
16 June 1993 would be increased to $18.5 million. This voluntary contribution
was predicated on the restructuring of the Force in accordance with my preferred
option of six line companies as described in paragraphs 16 to 19 of my report of
30 March 1993 (S/25492).
54. The voluntary contribution promised by the Government of Cyprus is in
addition to and quite separate from that Government’s obligations under
article 19 of the Status-of-Forces Agreement whereby the Government of Cyprus
has undertaken to provide without cost to the Force such areas for headquarters,

/...

S/26777
English
Page 15

camps or other premises as may be necessary for the accommodation and the
fulfilment of the functions of the Force.
55. On 7 May 1993, the Government of Greece, in a letter to the
Secretary-General, indicated its intention to contribute voluntarily
$6.5 million on an annual basis to the cost of the Force, provided that the
Security Council decided to convert UNFICYP’s system of financing to assessed
contributions and that the structure and the strength of the Force, i.e. at
least six companies, remained unchanged. The Government of Greece added that it
might wish to reconsider the annual amount of $6.5 million, should the Security
Council decide to change the structure and strength of the Force.
56. As a consequence of the foregoing, the costs of the Force have since
16 June 1993 been financed on a basis combining (a) voluntary contributions and
(b) contributions assessed on the entire membership of the Organization. In
adopting resolution 831 (1993) on 27 May 1993, the Security Council stressed the
importance of the continuation of voluntary contributions to UNFICYP and called
for maximum voluntary contributions in the future.
57. Taking into account the aforementioned undertakings given by the
Governments of Cyprus and Greece, the General Assembly on 14 September 1993
appropriated $8,771,000 ($8,443,000 net) for the mandate period
16 June-15 December 1993. The operating costs of the Force for the current
mandate period are, therefore, being met as follows:
$
Voluntary contributions

12 500 000

Assessed contributions

8 771 000

Total

21 271 000

58. The introduction of a system of financing the Force that combines voluntary
and assessed contributions has included for the first time in the UNFICYP budget
such standard payments as troop reimbursement costs, welfare (recreational
leave) and daily allowance for military contingents plus mission subsistence
allowance, travel costs and clothing allowance in respect of military observers
and civilian police. Existing agreements between the United Nations and
Governments contributing troops to UNFICYP have been changed or are under review
in order to conform to the new financing methodology of UNFICYP. Moreover, the
costs of the United Kingdom Contingent, which heretofore had not been charged to
the United Nations, now fall to the Organization. These additional costs, which
were not previously a component of the UNFICYP budget, have contributed to an
increase in the Force’s operating costs for the current mandate period as
compared to previous mandates, despite the reduction in the size of the Force.
(See annex I for a comparison of costs from 1985 to 1993.) However, as a result
of the new funding arrangements, a significant portion of these additional costs
is absorbed by the voluntary contributions referred to above; the balance
($8,771,000) to be shared among all Member States is less than the operating
costs for any 6-month period during the past 10 years.

/...

S/26777
English
Page 16

II.
A.

DETAILED OPERATIONS DURING THE CURRENT MANDATE PERIOD

Maintenance of the cease-fire and the military status quo

59. In May 1992 I reported that UNFICYP had agreed to permit the National Guard
to clear mines from an area of the buffer zone, on the understanding that the
land would be designated for farming, and that, despite strong protests from
UNFICYP, the National Guard had subsequently relaid the minefield (see S/24050).
I also reported that the Government of Cyprus had agreed to remove the mines in
question. During the period under review, the Government’s commitment in this
regard has still not been fulfilled.
60. During the period under review, the number of cease-fire violations again
decreased in comparison with the previous reporting periods, and both sides
showed considerable restraint and discipline. There continued to be isolated
incidents where shots were thought to have been fired deliberately and, during
the past six months, 16 separate incidents of weapons being cocked and pointed
were reported. At the same time, the military forces on both sides continued to
cooperate with all UNFICYP’S investigations, thereby ensuring that tension
remained at a low level.
61. The 1989 agreement concerning the unmanning of certain positions in Nicosia
(see para 15. above) continued to hold, with only minor violations by both sides
in the unmanned areas. I requested the Force Commander to continue discussions
to extend the agreement to all areas of the buffer zone where the troops of both
sides remain in close proximity to each other. However, no progress has been
achieved. More recently, the extension of the unmanning agreement has been
included in the package of confidence-building measures. I strongly urge both
sides to cooperate fully in the effort to reduce tension by unmanning specific
areas where their military forces are in close proximity.
62. During the period under review, there was a decrease in the number of
violations by military aircraft, with 10 overflights of the buffer zone by
Turkish Forces aircraft and 2 by National Guard aircraft. At the same time,
there was a heavy increase in the number of air violations by other aircraft in
the early part of the mandate period. Following a meeting in August 1993 with
those responsible for aviation safety in the north, there have been only a few
overflights of the buffer zone by civilian aircraft from the north. For the
mandate period overall, there were 74 civilian overflights from the north, with
5 overflights from the south by the Cyprus Police Airwing. Civilian or military
aircraft from other countries accounted for a further 13 overflights. These
violations continue to create tension and increase the risk of serious
incidents. All overflights were protested.
63. The National Guard’s programme to improve its defensive positions all along
its cease-fire line continued during this period and occasionally led to an
increase in tension. The amount of construction was somewhat less than in
previous reporting periods, and in some cases minor construction was stopped
when protested by UNFICYP.
64. There were no incidents in the fenced area of Varosha. UNFICYP continued
to monitor the area closely to ensure that the status quo was maintained.
However, UNFICYP’S freedom of movement within the area continued to be
/...

S/26777
English
Page 17

restricted. As stated in previous reports to the Security Council, the United
Nations considers the Government of Turkey responsible for maintaining the
status quo in the fenced area of Varosha (see S/18880, para. 28), as reiterated
to the Turkish and Turkish Cypriot authorities on numerous occasions. Despite
this clear position on the part of the United Nations, the Government of Turkey
has recently sought unilaterally to change long-standing procedures for access
to the fenced area of Varosha for UNFICYP visitors. This is not acceptable, and
I am certain that the Council will join me in calling on the Government of
Turkey to cooperate with UNFICYP on the basis of long-standing procedures.
65. Despite UNFICYP’S continued representations, Greek Cypriot tourist and
fishing boats continued to violate the seaward extensions of the cease-fire
lines known as the maritime security lines, which were established by UNFICYP as
a practical measure for security and safety purposes in the vicinity of Kokkina
and Famagusta. 5/ These violations raise tensions and are potentially dangerous
for the individuals concerned. I therefore urge restraint by all parties and
request that the authorities assist UNFICYP in supporting this measure.
66. As noted in my report of 9 June 1993 (S/25912, para. 20), threats to safety
and security arose as a result of hunting by Greek Cypriots in certain areas of
the buffer zone during the 1992 hunting season. Although the Government
declared a ban on such hunting in 1992, armed and camouflaged poachers continued
to enter the buffer zone causing UNFICYP to deploy additional military and
police personnel to maintain the integrity of the buffer zone. I expect the
Government to cooperate in the enforcement of the ban during the 1993 hunting
season.
67. During the review period, several Greek Cypriot demonstrations and rallies
took place. Although most demonstrations were peaceful, orderly and
well-policed by the Cypriot police, this fact could not have been known in
advance. In each case, UNFICYP deployed considerable manpower as a contingency.
However, one demonstration, on 25 July, was marked by serious violence. A large
number of Greek Cypriot motorcyclists circumvented UNFICYP-manned road blocks
and entered the buffer zone at Akaki and Mammari approaching the Turkish Forces
cease-fire line and prompting the Turkish Forces to overman their positions and
to cock their weapons. The demonstrators then drove to Nicosia and confronted
UNFICYP at the Ledra Crossing, where they were extremely belligerent, tore down
the UNFICYP barriers by using vehicles equipped with towing chains and again
entered the buffer zone. Six members of the Australian Civilian Police were
injured. The motorcyclists finished at Dherinia where they again entered the
buffer zone and approached the Turkish Forces cease-fire line. The
demonstrators threw rocks and Molotov cocktails towards the Turkish Forces and
towards the UNFICYP soldiers. Six members of the Austrian Contingent were
injured and nine United Nations vehicles were damaged. Had these events not
been met by a conscientious response on the part of UNFICYP and restraint by the
Turkish Forces, there could have been serious consequences. Strong protests
over this demonstration were made at the political and military levels. The
Government expressed its regret and assured UNFICYP that it would take
appropriate measures so that such incidents did not recur.
68. A further violent demonstration, attended by some 5,000 youths who had left
their schools to participate, occurred at the Ledra Palace Hotel on
21 October 1993 at the time of the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting.
/...

S/26777
English
Page 18

The buffer zone was violated and four members of the United Kingdom Contingent
and one member of the Australian Civilian Police sustained injuries trying to
restrain the demonstrators.
69. Another demonstration of some 2,000 participants at Astromeritis on
17 October 1993 was largely peaceful. Some demonstrators, however, penetrated
the buffer zone and a number of these subsequently stated to UNFICYP that they
had been incited to do so by some of the organizers of the event.
70. I share the view of the Force Commander that neither the Security Council
nor the troop-contributing Governments should be expected to accept that
violations of the buffer zone or attacks on UNFICYP personnel are not prevented
by the Cyprus Police.
71. Each side again expressed its concern over the strength of the military
forces on the other side. I also remain very concerned about the strength and
development of the military forces on both sides. This creates tension and
risks of serious incidents. As recommended in my report of 19 November 1992
(S/24830, para. 63), and endorsed by the Security Council in its resolution
789 (1992), the Turkish Forces on the island should be reduced to their 1982
level and this should be reciprocated by a suspension of weapons acquisition
programmes on the Greek Cypriot side.
72. In its resolution 839 (1993) of 11 June 1993, the Security Council mandated
the Secretary-General to negotiate arrangements whereby the two sides would
prohibit (a) along the cease-fire lines live ammunition or weapons other than
those that are hand-held and (b) firing of weapons within sight or hearing of
the buffer zone. UNFICYP has taken up this operational matter with the military
commanders on both sides, asking each of them to designate a senior officer to
serve as point of contact with UNFICYP in this regard. Unfortunately, the
response from the Commander of the Turkish Forces has been that resolution
839 (1993), like all other resolutions related to Cyprus and adopted by the
United Nations Security Council, concerns "political matters". In the Turkish
Forces Commander’s view, it would be necessary for civilian authorities in the
north and the Government of Cyprus both to agree on the terms of resolution
839 (1993) and on how it should be implemented. The Turkish Forces Commander
declined, therefore, to pursue the matter further and instead directed UNFICYP
to the authorities in the northern part of the island. UNFICYP has told the
Turkish Forces that this position is not acceptable. The Commander of the
National Guard, on the other hand, has nominated his Chief of Staff as UNFICYP’s
interlocutor in the matter.

B.

Restoration of normal conditions and humanitarian functions

73. UNFICYP has for many years worked with authorities and agencies on both
sides to facilitate a wide spectrum of humanitarian activities. It has
sponsored bicommunal contacts and encouraged authorities to cooperate in
restoring normal conditions for members of both communities. During the
reporting period there has been some significant progress in persuading both
sides, despite their initial reservations, to cooperate more closely in
connection with essential humanitarian services and in promoting
people-to-people contact. The UNFICYP exchange point was established in
/...

S/26777
English
Page 19

July 1993 at the Ledra Palace Hotel in the buffer zone.
conducted through the exchange point to date are:

The activities

(a)

The provision of medicines to be transported from south to north;

(b)

The transfer of mail in each direction;

(c) The transmission of Cyprus Government pension and welfare cheques to
Turkish Cypriot recipients in the north and related processing;
(d)

Emergency medical evacuations and hospital runs, north to south;

(e) Facilitation of the processing by embassies accredited to the
Government of Cyprus of visa applications from applicants in the north.
The exchange point has potential for the future in fostering direct contact and
cooperation between the two communities.
74. The number of Greek Cypriots in the northern part of the island is now 544,
of whom 541 live in the Karpas peninsula and the remaining 3 in Kyrenia. The
average age of these Greek Cypriots is now 66. UNFICYP continued to provide
them with humanitarian support, delivering foodstuffs and other supplies
provided by the Government of Cyprus and the Cyprus Red Cross.
75. Over the past four years, Turkish Cypriot authorities have insisted on
vetting school texts destined for Greek Cypriot schools in the Karpas, claiming
that they contained material considered inaccurate and offensive to the Turkish
Cypriots. Delivery of such books has thus been delayed and the schooling of the
children concerned adversely affected.
76. UNFICYP continued to interview Greek Cypriots who applied for permanent
transfer to the southern part of the island in order to verify that the transfer
was voluntary. Four such transfers took place during the reporting period, and
three Turkish Cypriots permanently transferred from south to north. UNFICYP
also facilitated 476 visits by Greek Cypriots from the Karpas to the southern
part of the island.
77. UNFICYP continued periodic visits to Turkish Cypriots living in the
southern part of the island and assisted in arranging family reunion visits for
Turkish Cypriots at the Ledra Palace Hotel. Based on statistical evidence, it
is apparent that Turkish Cypriot authorities gave preference to requests that
originated in the north for family meetings and temporary transfers.
78. The number of Maronites living in the northern part of the island is now
207. UNFICYP continued to help them to contact Maronites living elsewhere on
the island and delivered to them foodstuffs and other supplies provided by the
Cyprus Government.
79. The mixed village of Pyla, located in the United Nations buffer zone,
remained a matter of concern for UNFICYP during the reporting period. The
following issues in Pyla have given rise to intercommunal differences:

/...

S/26777
English
Page 20

(a) At present a Greek Cypriot sports complex is under construction in
Pyla on a site immediately adjacent to the Turkish Cypriot school on formerly
public land. It is viewed as insensitive and provocative to the Turkish Cypriot
community and has been the subject of much complaint from that quarter. It is
extremely regrettable that, in a village where both communities live locally in
harmony, they do not share in the use and management of such sports and
community facilities. This situation should be remedied;
(b) The allocation of Hali land in Pyla is a sensitive issue. Hali land
is public land and is owned by the State. The State may grant public land (i.e.
transfer ownership) to individuals or local communities upon application by
them. Greek Cypriots have received allocations of Hali land over the years.
The Turkish Cypriots of Pyla have yet to benefit and are awaiting a decision on
their application for the allocation of a plot of Hali land on the plateau above
Pyla village for a football field. In early November, the Government announced
that it had decided to grant the Hali land for the football field to the Turkish
Cypriot community. However, a number of applications from individual Turkish
Cypriots for allocation of plots of public land, some submitted as long as two
or three years ago, are still pending. A more equitable response from the
Government to such applications is long overdue;
(c) Another provocation to the Turkish Cypriot community is the erection
on 22 September 1993 of a very large Greek Cypriot sign above the Greek Cypriot
coffee shop in the village square. This sign with its inscription displaying
the Star of Vergina and the Greek flag clearly violates the status quo in Pyla
and agreed UNFICYP procedures in respect of flags and emblems. Upon protest by
UNFICYP, the Greek Cypriot side agreed to remove this sign. However, it has
remained in place to date.
80. The Cyprus police control point on the Larnaca-Pyla road, south of the
buffer zone, continued to block the flow of tourists and other visitors to Pyla,
thus severely disrupting the village’s economy. UNFICYP has on a continuing
basis requested that this obstacle be removed.
81. UNFICYP pursued discussions with the two sides in order to expand direct
telephone communications between Turkish Cypriot residents of Pyla and the
north. For their part, Turkish Cypriot authorities had long before promised to
facilitate at an early date telephone services to Greek Cypriots living in the
Karpas and to Maronites living in the Kormakiti area. But that promise has not
materialized. Neither side has been cooperative on this subject. UNFICYP
continues to promote these important humanitarian projects.
82. UNFICYP has observed that political figures of both communities outside
Pyla use Pyla for negative political purposes instead of fostering the already
manifest capacity of the two communities that live there to exist together in a
considerable measure of harmony. The result is not in the interests of the
inhabitants of Pyla, nor is it in the interests of the two communities at large.
I call on both sides not to undermine the desire in both communities in the
village to be cooperative and positive in their dealings with one another and in
resolving in a harmonious manner issues of mutual concern.
83. The attitude of the Turkish Cypriot authorities to contacts between Turkish
Cypriots and Greek Cypriots is extremely restrictive. Freedom of movement is
/...

S/26777
English
Page 21

frequently denied by them to Turkish Cypriots wishing to go to the Ledra Palace
Hotel for contact with Greek Cypriots, and is granted to only a very few Turkish
Cypriots wishing to cross to the southern part of the island for that purpose,
and then only after much procrastination.
84. Once again, during the current mandate period, the Government of Cyprus has
expressed to the United Nations its concern about continued changing of
geographical and place names in the northern part of the island. The Government
also stated that, in violation of the 1954 Hague Convention, the monastery of
Apostolos Varnavas (Saint Barnabas) had been turned into a museum of antiquities
displaying exhibits from approved private collections of
Messrs. D. Hadjiprodromou and M. Zavos and from the stores of the Salamis
archaeological site. Also, the Government stated that the church at the village
of Livera had been turned into a mosque. These concerns were brought to the
attention of the Turkish Cypriot authorities.
85. Also, during the current mandate period, the Government alleged to UNFICYP
that a Greek Cypriot cemetery at Karavas in the northern part of the island had
been desecrated. This matter was brought to the attention of the Turkish
Cypriot authorities, who stated that the recent deterioration was due to neglect
rather than vandalism and expressed a concern for the condition of the Turkish
Cypriot cemeteries in the southern part of the island.

C.

Committee on Missing Persons

86. During the period under review the Committee on Missing Persons in Cyprus
held 4 sessions, consisting of a total of 13 meetings. The Committee continued
its discussions on reports by both sides and its investigations in the cases
that have been submitted to it so far.
87. The recent appointment by President Clerides of Mr. Leandros Zachariades as
Commissioner for Humanitarian Affairs should contribute positively to the
Committee’s work.
88. On 4 October 1993, I wrote once again to the leaders on both sides, noting
with regret that since my review of the work of the Committee of 31 May 1992
(S/24050), there had been no improvement. To date, only 210 cases of missing
persons have been submitted by the Greek Cypriot side and only 318 cases on the
Turkish Cypriot side. I underlined to both leaders the need for both
communities to demonstrate urgently their determination to support the work of
the Committee. The international community and the United Nations, which had
endorsed the objectives of the Committee and had funded a major portion of its
work, would not understand if, nine years after it had become operational, the
Committee remained unable to function effectively.
89. I emphasized to both leaders the need for a fresh commitment by both
communities to the humanitarian objectives of the Committee. The communiqué
issued by the Committee, on 11 April 1990, addressing the issues and
difficulties that the Committee has faced, remains a good basis for a new start.
90. I told both leaders that I consider it vital that both communities commit
themselves to the following:
/...

S/26777
English
Page 22

(a) Both sides should submit to the Committee all their cases of missing
persons without further delay. This would, inter alia, enable the Committee to
take into consideration the common denominators linking certain cases or groups
of cases to one another and would also allow the Committee to carry out its work
in a more systematic manner and should help its members to reach a consensus on
the overall criteria for taking decisions;
(b) The Committee should urgently reach a consensus on the criteria for
concluding its investigations, taking into account the considerations in its
communiqué of 11 April 1990.
91. The autonomy of the Committee and of its three members must be respected by
all so that they can do their work without political interference and solely in
the humanitarian interest of the families concerned. Outside interventions of a
political character only undermine their work. The two Cypriot members of the
Committee must receive the necessary support from their respective authorities.
92. In asking both leaders to support the approach set out above, I informed
them that I had asked the Third Member to submit to me in January 1994 a full
report on the situation at that time and that, on the basis of that report, I
would review thoroughly the work of the Committee and evaluate how far it merits
the continued support of the United Nations.

III.

OBSERVATIONS

93. Since December 1990, the strength of UNFICYP has fallen from 2,132 to
1,203, a reduction of 43.6 per cent as the result of decisions by
troop-contributing Governments to withdraw or substantially reduce their
contingents. The Ferret Scout Car Squadron of 28 vehicles has been replaced by
a smaller number of APCs. The Force now covers the cease-fire lines more thinly
than before. Its capacity to react to incidents (on average 90 per month) and
to prevent them from escalating has been affected. At the same time, the
mandate of the Force has remained unchanged, as essentially have the functions
deriving from that mandate.
94. The Force Commander has absorbed the effects of the successive reductions
in the strength of the Force and has used his best endeavours to control the
buffer zone, as well as to carry out UNFICYP’s humanitarian functions. He has
adjusted the organization of the Force by moving a greater proportion of
battalion strengths into the buffer zone, reorganizing the system of observation
posts, relying more heavily on mobile patrolling and beginning a process of
handing over certain UNFICYP humanitarian activities to the two sides.
Consequently, UNFICYP should be able to carry out its tasks, provided that the
military on both sides maintain their present level of restraint and cooperation
with the Force and provided that no major incidents occur.
95. The Security Council in its resolution 831 (1993) of 27 May 1993 asked me
to address the question of possible progressive steps towards an observer force
supported by three or four infantry companies, in line with the contents of
paragraph 12 of my report of 30 March 1993 (S/25492).

/...

S/26777
English
Page 23

96. The question of using large numbers of military observers in UNFICYP was
addressed in a review of the Force carried out in 1990. The Force Commander and
the Secretariat have again looked into this matter. They have concluded that a
number of arguments continue to weigh heavily against the deployment of military
observers.
97. If an unarmed observer mission is to be able to monitor a cease-fire and
control a buffer zone, certain requirements must be fulfilled. There should be
clear agreement between the parties on the delineation of the cease-fire lines
and on rules about what is and is not permitted under the cease-fire. The
cease-fire lines should be sufficiently far apart to reduce the risk of
provocative actions leading to an unintended resumption of hostilities. The
observers should have freedom of movement behind the cease-fire lines and should
enjoy the full cooperation of the parties, including acceptance of their
decisions in disputed cases. Above all, the situation must be one in which
intervention and negotiation by unarmed military observers will suffice to
control any local increase in tension, without a need for the United Nations to
interpose itself physically between the two sides.
98. Those requirements are not at present fulfilled to the necessary extent in
Cyprus. There is no clear agreement between the two sides on the delineation of
all parts of the cease-fire lines or about what is permitted under the
cease-fire. The cease-fire lines are in some places extremely close to each
other. As part of its mandate, UNFICYP encourages the resumption of economic
activity in the buffer zone, but because of the intense distrust between the two
sides, this activity has to be carefully controlled by UNFICYP to ensure that it
does not lead to incidents. These facts require UNFICYP not only to be able to
observe incidents that could lead to a resumption of hostilities but also as a
preventive measure to deploy, very rapidly, armed troops to occupy the ground
between the two sides when an incident threatens to get out of control. I
endorse the conclusion that these considerations rule out the option of turning
UNFICYP into an observer mission.
99. The alternative option of dividing UNFICYP’s functions between infantry and
military observers was also examined. It was asked whether manpower savings
could be made by retaining UNFICYP’s infantry presence in the areas of greatest
tension, especially Nicosia and its suburbs, but relying on United Nations
military observers in at least some of the rural areas where incidents have been
comparatively few. In such areas, the United Nations military observers would
man observation posts and conduct mobile patrols and would call on Force
headquarters to provide reinforcement if needed. This is in fact very close to
what UNFICYP is doing at present. The difference is that the observation posts
are manned by private soldiers and non-commissioned officers, who are able to
deploy an armed patrol as soon as they observe an incident in their vicinity,
whereas military observers would be unarmed and would not have that capacity.
For all of these reasons, I do not recommend this option.
100. UNFICYP has recently been assigned a limited number (12) of military
observers. These officers have been integrated into the existing three sectors
and carry out reconnaissance, liaison and humanitarian tasks. Additionally,
since they are on 1-year assignments while the infantry units are on six- to
eight-month tours, the 12 military observers provide useful continuity from one
line unit to its replacement. The Force Commander believes that in the present
/...

S/26777
English
Page 24

circumstances and with the present configuration of the Force, the existing
number of observers is sufficient to carry out these tasks. I have,
nevertheless, instructed him to keep in mind the possibility of recommending the
deployment of additional military observers if this would permit manpower
savings without impairing the Force’s operational effectiveness.
101. While UNFICYP has successfully kept the peace, the resulting opportunity
has not been used properly by the two sides to reach an overall agreement. It
is often asked whether UNFICYP is not part of the problem in Cyprus, rather than
part of the solution. The ancillary question is how long UNFICYP will remain on
the island. In weighing these questions, the Security Council might take into
account, inter alia, the following considerations:
(a) Each side has its own perspective on the future of UNFICYP. The Greek
Cypriot side perceives that, for as long as the current situation on the island
remains unchanged, it has a vital interest, including for security reasons and
mindful of the demographic changes that have taken place in the northern part of
the island, in seeing UNFICYP maintained at its current or greater strength.
The Turkish Cypriot side often says that it has no great objection to UNFICYP
remaining on the island, but nor does it particularly desire its continued
presence, as security and stability on the island are assured by the large-scale
presence of Turkish forces;
(b) There can be no doubt that, were UNFICYP to be withdrawn, the present
buffer zone, which makes up 3 per cent of the island, would be a vacuum that
each side would want to fill, at least in part. This, combined with the very
close proximity of the cease-fire lines in certain sensitive locations, would
give rise to incidents which, without the presence of UNFICYP, would quickly
escalate out of control and could result in a conflict, with significant
consequences for the security of both communities, and indeed of the region.
This would also eliminate any hope of progress in my mission of good offices;
(c) The status quo, which the Security Council has deemed to be
unacceptable, was established through the use of force and is sustained by
military strength. Such a status quo is not viable in the long term. A
negotiated settlement, mutually acceptable to the two communities in Cyprus, is
needed. The maintenance of tranquillity between the cease-fire lines is a
necessary condition for this to be achieved.
102. There is every justification for demanding that the two sides on the
island, as well as Turkey and Greece, work more effectively for a negotiated
settlement, in return for the great efforts of the international community. The
responsibilities of the two sides include the following elements in particular:
(a) They must show a serious willingness to compromise. A permanent focus
on the past condemns Cyprus to a bleak future. They must have the courage and
imagination to envisage and bring about the better Cyprus that is on offer. No
solution worth having, indeed no agreed solution of any kind, is possible
without a measure of domestic political cost to the leadership on each side;
(b) Both sides must work more effectively to promote tolerance and
reconciliation. Both have been wanting in this respect. Neither teaches the
other’s language in its schools. The Turkish Cypriot authorities actively
/...

S/26777
English
Page 25

discourage and frequently prevent members of their community from having
contacts and dealings with Greek Cypriots. Bicommunal programmes, for example
those of UNHCR and others, have to expend great and unnecessary energy in trying
to overcome this impediment;
(c) On the Greek Cypriot side, there is a widespread reluctance to have
anything to do with the Turkish Cypriot side in current circumstances.
Recently, for example, a small number of private Greek Cypriot participants in a
worthy bicommunal endeavour to foster fresh and practical thinking were made the
victims of a campaign of questioning and vilification in the Greek Cypriot
press, a campaign that can only be described as paranoid and in which a great
proportion of the Greek Cypriot political establishment joined;
(d) Simultaneously, the two sides, despite their professed aim of forging
an agreed settlement and creating a bicommunal and bizonal federation, carry out
an endless propaganda campaign against each other that is incompatible with this
objective. Even school textbooks are not exempt from that campaign. This must
change.
103. I intend to concentrate on the package of confidence-building measures for
the immediate future. The package is a good one and would confer important and
proportionate benefits on both sides. This effort is intended to facilitate an
overall framework agreement based on the set of ideas and is not a substitute
for that agreement.
104. After the elections in the Turkish Cypriot community on 12 December, I
shall resume intensive contacts with both sides and with Turkey. It is expected
that the Government of Turkey’s declared support of the package and its
assurances that speedy developments may be expected will bring positive results.
It is also essential that the Greek Cypriot side demonstrate its readiness to
take the specific steps called for in the package. I propose to report further
to the Security Council on the outcome of my efforts by the end of
February 1994.
105. In the meantime, I would urge once again that as a first step towards the
withdrawal of non-Cypriot troops envisaged in the set of ideas, the Turkish
forces on the island be reduced to their level of 1982 and this be reciprocated
by a suspension of weapons acquisition programmes on the Greek Cypriot side.
106. Furthermore, I call upon the military on both sides to cooperate with
UNFICYP in extending the 1989 unmanning agreement so that it will cover all
areas of the buffer zone where the two sides are in close proximity to each
other. Unmanning these positions would significantly reduce the tensions in the
buffer zone and facilitate UNFICYP’s tasks.
107. I also urge the military authorities on both sides, and especially the
Turkish Forces, in line with Security Council resolution 839 (1993), to enter
into mutual commitments to prohibit along the cease-fire line live ammunition or
weapons other than those which are hand-held and to prohibit also firing of
weapons within sight or hearing of the buffer zone.
108. In the prevailing circumstances, I recommend that the Council extend the
mandate of UNFICYP for a further six-month period until 15 June 1994. In
/...

S/26777
English
Page 26

accordance with established practice, I have undertaken consultations on this
matter with the parties concerned and I will report to the Council on these
consultations as soon as they have been completed.
109. I take this opportunity to express my appreciation to the Governments
contributing troops and civilian police to UNFICYP for the support that they
have given to this important peace-keeping operation of the United Nations. I
also wish to thank the Governments that have made voluntary contributions
towards the financing of the Force and pledges towards its financing in the
future.
110. In conclusion, I wish to pay tribute to my Special Representative,
Mr. Joe Clark, to my Deputy Special Representative, Mr. Gustave Feissel, to the
Force Commander, Major-General Michael Minehane, and to the military and
civilian personnel of UNFICYP, who have continued to discharge with efficiency
and dedication the important and difficult responsibilities entrusted to them by
the Security Council.

Notes
1/
Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-fifth Year,
Supplement for October, November and December 1980, document S/14275 and
note 57.
2/
Ibid., Thirty-fourth Year, Supplement for April, May and June 1979,
document S/13369, para. 12.
3/

See A/47/1001.

4/
See Official Records of the Security Council, Nineteenth Year,
Supplement for January, February and March 1964, document A/5634 and Corr.1,
annex.
5/
See Ibid., Fortieth Year, Supplement for October, November and
December 1985, document S/17657, para. 19.

/...

Annex I

S/26777
English
Page 27

/...

S/26777
English
Page 28

Annex II
Voluntary contributions: cash and pledges from
inception to 15 June 1993
(In United States dollars)
Country

27 March 1964-15 June 1993

Antigua and Barbuda
Australia
Austria
Bahamas
Barbados

500
3 619 879
6 190 000
18 500
8 500

Belgium
Botswana
Brunei Darussalam
Cameroon
Cyprus

6 518 517
500
14 000
28 853
11 256 359

Cambodia
Denmark
France
Finland
Germany
Ghana

600
6 589 328
517 927
1 050 000
35 342 346
76 897

Greece
Guyana
Iceland
India
Indonesia

27 620 311
12 816
196 701
120 000
15 000

Iran (Islamic Republic of)
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy

94 500
50 000
50 000
26 500
11 297 030

Côte d’Ivoire
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kuwait

60 000
36 783
8 040 000
2 000
165 000

Lao People’s Democratic Republic
Lebanon
Liberia
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
Liechtenstein

1 500
5 194
11 821
50 000
2 000

/...

S/26777
English
Page 29

Country
Luxembourg
Malawi
Malaysia
Malta
Mauritania

27 March 1964-15 June 1993
242 246
6 363
17 500
9 622
4 370

Micronesia (Federated States of)
Morocco
Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand

300
20 000
2 400
2 518 425
71 137

Niger
Nigeria
Norway
Oman
Pakistan

2 041
48 070
13 798 275
8 000
77 791

Panama
Philippines
Portugal
Qatar
Republic of Korea

2 000
16 443
12 000
21 000
16 000

Sierra Leone
Singapore
Somalia
Spain
Sri Lanka

46 425
9 000
1 000
923 237
4 000

Sweden
Switzerland
Thailand
Togo
Trinidad and Tobago

8 645 000
18 882 373
10 500
12 209
2 400

Tunisia
Turkey
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
United Republic of Tanzania

3 000
1 839 253
30 000
89 191 363
7 000

United States of America
Uruguay
Venezuela
Viet Nam
Yugoslavia

234 306 092
14 000
72 982
4 000
140 000

/...

S/26777
English
Page 30

Country

27 March 1964-15 June 1993

Zaire
Zambia
Zimbabwe

36 000
45 379
24 918
Total

490 233 975

/...

S/26777
English
Page 31

-----
