UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

.. .. ... .. ... .. ... .. .. ... .. ... .. .. .. ..

1

. . ... ... ... .. .. .. ... .. ... ... . .. ... .. ... ... .. .. ..

1

The question of the exercise by the Palestinian people of its inalienable rights:
Report of the Committee established under General Assembly resolution
3376(XXX)(S/12090)..............................................

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l935)
Adoptionoftheagenda

S/PV. 1935

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters conic
bined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
I
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . .. .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The’date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with ,a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions .qf the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

,

1935th MEETING
Held in New York, on Monday,
President:

Mr. Frederick

R. WILLS

(Guyana).

Present:
The representatives
of the following
States: Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan,
Libyan Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania,
Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, United States of America.
Provisidnal

ggenda (S/Agenda/l9354

1.

Adoption

2.

The question of the exercise by the Palestinian
people of its’inalienable
rights:
Report of the Committee established under General Assenjbly resolution 3376 (XXX) (S/12090)
The meeting

Mr. Abdel Megttid (Egypt), Mr. Floritl (German Democratic Republic), Mr. Briny&z (Hungary), Mr. Jaipal (India), Mr. Marpartng (Itldonesia),
Mr. Sharaf
(Jordan), Mr. Botrlom (Lao People’s
Democracltic
Republic), Mr. El Hassett (Marrrirania),
Mr. Zaimi
Morocco), Mr. Al-Said (Oman), Mr. Barootiy (Sattdi
Arabia), Mr. Allaf (Syrian Arab Reptrblic), Mr. Driss
(Tunisia),
Mr. Tiirkmen
(Tttrliey),
Mr. Httmaidatt
(United Arab Emirates) and Mr. Pert+ (Yugoslavia)
took the places reserved for rhetii nT rhe side of the
Cotttlcil chamber.

of the agenda

was called to order at II.10
Adoption

The age&a

28 June 1976, at 10.30 a.m.

a.m.

of the agenda

2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members of the Council that, in addition, I have received
letters from the representatives
of Bulgaria, Guinea
and Somalia containing requests to be invited to participate without the right to vote in the Council’s discussion, in accordance with the provisions of Article 31 of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure. With the consent of the Council
and in accordance with the usual practice, I therefore
propose to invite those representatives to participate
in the discussion without the right to vote.

was adopted.

The question of the exercise by the Palestinian people
of its inalienable rights:
Report of the Committee established under General
Assembly resolution 3376 (XXX) (S/12090)’
1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions taken at the 1924th, 192&h, 1933rd and 1934th
meetings, I shal now invite the Chairman a6d other
members of the Committee
on the Exercise of the
Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization
and the representatives
of Afghanistan,
Algeria,
Bahrain,
Cuba, Democratic
Yemen,
Egypt; the
German
Democratic
Republic,
Hungary,
India,
Indonesia,
Jordan, the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Mauritania, Morocco, Oman, Saudi Arabia,
the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, Turkey, the United
Arab Emirates and Yugoslavia to participate in the
discussions without the right to vote.

At the itlvitation of the Presidett~, the delegatiott qf
the Committee
ott the Exercise of the Itutlietrahle
Rights qf the Pttles~it~itrt~ People and Mr. AI-Hottl
(Palestine Lihera~iott Orgatiiza~ion)
rook places al
the Cotttlcil table and Mr. Siddiq (A.fghattisrttn), Mr.
Rtrhtrl (Algeria), Mr. Al S&r
(Bahrain), Mr. Altrrcoin (Ctthtt),
Mr. Ashral (Democratic
Yemen).

3. In view of the limited number of places available
at the Council table, I invite those representatives to
take the places reserved for them at-the side of the
Council chamber, on the understanding that they will
be invited to take a place at the Council table when
it is their turn to speak.
Ar rhe inrittrtion c!f the President, Mr. Grozev (Bulgrrria). Mr. Camara (Gttittea) and Mr. Has.&
(Somalia) took the places resen*ed .for them at rhe side
of the Cottttc~il c~htrttrbcr.
4. Mr. HOUNGAVOU
(Benin) (interprutcttion .fivttr
French): My delegation is most honoured to have the
Council presided over by you, Mr. Minister.
The
People’s Republic of Benin and the co-operative
Republic of Guyana have made the same political
choice: both are embarked on a socialist course and
are in favour of peace and understanding
among
States. My delegation therefore wishes to express to
you its deep appreciation for the ,masterly and impartial manner in which you have been guiding the debate
since last Friday on this important question of the
exercise of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people.
5. The underlying cause of the problem in the Middle
East, in the opinion of the Revolutionary
Military

Government of the People’s Republic of Benin, is the
fact that so far the Palestinian people have not been
able to exercise their inalienable and legitimate rights.
For the first time the Council is considering more
specifically and concretely than before the rights of
the Palestinian people, in the light of the report of the
Committee
established
under General
Assembly
resolution 3376 (XXX).

10. In the course of recent months tragic events have
occurred because of a persistent state of tension and
have made us aware once again that the Middle East
is and remains a dangerous powder keg which might
go up in flames at any time. All those who wish peace
to prevail in the Middle East-true
peace which would
foster the inalienable rights of the Palestinian peopleshould not lose sight of this reality. On the contrary,
they should have the sense to recognize and respect
the rights of the Palestinian people. By approving the
recommendations
in the report the Council will be
working for peace and justice, and this will be a decisive stage on the road towards a negotiated and peaceful settlement of the Middle East conflict.

6. In the opinion of my delegation, the Committee
has done remarkably
impartial
work and has submitted balanced and realistic conclusions: realistic,
because they are based on the fewest possible demands, and balanced, because they specifically take
into account the interests of all the parties concerned.
The Committee has therefore carried out the delicate
mission entrusted to it by the General Assembly, and
so the Committee’s
report is an historic document.
It represents the first step towards the attainment of
a just and lasting peace in the Middle East.

11. Mr. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation
from Russian):
The Security
Council has on its agenda a question the solution of
which is of great importance not, only for the future
of the Arab people of Palestine but also for the fate of
international
peace and security in the Middle East
and throughout the world.

7. My delegation unreservedly supports the Committee’s report and endorses all its recommendations.
It is convinced and reaffirms that the exercise of the
inalienable right of the Palestinian people to a national
identity and of their right to return to their homes
represents the normal way to achieve a peaceful, just
and lasting solution of the Middle East crisis. Not to
consider the report from that angle would be political
short-sightedness and partisanship. Furthermore,
the
Committee’s
report reveals the high quality of research undertaken so as to find minimum proposals
acceptable to all those struggling for international
peace and security. All the parties concerned should
be able to accept those recommendations
if they are
really prompted by the political will to arrive at a
peaceful settlement of the Middle East conflict.

12. The detailed report of the Committee
on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People demonstrates
that that Committee,
created
by a decision of the General Assembly, has done a
considerable
amount of work, and has elaborated
concrete, well-thought-out
and carefully argued recommendations
on the exercise of the lawful national
rights of the Arab people of Palestine. The recommendations contained in the report represent a concrete
programme for implementing
the fundamental resolutions of the General Assembly on the question of
Palestine.
13. The Security Council, for the first time, is treating
comprehensively,
as an independent political problem, the question of the exercise by the Palestinian
people of its inalienable rights. This represents a new
and important
stage in the Council’s consideration
of the key aspects of a Middle East settlement. Indeed,
for the first time, the Council, with the direct participation of the representatives
of the Palestinian
people-the
delegation of the Palestine Liberation
Organization-is
discussing the Palestine problem in
detail and comprehensively
as one of the fundamental
problems of a Middle East settlement. This important
step on the part of the Council is a consequence of
its earlier decisions on the’ Middle East problem and
of the fundamental resolutions adopted by the General
Assembly at its twenty-ninth
and thirtieth sessions,
which stressed the political nature of the Palestine
problem, confirmed the inalienable national rights of
the Palestinian people and proclaimed the necessity
of participation
on an equal looking by the Palestine
Liberation Organization, the legitimate representative
of the Palestinian people, in all efforts, deliberations
and conferences on the Middle East.

8. The recommendations
in the report serve the
interests of all the parties concerned because they are
based on the redress of grave injustices committed
against the oppressed people of Palestine. The unanimous attitude of the Council should simply be to
endorse the objective recommendations
of the Committee at the end of this important debate. But on the
basis of certain remarks it would appear that this
minimum is not likely to be accepted because of the
selfish calculations
of certain Powers which have
.vested interests in the area.
9. The Palestinian people has on many occasions
proclaimed its firm wish to have its fate settled peacefully, because, after all, no people wants violence,
and no people wants to shed its blood in vain. That
is why the representatives of the influential Powers on
the Council should reflect seriously before they adopt
a negative attitude to this report, an attitude of rejection which would be contrary to the legitimate interests
of the oppressed people of Palestine and which might
have serious consequences for the future evolution
of the Middle East crisis.

14. The Soviet Union firmly believes that the ,exercise of its inalienable rights by the Arab peo,ple of
2

Palestine and the solution of the Palestine problem are
key elements without which it will be impossible to
bring about a just and lasting settlement of the Middle
East problem or the elimination
of the explosive
source of tension in that area which poses a constant
threat to international
peace and security.

peace in that area. Those debates have also confirmed
that the majority of Council members are opposed to
separate steps which divert attention from an over-all
solution of this problem and quite often create additional obstacles to a settlement of the Middle East
conflict.

15. The delegation of the USSR believes it necessary
in the discussion of this problem to recall the statement of 28 April by the Soviet Government on the
Middle East, according to which:

18. The Council is discussing questions which are of
vital importance for the future of the 3 million who
have been suffering for so long and who, Palestinians,
as a result of aggression carried out by Israel with the
support of its imperialist
protectors, have been reduced to the position of exiles, deprived of any opportunity to exercise their inalienable
rights, including
their right to self-determination
and statehood. Such
a flagrant, tragic situation must be ended.

“The Soviet Union... proceeds from the premise
that the peoples of that area should be complete
masters of their destiny, should receive an opportunity to live in conditions of independence, freedom
and peace. That is precisely why the Soviet Union
firmly supports a radical political settlement of the
Middle East conflict and believes that this is attainable. The discussion in recent years of questions
relating to the situation in the Middle East and the
relevant decisions of the Security Council and the
General Assembly have determined
the basis on
which such a settlement can and must be achieved.
This basis consists of three organically
interconnected elements:

19. The Palestinian people, like all other peoples -of
the world, is entitled to have full control over its own
destiny and will undoubtedly achieve this in the end.
It will be able to live in freedom, independence and
peace. This right of theirs and of the other peoples of
the world is enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations and in the fundamental decisions of the Organization on the Midd.le East.
20. The Government of Israel, with the support of its
protectors and partners, continues with stubborn
recklessness its polic) of aggression and territorial
expansion at the expense of its Arab neighbours. It
is stubbornly pursuing a course of creating Israeli
settlements in the occupied Arab territories and is
banking on including them within Israel. In this the
leaders of Israel, with their typical Zionist racist
cynicism, are disregarding the will of the Arabs and
the decisions of the United Nations, which express
the will of the world community.
The failure of Israel
to participate in this discussion in the Council is further
evidence of the Israeli leaders’ policy of disregarding
the will of the peoples of the world and the decisions
and demands of the United Nations, to which Israel,
itself, is indebted for its very existence. In this regard,
Israel is following the same policy as the white racists
of South Africa, who are also disregarding the demands
and decisions of the United Nations and are oppressing the black population and depriving it of its elementary human rights.

-First,
the withdrawal of Israeli troops from
all Arab territories occupied as a result of Israel’s
aggression in 1967.
-Second,
satisfaction of the legitimate
national demands of the Arab people of Palestine,
including their inalienable right to establish their
own State.
-Third,
international
guarantees
for the
security and inviolability
of the frontiers of all
Middle Eastern States, and their right to independent existence and development.
These basic and interconnected
problems of a
Middle East settlement take due account of the
legitimate
rights of all parties directly concerned
and create a just and realistic basis for settlement.”
[S112063, annex, point 3.1
16. These principles have been confirmed and are
now shared by the overwhelming majority of Member
States-particularly
by the socialist and non-aligned
countries-and
the whole of progressive world public
opinion. This is something which was reflected in the
resolutions of the twenty-ninth and thirtieth sessions
of the General Assembly, as well as in all the fundamental documents of the conferences and meetings
of the non-aligned. countries.

21. The Israeli leaders, and some of their protectors
in the West, like to make high-flown speeches about
human rights and the delights of bourgeois democracy, which has long been bankrupt. However, as has
been shown by the recent discussions in the Council,
they are all continuing to make persistent efforts to
paralyse the Council and prevent it from taking effective measures to ensure respect for the elementary
human rights and the inalienable national rights of the
much tried Palestinian people and of the indigenous
population of southern Africa, which has long been
reduced to slavery. This is convincing proof of their
imperialist,
colonialist
and racist approach to the
problem of the rights of the Arab peoples of the Middle
East and those of the black peoples of southern Africa.

17. As has been revealed by this year’s Council discussions of the Palestine problem and other aspects
of the Middle East situation, only an all-embracing
solution to the problem of the Middle East, including
the question of the Palestinians, can lead to a lasting
3

comprehensive assistance and support in their struggle for the exercise of their lawful inalienable rights.

22. The Soviet Union, guided by Leninist principles
in its foreign policy, has provided and will continue to
provide constant support in the struggle of the Arab
peoples, in particular that of the Arab people of Palestine, for the restoration of their legitimate rights and
the elimination of the consequences of Israeli aggression. Our country has made and will continue to make
tireless efforts to achieve genuine improvements
in
the question of an all-embracing
settlement of the
problem in the Middle East on the basis of the decisions of the United Nations, which, as has already
been pointed out, require, first, the withdrawal of
Israeli troops from all Arab territories occ.upied in
1967 and then the exercise of the inalienable national
rights of the Arab people of Palestine. Recently, the
Soviet Government
made a number of important
proposals which are directed at this objective. It has
been stressing the necessity of a resumption of the
work of the Geneva Peace Conference on the Middle
East with the equal participation
of all the parties
directly concerned, including the Palestine Liberation
Organization as the legitimate and recognized representative of the Arab people of Palestine.

25. The Soviet Union-and
here its position coincides with that of many progressive Arab countries-believes
that the most important condition for
success in the struggle against imperialist
Zionist
aggression is the solidarity of the Arab States on an
anti-imperialist
basis, and the strengthening of their
co-operation with their real friends, the socialist and
non-aligned countries.
26.. In the discussion of the exercise by the Palestinian people of its inalienable rights, we should not
overlook the events in Lebanon, which are the result
of actions on the part of the forces of imperialism
and
Zionism. In a TASS statement of 9 June there was an
over-all assessment of these developments. The forces
of imperialism
and internal reaction; by instigating
internecine strife in Lebanon, are striving to divert the
attention of the Arabs from the liberation of the lands
occupied by Israel and to strike a blow against the
Palestine resistance movement and the patriotic forces
in Lebanon. This is an attempt to pit the Arabs against
each other and to delay a settlement of the Middle
East crisis.

23. The report of the General Secretary, of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet
Union,
Comrade
Brezhnev,
to the Twenty-fifth
Congress of the Party exhaustively,
fully and with
great clarity sets forth the consistent position of the
Soviet Union in support of the struggle of the Arab
peoples, including the Arab people of Palestine, for
their inalienable rights and against Israeli aggression
and expansion. Mr. Brezhnev stated:
“All these years, the Soviet Union has consistently supported the Arab people’s struggle to eliminate the consequences of the Israeli aggression.
Our country helped-and
effectively, as .the October 1973 war showed-to
build up the military
potential of the countries opposing the aggressor,
that is, Egypt, Syria and Iraq. We supported the
Arab political
struggle both within the United
Nations and outside it.

27. The report of the Committee.on
the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People contains a number of concrete and constructive recommendations, which, if put into effect, will provide a
solution for the key problem of the Middle East settlement, and by so doing would lead to the establishment of a just and lasting peace in the Middle East.
The recommendations
confirm the important fundamental principle of the inadmissibility
of the acquisition of territory by force contained in the Charter and
stress -the need for ,the complete and unconditional
withdrawal of the Israeli occupiers. They also provide
for the total withdrawal of Israeli troops from all Arab
territories occupied in 1967, and lay down a time-table
for their withdrawal, which must be completed by
1 June 1977.

“There is no war in the Middle East at present.
But ‘neither is there peace, let alone tranquillity.
And who would venture to guarantee that hostilities
do not erupt anew? This danger will persist as long
as Israeli armies remain in the occupied territories.
It will persist as long as the hundreds of thousands
of Palestinians driven from their land are deprived
of their legitimate rights and live in appalling conditions, and as long as the Arab people of Palestine
are denied the possibility to create their national
State.”

28. The Soviet delegation entirely supports the re‘commendations
of the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People to selfdetermination,
national
independence
and sovereignty in its own country. We also support the earliest
possible implementation
of the unconditional
right of
a11 Palestinians to return immediately
to their own
homes and recover their lands and property, and we
believe that the Council should take measures in
accordance with the Charter to facilitate their exercise
of that right.

24. Between the Soviet neonle and the Arab neonle
of Palestine, and between be Government
bf the
Soviet Union and the leadership of the Palestine
Liberation Organization, increasing relations of friendship and fraternal co-operation have grown up. The
Soviet Union has given the Arab people of Palestine

29. We should like to express our gratitude to the
members of that Committee
and to its Chairman,
Mr. Fall, for their valuable work in preparing the
report and the recommendations
it contains. In the
light of those recommendations,
the Council must take
measures to halt the establishment of new settlements
4

34.

(Guinea) (itzterpretatiotz
front
my delegation is most happy
to congratulate you on your accession to the presidency of the Security Council for the current month.
The century-old links and the common destiny which
unite my country, the Republic of Guinea, with
Guyana, which you represent with dedication and
competence, need hardly be recalled since they are
so solid, friendly and fraternal.

by Israel, to eliminate the existing settlements in the
Arab territories occupied in 1967 and to ensure that
all th.s Arab property in the territories is returned
intact to its owners.

Mr.

CAMARA

French): Mr. President,

30. One recommendation
is of great importance for
a comprehensive
settlement in the Middle East, and
that is the recommendation
calling for the participation on an requal footing of the Palestine Liberation
Organization, the sole legitimate representative of the
Palestinian people, in all efforts, deliberations
and
conferences on the Middle East held under the auspices of the United Nations. It reflects the broad
recognition in the world and within the United Nations
of the need for equal participation
by the Palestine
Liberation
Organization
in the work of the Geneva
Peace Conference, just as the Palestine Liberation
Organization now participates on an equal footing in
the discussions on the Middle East in the United
Nations and its major organs.

35. The item on the agenda of the Council is of
enormous interest to us. Indeed, in resolution 3376
(XXX),
which established
the Committee
on the
Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian
People, the General Assembly designated Guinea and
other Members to study this problem. Thus it was in
the spirit of that resolution that my delegation asked
to be allowed to speak in the present debate.
36. The inalienable rights of the Palestinian people,
including self-determination
and independence,
have
been clearly defined in General Assembly resolution
3236 (XXIX).
The right of return signifies the exercise of the individual
right of every Palestinian to
return to his country of origin. In undertaking
to
respect the United Nations Charter when it was
admitted to the international
community,
Israel at the
same time subscribed to the integral implementation
of this first aspect of the problem.

31. As is stressed in paragraph 60 of the Committee’s report, the exercise of the inalienable rights of
the Palestinians
would “contribute
decisively to a
comprehensive
and final settlement -of the Middle
East crisis”. That is indeed so because exercise of
those rights is an integral part of a solution of the overall political problem of the Middle East. The delegation of the Soviet Union also whole-heartedly
supports the Committee’s
major conclusion, which is to
be found in paragraph 59 of its report, namely, that
“no solution in the Middle East can be envisaged
which does not fully take into account the legitimate
aspirations of the Palestinian people”.

37. General Assembly resolutions 181 (II), 194 (Ill)
and 273 (Ill), the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and the fourth Geneva Convention’
also, bear
witness to the fact that the Committee has remained
faithful to the spirit of its mission.

32. The Soviet delegation believes that the Council
must take decisive, effective and immediate measures
to implement the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people and thus facilitate the earliest possible achievement of a just and lasting settlement in the Middle
East. The Council must adopt a decision which confirms the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people
and endorses the Committee’s
recommendations
regarding the exercise of those rights. Such a decision
would bring the position of the Council fully into line
with the position of the General Assembly. Such a
decision would be a real contribution
by the Council,
as the major organ of the United Nations responsible
for the maintenance of international
peace and security, to the elimination
of a dangerous hotbed of war,
which is the primary task of the Council and all its
members. Such a decision would also be in keeping
with the interests of all the States and peoples of that
area and with the strengthening of universal peace.
Anyone who, by abusing the right of veto, prevented
the Council from taking such a decision would be
assuming a serious international
political responsibility.

38. The return of the Palestinians
to their homes
must be carried out in two phases, and the implementation of that absolute right is to follow a definite
time-table.
In the first phase, the Palestinians
displaced in 1967, are to be authorized to return to the
territories
which have been under Israeli military
occupation
since 1967, in accordance with resolution 237 (1967) of the Council. The implementation
of this first phase of the programme must be undertaken on certain conditions which are properly specified in the report. The second phase concerns the
Palestinians displaced between 1948 and 1967, and
should be carried out in co-operation with the parties
concerned and in accordance with the resolutions of
the United Nations.
39. Persistent refusal to recognize the right of the
Palestinians to return to their homes cannot but be
detrimental to the restoration of peace in the Middle
East. We believe that Palestinians who choose not to
return should be paid equitable compensation.
40. In regard to self-deter&nation,
independence
and national sovereignty, my delegation, fully shares
the Committee’s
views and considers that the establishment of an independent
Palestinian
State is in

33. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Guinea. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.
5

accordance with United Nations principles and remains a prior condition for the solution of the Middle
East problem. It will be up to the Palestinians, once
they are established in their country, to determine
what kind of expression they wish to give to the national independence of Palestine. In this the Palestine
Liberation
Organization
remains the only genuine
spokesman and the only representative of its people.

for the benefit of the patient and suffering Arabs, my
delegation thanks the members of the Council for their
kind attention.
47. Mr. VINCI (Italy): Mr. President, I should like
first of all to express to you the deep gratification of
my delegation at your presence here. Mr. Minister,
you could not better underline the attachment and
dedication of your country to the principles and purposes of the United Nations than by personally presiding over our deliberations.

41. The status of the City of Jerusalem is of particular concern to the Moslem population of Guinea.
We agree that the administration
of this city should
consist of two main organs: (0) a 45member
legislative body in which the three main religious communities df the city-Moslem,
Jewish and Christianwould be represented; and (h) an executive organ led
by a United Nations commissioner
appointed by the
Secretary-General.
My delegation appeals to Israel to
refrain from any act or policy intended to alter the
legal status of Jerusalem.

48. I should like to seize this opportunity
also to
express our satisfaction at the friendly relations and
close collaboration
we have developed with the delegation of Guyana, and particularly with Ambassador
Jackson, who represents his country so honourably
in our world Organization and who, during his presidency of the Council, has displayed outstanding qualities of impartiality
and leadership.

42. For the implementation
of the programme proposed in the Committee’s
report, my delegation
further voices to the Council its insistence on Israel’s
abandoning the establishment
of settlements in the
occupied territories and, what is more, on its proceeding unconditionally
to withdraw those of its
citizens who have been settled in these territories
since 1967 in violation of‘ article 49 of the fourth
Geneva ‘Convention
and of the relevant resolutions
adopted in the United Nations. The Council must
consider all the actions and measures that might lead
Israel to implement the terms of the programme that
has been proposed, while leaving full responsibility
to the General Assembly in the event of a total lack
of co-operation on the part of Israel.

49. I should like to associate myself with previous
speakers in conveying to the United States delegation
the most sincere condolences of my Government at
the tragic loss in Beirut of Ambassador Meloy and his
colleagues, a loss which has increased the tragic toll
of officials of the United States State Department of
State who have fallen while serving their country.
The death of the two American diplomats is another
sad chapter in the endless, senseless tragedy taking
place in Lebanon, a country which occupies a special
place in the history of the Mediterranean
and of Italy
in particular. We sincerely hope that the people of
that highly civilized and friendly country will soon be
able to reconcile the differences which divide them
and reserve the territorial integrity, the national unity
and the independence of the Lebanese State for the
good of their country and for the good of the international community.
Lebanon is an irreplaceable asset
in our world.

43. The establishment of an independent Palestinian
State is not a question that be considered apart from
the problem of the Middle East. The rights of the
Palestinians can be exercised only within the framework of a complete settlement and the establishment
of not only a lasting but also a definitive peace in the
region.

50. I turn now to the item we are considering. My
Government is convinced-and
has so publicly stated
on various occasions-that
the solution of the Palestinian problem is crucial to the achievement of a just
and lasting peace in the Middle East. My delegation
therefore welcomes the current debate on the item on
our agenda, namely, the question of the exercise by
the Palestinian people of its inalienable rights, in so
far as it places this issue in the right perspective and
contributes to the negotiation of an over-all settlement
of the Middle East problem.

44. The Security Council remains the only body
where all parties are able to meet. My delegation
firmly believes that if each State member of the Council were to make an effort, we would manage to
extinguish this blazing fire which has caused such
devastation in the region.
45. The solution of the problem of the Middle East
and the restoration of the rights of the Palestinian
people lead us to draw the attention of the Council to
the’ dangerous collaboration
which exists between
Tel Aviv and Pretoria. This axis, which seeks to
extend itself so as to bring all the racist and Fascist
regimes of the world, to support each other militarily,
is an imminent danger and a threat to world peace.

51. My delegation already had the occasion to recall
on 30 March 1976” the basic .position of the Italian
Government
with regard to resolution 3376 (XXX),
which set up the Committee
on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People. I do not
think, therefore, that I need now to reiterate our views
in this regard or to elaborate on them; the less so since
they were along the lines of the statement which I
made on 10 November
l9754 on behalf of the nine

46. In requesting the Council to consider the Committee’s responsibly and to assess it at its just value
6’

But nowhere else in the report or in the recommendations, some of which we could consider favourably if
they were put in the right context, is this basic idea
spelled out in clear, specific terms in order to make
clear the territory on which the future Palestinian
entity, to use the words in paragraph 71 of the report,
should be established. To that effect it would perhaps
be useful to follow-if
not now, later-to
the suggestion in paragraph 56, namely, that

members of the European Community
and to which
the representative of the United Kingdom, Ambassador Richard, referred in his own statement [/93&h
niceting.

pclrtl. 71.

52. Rather, I should like at this stage to assure the
members of the Council, and the members of the Committee as well, that my delegation, while of course
maintaining
its position, has given very careful consideration to the Committee’s
report. We have also
followed with great attention the very clear introduction of the report by the Chairman of the Committee,
Ambassador Fall of Senegal, and the additional comments provided by the Committee’s
Rapporteur, our
colleague from Malta, Mr. Gauci [/92&h mmting].
We have, furthermore,
listened with great interest
to the other statements made in the Council, notably
by those delegations which made valuable contributions to this document, which the Committee
was
able to produce so promptly thanks to the personal
efforts of its members. We hope that all this documentation will be of some help in our labours with
a view to achieving the objectives I indicated at the
outset of my statement.

“the members of the Council, assisted by the
either in closed session or
Secretary-General,
through informal consultations,
could search for
those constructive moves which would contribute
to an over-all settlement.”
That is a new practice, inaugurated by the Council
last .year. in connexion with another item, when it
produced some positive results.
55. To sum up our view on this point we feel that
the Palestinian question has been singled out from the
larger context of the whole problem and that the
other essential components
have been overlooked.
We are left with the impression-which
I hope will
prove to be wrong-that
the report, however well
intentioned, is somehow detached from the only solid
basis for the solution of the over-all problem, as laid
down by the Council in resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973). In those resolutions the framework and all
the components of the problem are clearly established.
What we need, and I feel there is general agreement
on this point, is to supplement and bring up to date
the provisions of resolution 242 (1967) concerning the
Palestinian question.

53. In this connexion, as we are coming close-1 assume-to
the end of our deliberations
on this item,
I should like to repeat, so that our position may be
clear to all concerned; what I stated at the 1923rd
meeting of the Council, on 28 May, when we adopted
resolution 390 (1976) on the renewal of the mandate
of the United
Nations
Disengagement
Observer
Force. I said then and I reaffirm now that Italy believes that the recognition of the national rights of the
Palestinian
people, including the right to establish
their own independent State, is one of the three indispensable prerequisites
that must be taken together
for a final, just and lasting settlement of the Middle
East crisis. The other two are: the withdrawal by
Israel from all the territories occupied in June 1967;
and the right of all States in the area to sovereignty,
political independence and territorial integrity within
secure borders to be internationally
recognized and
guaranteed.

56. In the light of the views I have expressed, I wonder what would best help to solve the problem, what
would best help towards the speedy implementation
of the rights of the Palestinian people.
57. To tell the truth, I believe that at this stage the
best thing would be to speed up the resumption-bf the
negotiating process, the success of which requires, in
our opinion, that all components of the problem .be
duly taken into consideration;
and this means not
onl,y the recognition of the rights of the Palestinian
people in the terms I described earlier, but also, as
I have already said, the withdrawal of Israel from all
the territories occupied in June 1967, and the right of
all States in the area to sovereignty, political independence and ‘territorial
integrity within secure borders
to be internationally
recognized and guaranteed.

54. Having said that, I would reiterate the view that
the only realistic way to deal with the Palestinian
problem and satisfy the legitimate
aspirations and
national rights of the Palestinian people is within the
established
negotiating
framework,
which comprehends and takes into consideration all the aspects
of the bioader issue-namely,
the Arab-Israeli
conflict. That approach does not appear to have been
taken sufficiently into consideration in the report submitted to us. I hasten to recognize that the point is.
:made in paragraph 51 that

58. May I now make a few further comments
report itself.

“Palestinian
rights could not be achieved outside
a comprehensive, just settlement that would include
Israel’s withdrawal from all the Arab territories
occupied in June 1967 and the establishment
of a
just and lasting peace.”

on the

59. I have already expressed our doubts about the
usefulness of an exercise bound to concentrate on only
one component auf of the many which make up the
complex Middle East crisis. For that reason, the
report does not reflect the political realities in the area,
7

$

as envisaged in resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973);
rather, it omits any consideration of the existence of
a State Member of the United Nations, Israel, which
of course is a recipient of all the rights and duties that
are naturally inherent in such a status. That is a very
serious point, as it raises a general principle involving
the individual
and collective responsibility
of each
State Member, regardless of the country considered.
No committee,
no body of the United Nations can
envisage any measure which could directly or indirectly, willingly or’unwillingly,
hamper the basic right
of a State Member to live in peace within, secure and
recognized frontiers.
‘.
60. We have’ noted with interest the reference
made in the report to the necessity of establishing a
system of international guarantees of the security and
inviolability
of the.frontiers of all Middle East countries. On various occasions my Government, together
with its partners in the European Community,
has
expressed its readiness to take part in such a system
as may be desired.

65. We are all.aware by now that these past three
weeks have been among the busiest in the history of
the United Nations. Even if the Secretariat’s records
do not show it, we feel it. Our President, Ambassador Jackson, was the first one not to spare himself.
What else could we do, then, but to follow his example
and leadership? It was a hard physical, mental and
nervous test for all. We have come out of it somehow,
exhausted but satisfied, and we owe this satisfaction
over a job well done to our President. Ambassador Jackson already had our respect, esteem and confidence; he has now won our full appreciation, praises
and affection. I should like to say to him and to all
our colleagues around the table “au revoir”, not in
this chamber or in other rooms at Headquarters,
but
outside, preferably in my residence. After a most
active month we are all, including the next President,
as human beings, entitled to a quiet month.
66. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.

61. As to the issue of the Israeli settlements in the
occupied Arab territories, an issue raised in the report,
I would assure the Council that my Government
maintains its firm position of total disapproval of such
a course, as I previously stated at the 1897th meeting
of the Council.

67. Mr. BOULOM
(Lao People’s Democratic Rel
public) (interprvtation
from French): Permit me first
of all to associate myself with previous speakers in
extending the profound condolences of my delegation to the delegation of the United States on the tragic
death of Mr. Meloy, United States’ Ambassador in
Lebanon, and his economic counsellor.

62. I have already mentioned the keen interest with
which my delegation has been studying the report of
the Committee,
despite our reservations about its
origin. ,May I add that we have been doing so bearing
clearly in mind above the whole of the human factor
behind it-that
is to say, the suffering of hundreds of
thousands of people, people dispossessed of homes,
of land, of work, of the enjoyment of their basic rights.
And, since I am speaking of the plight of the Palestinian refugees, my delegation would welcome wholeheartedly a gesture from the Government
of Is,rael
making possible, to begin with, the return of those
who left their villages during the 1967 war. We are
also in favour of the employment in this respect of the
International
Committee
of the Red Cross and the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA),
suitably
financed and mandated, as recommended
in paragraph 68 of the report.

68. Mr. President, it is a great honour for me to
address you on behalf of the delegation of the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic and to convey to you
our warmest congratulations
on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council at a time when
this august body has embarked upon the consideration
of such an important and complex item as that of the
question of ‘Palestine. Your assumption of the presidency ‘is a tribute to your country, the Republic of
Guyana, which is pursuing a policy of peace, freedom
and national independence
within the non-aligned
movement.
69. I should also like to express my sincere gratitude
to the members of the Council for having been kind
enough to permit me to participate in this debate.
70. The question of’the exercise by the Palestinian
people of its inalienable rights is the item on the Council’s agenda. The. Lao delegation, a member of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian
People, deems it necessary to
address the Council on this subject. .

63. To those people, on this occasion, I should like
to express, again here the sympathy of the Italian people and to assure them that, being well aware of the
fact that their ordeal has, been going on for far too
long, the- Italian’ Government,
together with its European partners, will do its utmost to promote a solution
of the problem of the Middle East on the lines repeatedly set by the United Nations, and particularly
by tie Security Council.

71. For the last 29 years the United Nationshas been
trying to solve the distressing problem of Palestine
by adopting more than 188 resolutions and decisions.
In spite of all those efforts, the problem of Palestine
is still unsolved. The Israelis obstinately continue to
usurp the Arab territories of Palestine. They have

64. Since this is my last’statement in’ the Council for
this month I should like, with the Council’s permission, to make a personal comment.
8

introduced into that area a new style of colonization
which consists in Judaizing Jerusalem, establishing
settlements
and expropriating
Arab property. The
indigenous population has been subjected to oppression and tyranny. In a word, the Zionist aggressors
have thus created insurmountable
obstacles to the
process of peace and are endangering international
peace and security.

principles
which my delegation
considers indispensable to any settlement of the Middle East problem
in general and the problem of Palestine in particular.
First, the settlement of the Palestinian problem is a
conditio
sine qua non of any final and global solution
to the Middle East problem. Secondly, no valid overall solution can be contemplated
in the Middle East
without the effective participation
of the Palestine
Liberation Organization,
which is the only authentic
representative of the Palestinian people. Thirdly, the
evacuation of the Arab territories of Palestine by
Israel is a precondition for a settlement of the Palestine problem. Fourthly, the Palestinian
people can
fully exercise their inalienable rights only in Palestine.
Fifthly, the right of all the States in the region to live
in peace within secure, recognized and guaranteed
boundaries can be contemplated
only after the establishment of an independent Palestinian entity in Palestine. As we are all aware, Israel is now undeniably
overstepping its boundaries. Consequently, to recognize Israel’s right to live in peace within secure,
recognized and guaranteed frontiers would at the
present stage be tantamount,
ipso f&to,
to legitimizing the occupation of Arab territories by the Israeli
aggressors. In this connexion, I should like to add that,
in my view, there can be peaceful coiexistence only
when two or more peoples sincerely demonstrate
their desire to live in harmony; On the other hand,
it is impossible to contemplate peaceful co-existence
between aggressor and victim,
let alone between
oppressor and oppressed.

72. In the face of that challenge, the Palestinian
people, under the enlightened leadership of the Palestine Liberation Organization,
the veritable nucleus of
the Palestinian revolution,
rose up to win back their
fundamental
national rights. The heroic struggle of
the Palestinian
people has had militant
and spontaneous support from the Arab States, the socialist
countries and all progressive peoples that prize peace
and justice in the world.
73. My country’s position with regard to the question of Palestine is one of principle based on the solidarity and the common front of the progressive peoples and Governments in the world striving for peace,
justice and social progress. The Lao people has been
anxiously following the struggle of the Palestinian
people. This position of principle has been demonstrated by our voting in favour of all resolutions of
the General Assembly on the Middle East in general
and on Palestine in particular,
notably resolutions
3375 (XXX), 3376 (XXX), and 3379 (XXX) declaring
Zionism a form of racism. Furthermore, the Lao Government has decided to break off diplomatic relations
with Israel, a decision which will take effect from
23 February 1976, thus eliminating
the last remnant
of a link contracted by the former regime with the
racist regime in Tel Aviv. Finally, the people of Laos
organized, from 12 to 19 May 1976, an international
week of solidarity with the Palestinian people.

76. It is high time for the United Nations, which
was the source of the misfortunes of the Palestinian
people, to find a just and equitable solution to the
Palestine problem in order to avert a new devastating
war in the Middle East.
77. In conclusion, the delegation of the Lao’People’s
Democratic Republic calls upon the Council to adopt
a constructive attitude towards the’recommendations
made by the Committee in accordance with Article 36
of the Charter. Since at the present stage we are
merely formulating
recommendations,
my delegation
believes that the Council is entirely free to make
improvements
to them so that they may reflect the
views of the international
community as a whole.

74. Today the Council is meeting once again to
examine the weighty file on the Palestinian case. This
time, however, the Council has before it what it did
not have at previous meetings, namely, a concise
document designed to bring about a solution of the
Palestine problem. The report of the Committee
on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People is the fruit of the judictous efforts made
by its members over a period of more than three,
months. In part two, the members of the Committee
have most explicitly
fdrmulated
recommendations
which represent a programme of implementation
to
permit the Palestinian people fully to exercise its rights
to self-determination,
independence
and national
sovereignty
in Palestine.
Those recommendations
were prepared on the basis of the relevant resolutions,
in particular General Assembly resolutions 194 (III),
3236 (XXIX) and 3375 (XXX) and Council resolution
237 (1967), taking account of the legitimate aspirations
of the Palestinian people.

78. .Mr. SUNDBERG
(Sweden): First of all, Mr. President, let me address on behalf of the Swedish delegation our particularly warm welcome to you here today.
It is indeed a great honour for the Council to have in
the Chair for this debate such a distinguished
personality from a country which plays a central role in
this Organization. as well as in the defence of the rights
of the underprivileged
in all parts of the world-a role
to which the Permanent Representative .of Guyana,
Ambassador .Jackson, and .his.delegation
contribute
with such outstanding distinction.

751 -;Although I have no wish to go into detail, I should
none the less like to highlight a few of the fundamental

79. My defegation’would
also like to take this opportunity to offer its profound condolences to the delega9
._..

-

tion of the United States on the death of the American
Ambassador to Beirut and his colleagues on 16 June.
That senseless killing has deeply shocked the Swedish
Government and people.

report within the framework of an over-all solution
that my delegation finds the Committee’s
report to
be seriously deficient. True, we entirely share the
basic proposition in the report that the solution of the
Palestinian question is a necessary prerequisite for
a lasting peace in the Middle East. But, on the other
hand, Sweden does not believe that it is possible to
find a solution of the Palestinian question in isolation
from other elements in the Middle East problem.

80. The Swedish delegation has carefully studied
the report of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian
People. That
report Fontains a number of interesting ideas and
suggestions. We .are grateful to the members of the
Committee and to those others who have co-operated
closely with it for the efforts they have devoted to the
Committee’s
work. We are also grateful for a number
.of background documents produced within the Committee, which will be most valuable in our work, now
and in the future.

87. The only possible and durable solution is one
that takes due account of the legitimate rights and
aspirations of all the parties in the area. There is broad
agreement that the Middle East problem must be
settled by negotiation
between the parties. Resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) spell out in general
terms how such a solution should be achieved. The
question of Israel’s withdrawal from the occupied
territories is one key problem in the Middle East
complex. The modalities of withdrawal must be settled
in negotiations between the parties. That means that,
for instance, the question of a time-table for withdrawal can only be settled by agreement between the
parties. Sweden considers that the situation that.
existed before the June war in 1967 must be the point
of departure as the principle of the unacceptability
of
the acquisition of territory by force must be maintained.

81. Turning to the substance of the Committee’s
report, my delegation would like, first of all, to make
a few observations on certain points, especially with
regard to the recommendations
of the Committee.
82. The Committee
has penetrated to the.different
elements in the notion of “the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people”; it has thus taken as its point of
departure a clear distinction between the rights of the
Palestinian people and those of the individual Palestinians. The individual
rights of the Palestinians to
return to their homes h-ave been given a prominent
position in the Committee’s
recommendations.
The
Swedish delegation greets with satisfaction the fact
that the question of return, which over the years has
been dealt with in a number of United Nations resolutions and which is so important from a humanitarian
point of view, in thus highlighted in the report.

88. As a solution of the Palestinian problem is based
on an Israeli withdrawal, such a solution cannot be
taken out of the negotiating context. It is obvious
that the return of the Palestinians displaced as a result
of the war of June 1967 can hardly be realized without
the co-operation of the occupying Power as long as
that occupation exists. As I mentioned earlier, Sweden
supports a swift implementation
of the provisions of
resolution 237 (1967).

83. It is in this perspective that Sweden has always
supported the idea of a rapid implementation
of Security Council resolution 237 (1967), as was stated by
my delegation, for example in the debate on Palestine
during the twenty-ninth ‘se&ion of the General Assembly.

89. Another basic prerequisite for any solution of
the Middle East problem is that the final borders
eventually to be defined must be secure and recognized, thus ensuring the right of all States in the area
to live in peace.

84. It is further noteworthy that the Committee,
in
formulating its recommendations
for a solution ofthe
problem of the displaced Arab Palestinians, makes a
clear distinction between Palestinians displaced as a
consequence of the 1967 war and those displaced
before the same war, just as it makes a corresponding
distinction with regard to territorial and other questions when the rights of the Palestinian people are
dealt with in the report.

90. The third basic prerequisite for any settlement
in the Middle East is the realization of the legitimate
rights of the Palestinian people-the
very object of
this debate.
91. These are thus the basic elements around which
a just and durable pea& in the Middle East should be
built. Some of them are already laid down in resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). The element which has
been lacking hitherto-due
consideration for the pioblems of the Palestinian
people-stands
out with
increasing clarity as the key to the final solution.

85, The Committee
links the right of return of the
Palestinians to the right of the Palestinian people to
self-determination
by stating that the right to selfdetermination
can only be exercised only if the occupied territories were evacuated and the displaced
Palestinians returned.

92. The parties must now convincingly demonstrate
their readiness to accept each other. Isiael must recognize the legitimate national rights and interests of the
Palestinian people, their right to a homeland; and the

86. It is when we come to the question of the implementation of the various principles enunciated in the
10

99.

GROZEV
(Bulgaria) ~(interpretution
from
Mr. President, I should like to thank you
and the other members of the Council for the opportunity afforded me to set forth the position of the Government of the People’s Republic of Bulgaria on the
question under consideration.

Palestine Liberation
Organization
must accept the
right of Israel to continued existence within secure
and recognized borders. In so far as the deliberations
in this Council and the forthcoming
debates in the
General Assembly could contribute to such a mutual
acceptance, they could be said to assume a particular
importance in the search for peace in the Middle East.

Mr.

Russicrn):

100. At the same time I should like to congratulate
you, Mr. Minister, and the representative of Guyana,
Mr. Jackson, whom we all respect. We are familiar
with the energetic and sincere efforts of you both to
bring about a just solution of the important international problems facing our Organization.
New and
striking evidence of this has been the tireless work of
Mr. Jackson this month and your own now, as.President of the Council for this month, as it discusses one
of the most acute problems of the day. If any of these
problems remain without a satisfactory solution, I am
sure that the President of the Council is the person
least of all to blame for this. We are fully convinced
of your sincere intentions and desires. I should like
to express the wish that your presidency will culminate in an appropriate and just solution by the Council
of the question under consideration,
the question of
Palestine.

93. Sweden strongly supports the principle that a
solution of the central elements of the Middle East
problem must be found in negotiations between the
parties concerned and cannot, without their agreement, be dictated by the Council. Any other principle
would be against the principles set down in the Council’s own decisions in resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973).

The Palestinian Arabs should be represented in
all efforts to find solutions to the Palestinian question.
This follows as a consequence of the recognition of
the right to self-determination
of the Palestinian
Arabs. The Palestine Liberation Organization,
as the
most authoritative
spokesman for the Palestinian
Arabs, must thus necessarily be invited to participate
in the international
debates, for instance, in the General Assembly and in the Security Council. We believe
that such participation
should be based on the recognition of principles embodied in the Charter, among
which is the right of all Member States to self-determination and territorial integrity.
94.

101. The problem of the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination
which has always been
before our Organization has occupied a very important place in its work over the last two years. The discussions in the General Assembly at its twenty-ninth
and thirtieth sessions and in the Security Council, the
relevant decisions adopted on this question andethe
participation
of the Palestine Liberation Organization
on an equal footing, all demonstrate
most cogently
that the United Nations is fully aware of the importance of this problem. It is quite clear what path we
should follow if we want to find a solution to this
problem; it is one that is closely connected with international peace and security.

95. The role of the United Nations must inevitably
be a central one in any Middle East settlement. Also
on this point, the Committee
has put forward interesting ideas involving, inter ah, the possibilities of a
temporary United Nations peace-keeping force.
96. It is also evident that an important role in the
settlement of the tragic refugee problem will fall to
UNRWA,
in as much as that organization
has been
of central importance in this respect during the last
decades. Absolute priority should be given to providing UNRWA with adequate resources for the fulfilment of its task. My country is traditionally
one of
the largest contributors to the Agency, and we, have
made an extra contribution this year to help in meeting
the most urgent needs.

102. The fact that so far we have not been able to
find a solution does not at all mean that the problem
cannot be resolved. It simply means that it is extremely
urgent now to proceed to a final settlement of the
Palestine problem, and this is particularly
closely,
even organically,
linked to the adoption of decisive
measures for the final solution of the Middle East
conflict.

97. The task of the Council is now to stimulate the
parties to come together in meaningful negotiations.
All the Council’s efforts should be directed towards
that end. However, the debate on the rights of the
Palestinian people is an important and useful one. The
Committee
can soon draw its conclusions from the
Council’s deliberations
and prepare its report to the
General Assembly at its forthcoming
session, where
there will be a further opportunity
to discuss this
problem.

103. Underlying this conflict is the aggressive nature
of Israeli militarism
and expansionism,
as practised
by Israel in the Arab territories occupied in 1967, and
the entirely arbitrary flouting by Israel of the inalienable rights of the people of Palestine to self-determination, national independence
and sovereignty and
their right to return to their homes. The path to a solution of the conflict in the Middle East lies in the solution of these problems. .Only then will there exist
conditions required to guarantee the right to an independent existence for all countries and peoples of the
area. Such a guarantee would be a new and important

98. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Bulgaria, whom I invite to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.
11

contribution
to the strengthening
and security.

of universal

an end to the bloodshed in Lebanon as soon as possible. A solution to the crisis in Lebanon would doubtless facilitate a comprehensive
and final solution of
the Middle East conflict.

peace

104. At the recently concluded Eleventh Congress
of the Bulgarian Communist
Party, Comrade Todor
Zhivkov,
the First Secretary of the Central Committee of the Party and Chairman of the State Council
of the People’s Republic of Bulgaria, made the following statement:

108. I should like to take this opportunity to express
to the United States delegation the sincere condolences of the Bulgarian delegation on the senseless
murder of American diplomats in Beirut.

“Thanks
to the imperialists
and their accomplices in the Middle East, a hotbed of war is still
smouldering. The danger of a new conflagration in
that area will not be eliminated until Israeli troops
evacuate the Arab territories occupied in 1967, until
the Arab people of Palestine has the opportunity to
establish its own State, and until conditions are
created which will permit all States and peoples of
that part of the world to live in peace and security.
A just and lasting solution to the Middle East problem can be achieved only at the Geneva Conference
with the participation
of the Palestine Liberation
Organization,
the only legitimate representative of
the Arab people of Palestine.**

109. The rights of the Palestinian people are recognized by everyone except Israel and its protectors,
.who are attempting in this they to,defer a final settlement of the Palestinian problem, thus postponing a
settlement of the Middle East crisis as a whole. They
are using all possible ways and means of holding up
a lasting settlement of the conflict. Half measures and
partial agreements which totally disregard the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people and attempts to
foment division between Arab countries are all efforts
by the imperialist forces in Israel.designed
solely to
divert attention from the essence of the conflict.
110. The discussion of the report of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inal,ienable Rights of the Palestinian People in the Security Council once again
shows the great significance of this matter. The report
of the Committee
unanimously focuses attention on
the imperative need to restore the lawful rights of the
Palestinian people in order to bring about a solution
of the Middle East crisis. Therefore, among the basic
considerations
and guiding principles of the report
we find the following in paragraph 59:

105. The. Bulgarian delegation would like to take
this opportunity
to welcome the delegation of the
Palestine Liberation Organization
and to express its
great satisfaction
at the constructive
contribution
made by that organization to the work of the General
Assembly and the Security Council in the discussion
of the Middle East problem. The Palestine Liberation
Organization. is the only legitimate representative of
the Arab people of Palestine, a fact which has already
been recognized at the twenty-ninth
and thirtieth
sessions of the General Assembly. This is further evidence of the final recognition by the United Nations
of the political essence of the Palestine problem, in
spite of attempts by Israel and its protectors to reduce
the problem to a mere refugee problem. Today everyone understands that without the participation
of
the Palestine Liberation
Organization
in a comprehensive solution to the Middle East crisis it will be
impossible to establish either a just or a lasting peace
in that area.

“The question of Palestine is at the heart of the
Middle East problem and, consequently, the Committee stresses its belief that no solution in the
Middle East can be envisaged which does not fully
take into account the legitimate aspirations of the
Palestinian people?
The concrete proposals put forward by the Committee
place in clear and precise perspective the ways and
means of restoring the lawful rights of the Palestinian
people, its right to self-determination,
independence
and sovereignty and the right of Palestinians to return
to their homes.

106. The political maturity of the Palestine Liberation Organization has once again been manifested in
the course of recent events in Lebanon. The active
assistance provided by the Palestine Liberation Organization in the evacuation of foreign nationals from
Beirut, its categorical condemnation of the murder of
the United States Ambassador to Lebanon and his
Economic Counsellor, and the measures taken by the
Palestine Liberation Organization
in that regard, are
evidence of the noble purposes of that organization
and a confirmation of its international authority.

111. The Bulgarian delegation has studied the report
of the Committee with attention. It supports the recommendations
in the report,’ which, believes, give
a correct and realistic assessment of the actual state
of affairs in the Middle East, the prospects for the
exercise by the Palestinian people of their national
rights and the role the United Nations would be called
upon to play in this regard. We congratulate the Chairman and members of the Committee on their excellent
work, and we express our conviction that the Council
has an opportunity to formulate its own new and concrete plan of action .on the basis of the recommendations in the report.

107. We hope that the Lebanese crisis, that tragedy
which goes beyond the confines of purely domestic
issues and which threatens to become an intemational conflict, will be solved very soon. We must put
12

112. In its statement on the situation in the Middle
East of 11 May 1976 iti support of the new initiative
of the Soviet Uriion for a political settlement of the
crisis in the Middle East [S/1206:;, the Bulgarian
Government expressed its firm conviction that

on the Arab peoples themselves. Now more-than ever
it is essential to strengthen unity and not to yield to
provocative and divisive actions on the part of the
Zionists and the imperialists,
who are striving to pit
the Arab countries against each other while they themselves gleefully rub their hands and pursue their own
nefarious goals.

“The Government
of the People’s
Republic
of Bulgaria is .deeply convinced that a just and
lasting settlement of the Middle East conflict can
be achieved only by solving the three problems,
linked organically with each other, viz:

114. In so far as the socialist countries, including
my own country the People’s Republic of Bulgaria,
are concerned, we have always been and will remain
on the side of the Arab peoples in their just struggle
for the liberation of the territories occupied by Israel
and for the restoration of all the lawful rights of the
people of Palestine and for the establishment of lasting
peace and understanding
among all countries and
peoples of the Middle East.

-Withdrawal
of the Israeli troops from all
Arab territories occupied as a result of the aggression of Israel in.1967;
..
-Fulfilling
the legitimate national demands of
the Arab people ,of Palestine to create a State of
their own;
‘.
-International
guarantees for the security and
inviolability
of frontiers of all States in the Middle
East, for their right to independent existence and
development, :

115. Mr. SHERER
(United
States of America):
I should like to express the appreciation and gratitude
of my delegation to the representatives of Italy the
Lao People’s Democratic
Republic,
Sweden and ,
Bulgaria for their expressions of condolence
with
regard to the deaths of Ambassador Meloy and his two
colleagues in Beirut on 16 June.

The Governmint
of the People’s Republic of
Bulgaria has always maintained
the stand that a
successful solution to these fundamental problems
could be reached at the Geneva Peace Conference
on the Middle East with the participation
of all
parties directly interested, including the Palestine
Liberation Organization.”
[S//2080, nnnex.]

Now

I

,.

.

..,:.

.

.

.

.

the report.
Scssiorr.

2 United

113. The solution to the Middle
East problem,
including the question of Palestine, depends primarily

1

I For
Thirty-first

.

..

.

13

Nations.

see Qflkftrl

Rwords
qf I/W G~vwrtrl
Stqys&wwrrt
No. 35.
Trcwtv
Sm’~~s. vol. 75. D. 287.

A.w~vrthl~.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore
or write to: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences dfpositaires
du
monde entier. Informez-vous
aup& de votre libraire ou adressez-vows 5 : Nations Unis. Section
des ventes, New York.ou
GenPve.

COMO

CONSECUIR~PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas esdn en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas. Seccibn de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

00300

83-60801-February

198%2,200
