18

General Assembly-Fortieth Session

2. Considers that Israel has not yet committed itself
not to attack or threaten to attack nuclear facilities in Iraq
or elsewhere, including facilities under International
Atomic Energy Agency safeguards;
3. Requests the Security Council to take urgent and
effective measures to ensure that Israel complies without
further delay with the provisions of resolution 487 (198 l);
4. Requests the International Atomic Energy Agency to
consider additional measures effectively to ensure that
Israel undertakes not to attack or threaten to attack peaceful nuclear facilities in Iraq or elsewhere, in violation of
the Charter of the United Nations and in disregard of the
safeguards system of the International Atomic Energy
Agency;
5. Calls upon Israel urgently to place all its nuclear
facilities under International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards in accordance with resolution 487 (1981) adopted
unanimously by the Security Council;
6. Reaffirms that Iraq is entitled to compensation for
the damage it has suffered as a result of the Israeli armed
attack on 7 June 1981;
7. Urges all Member States to provide necessary technical assistance to Iraq to restore its peaceful nuclear programme and to overcome the damage caused by the Israeli
attack;
8. Calls upon all States and organizations that have not
yet done so to discontinue co-operating with and giving
assistance to Israel in the nuclear field;
9. Requests the Conference on Disarmament to continue negotiations with a view to an immediate conclusion
of the agreement on the prohibition of military attacks on
nuclear facilities as a contribution to promoting and
ensuring the safe development of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes;
l 0. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-first session the item entitled ..Armed Israeli aggression against the Iraqi nuclear installations and its grave
consequences for the established international system concerning the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and international peace and
security".
59th plenary meeting
1 November 1985

40/7. The situation in Kampuchea
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 34/22 of 14 November 1979,
35/6 of22 October 1980, 36/5 of21 October 1981, 37/6 of
28 October 1982, 38/3 of 27 October 1983 and 39/5 of 30
October 1984,
Recalling further the Declaration on Kampuchea• 1 and
resolution 1 (1) 12 adopted by the International Conference
on Kampuchea, which offer the negotiating framework for
a comprehensive political settlement of the Kampuchean
problem,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the implementation of General Assembly resolution 39/
5,13
Deploring that foreign armed intervention and occupation continue and that foreign forces have not been withdrawn from Kampuchea, thus causing continuing hostilities in that country and seriously threatening international
peace and security,
I I Report of the lnternaJiona/ Conference on Kampuchea, New York. 13-17
July 1981 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.81.1.20), annex I.
12 /bid., annex II.

Noting the continued and effective struggle waged
against foreign occupation by the Coalition with Samdech
Norodom Sihanouk as President of Democratic Kampuchea,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council decision
1985/155 of 30 May 1985 on the right of peoples to selfdetermination and its application to peoples under colonial or alien domination or foreign occupation,
Greatly disturbed that the continued fighting and instability in Kampuchea have forced an additional large
number of Kampucheans to flee to the Thai-Kampuchean
border in search of food and safety,
Recognizing that the assistance extended by the international community has continued to reduce the food
shortages and health problems of the Kampuchean people,
Emphasizing that it is the inalienable right of the Kampuchean people who have sought refuge in neighbouring
countries to return safely to their homeland,
Emphasizing further that no effective solution to the
humanitarian problems can be achieved without a comprehensive political settlement of the Kampuchean conflict,
Seriously concerned about reported demographic
changes being imposed in Kampuchea by foreign occupation forces,
Convinced that, to bring about lasting peace in SouthEast Asia and reduce the threat to international peace and
security, there is an urgent need for the international community to find a comprehensive political solution to the
Kampuchean problem that will provide for the withdrawal
of all foreign forces and ensure respect for the sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and neutral and nonaligned status of Kampuchea, as well as the right of the
Kampuchean people to self-determination free from outside interference,
Reiterating its conviction that, after the comprehensive
political settlement of the Kampuchean question through
peaceful means, the States of the South-East Asian region
can pursue efforts to establish a zone of peace, freedom
and neutrality in South-East Asia so as to lessen international tensions and to achieve lasting peace in the region,
Reaffirming the need for all States to adhere strictly to
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations, which
call for respect for the national independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of all States, non-intervention and
non-interference in the internal affairs of States, nonrecourse to the threat or use of force and peaceful settlement of disputes,
1. Reaffirms its resolutions 34/22, 35/6, 36/5, 37/6,
38/3 and 39/5 and calls for their full implementation;
2. Reiterates its conviction that the withdrawal of all
foreign forces from Kampuchea, the restoration and preservation of its independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity, the right of the Kampuchean people to determine
their own destiny and the commitment by all States to
non-interference and non-intervention in the internal
affairs of Kampuchea are the principal components of any
just and lasting resolution of the Kampuchean problem;
3. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Ad
Hoe Committee of the International Conference on Kampuchea on its activities during 1984-1985 14 and requests
that the Committee continue its work, pending the reconvening of the Conference;
13 A/401759.
14 A/CONF.109/9.

II. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

4. Authorizes the Ad Hoe Committee to convene when
necessary and to carry out the tasks entrusted to it in its
mandate;
5. Reaffirms its decision to reconvene the Conference
at an appropriate time, in accordance with Conference resolution I (I);

6. Renews its appeal to all States of South-East Asia
and others concerned to attend future sessions of the Conference;
7. Requests the Conference to report to the General
Assembly on its future sessions;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to consult with and assist the Conference and the Ad Hoe Committee and to provide them on a regular basis with the necessary facilities to carry out their functions;
9. Expresses its appreciation once again to the Secretary-General for taking appropriate steps in following the
situation closely and requests him to continue to do so and
to exercise his good offices in order to contribute to a comprehensive political settlement;
10. Expresses its deep appreciation once again to donor
countries, the United Nations and its agencies and other
humanitarian organizations, national and international,
that have rendered relief assistance to the Kampuchean
people, and appeals to them to continue to provide emergency assistance to those Kampucheans who are still in
need, especially along the Thai-Kampuchean border and
in the holding centres in Thailand;
l l. Reiterates its deep appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for his efforts in co-ordinating humanitarian relief
assistance and in monitoring its distribution, and requests
him to intensify such efforts as are necessary;
12. Urges the States of South-East Asi?. once a comprehensive political solution to the ~.npuchean conflict
is achieved, to exert renewerl ~riorts to establish a zone of
peace, freedom and neutr:dity in South-East Asia;
13. Reiterates ::,~ hope that, following a comprehen-

sive political solution, an intergovernmental committee
will be established to consider a programme of assistance
to Kampuchea for the reconstruction of its economy and
for the economic and social development of all States in
the region;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-first session on the implementation of the present resolution;

15. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-first session the item entitled "The situation in Kampuchea".
63rd plenary meeting
5 November 1985

40/8. Report of the International Atomic Energy
Agency
The General Assembly,
Having received the report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency to the General Assembly for the year
1984, IS
IS International Atomic Energy Agency, The Annual Report for /984 (Austria, July 1985) (GC(XXIX)/748 and Corr. I); transmitted to the members of
the General Assembly by a note of the Secretary-General (A/40/576 and
Corr. I).

19

Taking note of the statement of the Director General of
the International Atomic Energy Agency of 31 October
1985, 16 which provides additional information on the
main development of the Agency's activities during 1985,
Recognizing the importance of the work of the Agency
to promote further the application of nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes, as envisaged in its Statute,
Also recognizing the special needs of the developing
countries for technical assistance by the Agency in order to
en~arge the contribution of nuclear energy and its applications to their economic development,
Conscious of the importance of the work of the Agency
in the implementation of the safeguards provisions of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 17
and other international treaties, conventions and agreements designed to achieve similar objectives, as well as
ensuring, as far as it is able, that the assistance provided by
the Agency or at its request or under its supervision or
control is not used in such a way as to further any military
purposes, as stated in article II of its Statute,
Recognizing the importance of the work of the Agency
on nuclear power, nuclear safety, radioactive waste management, radiological protection and, in particular, of its
work directed towards assisting developing countries in
planning for the introduction of nuclear power in accordance with their needs,
Noting that the General Conference of the International
Atomic Energy Agency at its twenty-ninth regular session
approved the reappointment by the Board of Governors of
the Agency of Mr. Hans Blix as Director General of the
Agency for a further term of four years, commencing on I
December 1985,
Bearing in mind resolutions GC(XXIX)/RES/442,
GC(XXIX)/RES/443 and GC(XXIX)/RES/444, adopted
on 27 September 1985 by the General Conference of the
Agency at its twenty-ninth regular session,
l. Takes note of the report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency;

2. Affirms its confidence in the role of the International
Atomic Energy Agency in the application of nuclear energy
for peaceful purposes;
3. Urges all States to strive for effective and harmonious international co-operation in carrying out the work of
the International Atomic Energy Agency, pursuant to its
Statute, in promoting the use of nuclear energy and the
application of nuclear science and technology for peaceful
purposes; in strengthening technical assistance and cooperation for developing countries; and in ensuring the
effectiveness and efficiency of the Agency's safeguards system;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
Direct(lr General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency the records of the fortieth session of the General
Assembly relating to the Agency's activities.
69th plenary meeting
8 November 1985
16 See Official Records of the General Assembly. Fortieth Session. Plenan•
Meetings. 56th meeting.
17 Resolution 2371 (XXII). annex
