UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY

COuNwL,BMRy

RECORDS

OFFICIAL

2503’”

MEETING:

15 DECEMBER

JuN0 11992

k&!#

I irsp? ’ ** *

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2503). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoptionofthe

1

agenda.................................................

The situation in Cyprus:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations operation in Cyprus
(S/16192). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

SlPV.2503

2
:
:

-:i.
‘,

,

.”

-

/
_‘.

L

.,. *

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2503rd MEETING
Held in New York
President:

on Thursday,

Mr. Max VAN DER STOEL
.’ (Netherlands).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and NorthernIreland,
United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

agenda (S/Agenda/2503)

of the agenda

The situation in Cyprus:
Report of the Secretary-General
on the United
Nations operation in Cyprus (S/16192)
The meeting

was called to order at 4 p.m.

Expression of thanks to the retiring

President

1. The PRESIDENT:
As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for this month I should like at the very
outset to pay a tribute to Mr. Victor Gauci, representative of Malta, for e great diplomatic skill and unfailing
courtesy with w P .a he guided the work of the Council
during the month of November. In performing his task
he once again gave proof of his outstanding.abilities.
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Cyprus:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
operation in Cyprus (S/16192)
I should like to inform members
2. The PRESIDENT:
of the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Cyprus, Greece and Turkey in which
they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item an the Council’s agenda. In accordance
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
conformity with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Moushoutas
(Cyprus), Mr. Dountas (Greece) and Mr. Kirca (Turkey) took places at the Council table.

15 December

1983, at 3 p.m.

3. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to recall that in the
course of consultations Council members agreed that
an invitation should be extended to Mr. Nail Atalay in
accordance with rule 39 of the provisional rules of
procedure. Unless I hear any objection, I shall take it
that the Council decides to invite Mr. Atalay in accordance with rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure.
It was so decided.
4. Members of the Council have before them the report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations
operation in Cyprus for the period 1 June to 30 November 1983 [S/Z6192 and Add.I]. Members also have a
draft resolution [S/Z62Z71 which has been prepared
in the course of the Council’s consultations. It is my
understanding that the Council is ready to proceed to
the vote on the draft resolution before it. Unless I hear
any objection I shall put the draft resolution to the vote
now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
The draft resolution
olution 544 (2983)].

was adopted unanimously

[res-

5. Mr. SHAH NAWAZ (Pakistan): Mr. President,
I have great pleasure in availing myself of this opportunity first of all to extend to you our congratulations
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of December. During the past
two weeks you have given the Council admirable leadership and excellent advice. We feel confident that your
great experience as a diplomat and statesman and the
prestige you bring to the presidency as a former Foreign
Minister of your own country will enable the Security
Council to fulfil its responsibilities
and carry out its
tasks during this month with great success.
6. I also with to express our sincere appreciation of
the outstanding manner in which Mr. Gauci of Malta
conducted the business of the Council last month.
7. I have asked to speak in order to offer an explanation of our vote on the draft resolution just adopted as
resolution 544 (1983).
8. Throughout the informal consultations on this subject under your presidency, Sir, my delegation’s main
concern was to promote consensus in the Council on
a draft resolution which, by ensuring maximum cooperation by the parties concerned, would facilitate the
effective functioning
of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP)
and strengthen

the hand of the Secretary-General
in the pursuit of his
good offices to bring about a political settlement of the
Cyprus issue. To this end my delegation had occasion
to make certain observations, particularly on the preambular part of the draft resolution, which underlined
the need for further amendments to it in consultation
with the parties concerned so as to secure their broad
agreement on this procedural yet important resolution.

Nations forces in Cyprus in facilitating the resolution of
the Cyprus issue. It is our hope that the parties concerned will continue to co-operate with UNFICYP.
14. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Cyprus, upon whom I now call.
15. Mr. MOUSHOUTAS
(Cyprus): It is an honour
and a pleasure for me to congratulate you warmly, Sir,
on your assumption of the high-office of the presidency of the Council for the month of December and to
express to you my Government’s deep appreciation for
the outstanding competence, efficiency and tact with
which you have conducted the consultations for the
renewal of the mandate of UNFICYP.
Your vast diplomatic experience and statesmanship assure a positive’
outcome to the consideration of the item before the
Council. It is a source of satisfaction for us to see
as President of the Council the representative of the
Netherlands, a country with which my country enjoys
friendly and close relations.

9. Regrettably, in the draft resolution put to the vote,
the third and fourth preambular paragraphs, which
were objected to by the Turkish Cypriot representative,
remained unaltered, whereas the second preambular
paragraph was modified to indicate that the draft resolution lacked the concurrence of the parties concerned. For the first time, therefore, the Council has
adopted a draft resolution on UNFICYP
which does
not enjoy the agreement of all the parties concerned.
This is not because any of the parties entertains reservations in respect of the extension of the mandate of
UNFICYP,
but because the resolution contains certain
elements which are unacceptable to one of the parties.

16. Our congratulations
go also to your predecessor,
Mr. Victor Gauci of Malta, a friendly neighbouring
country in the Mediterranean with which we share common aspirations and destiny. The impeccable manner
with which he carried out his high tasks as President of
the Security Council during the month of November,
when members were considering the attempted dismemberment
of my country by Turkey, honours his
country and himself.

10. During the informal consultations my delegation
had also suggested deletion of a reference to “other
relevant resolutions”
in the fourth preambular paragraph because this implicitly
includes resolution 541
(1983), on which we had cast a negative vote and which
was rejected by the Turkish Cypriot community. Such
a reference would further alienate the Turkish Cypriot community
and prejudice the functioning
of,
UNFICYP.

‘_.
:_
:
_..._-:.
_

17. In the course of human history there are glowing
moments of progress but also striking hours of regression. One such hour of regression occurred in my country during the last six-month mandate of UNFICYP.
Turkey, in contemptuous disregard of the Charter, the
mandatory resolutions of the Security Council and
the resolutions of the General Assembly, attempted on
15 November,
in Ian Smith fashion, to finalize the
aggression committed against Cyprus on 20 July 1974
through the so-called declaration of independence of
the areas of the Republic under Turkish military occupation.

11. The draft resolution suffered from yet another
flaw. Unlike those in the past it made no reference to
the intercommunal
talks and the important agreement
which had been reached on the Cyprus issue within and
outside the United Nations framework. In November,
when the Cyprus issue was considered by the Council
[2497th to 2500th meetings], Pakistan objected to resolution 541 (1983) precisely for the reason that it
departed from the position of consistent support and
encouragement to the intercommunal
talks which the
Council had maintained over the years. Omission of
any reference to the intercommunal
talks and continued
reference to other relevant resolutions in the fourth
preambular paragraph, therefore, did not make the
draft resolution fully satisfactory from our point of
view.

18. This heinous crime aiming at the dismemberment
of Cyprus shocked world public opinion and brought
justified condemnation
of the Turkish action by all
States and many international organizations. The declaration of an independent Turkish Cypriot State is a
new and more sinister act of aggression manifestly directed against the territorial integrity, unity and independence of Cyprus for the purpose of partitioning the
island and destroying its identity and historic existence
through the ages. A public statement on behalf of the
Secretary-General
said the following:

12. What was required was a simple procedural resolution. The controversial
elements could have been
easily dispensed with. It is a matter of regret that
this was not done and that the draft resolution which
emerged as a result of our consultations contained elements which had no direct bearing on the question of
extension of the mandate of UNFICYP.

“The
Secretary-General
deeply
regrets the
announcement of a ‘Turkish Republic of Northern
Cyprus’. He considers that this move is contrary to
the resolutions of the Security Council on Cyprus and
at variance with the high-level agreements of 1977

13. We have nevertheless cast an affirmative vote for
the draft resolution to underscore the importance we
attach to the United Nations peace-keeping role and to
the usefulness of the continued presence of the United
2

.,_-.
..--i-.

d,..

.I

-

.

.

.

,_,

,-..

.

._..

^

and 1979. It is bound to affect adversely the situation
in Cyprus and to complicate the efforts of the Secretary-General to promote an agreed, just and lasting
settlement of the Cyprus problem under the mission
of good offices entrusted to him by the Security
Council.”

State Member of the United Nations and completes the
picture of a country which openly claims lands and
territories from other States.
23. Such statements, said the President of the Republic of Cyprus, Mr. Spyros Kyprianou,
not only run
counter to every concept of international law and violate all its rules, but also expose Turkish propaganda,
which always invoked the pretext of protecting Turkish
Cypriots when all along the real aim was to undermine
the statehood of Cyprus and partition the island.

19. In a message to the Fourteenth Islamic Conference of Foreign Ministers, held at Dhaka from 6 to
11 December, the Secretary-General
underlined that
“This announcement has inevitably increased tension
in the island and set.back the United Nations efforts
to bring about an agreed settlement of the Cyprus
problem.”

24. The m-etext of nrotecting the Turkish Cvnriots has
now been abandoned. Turkey’s leaders ,ihemselves
admit, by their cynical statements, that their policy is
motivated by expansionism and not by the promotion of
the interests of the Turkish Cypriot community.

20. The illegality of this declaration is obvious. The
so-called Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus is a
bogus and illegal entity, the outgrowth of aggression,
set up by Turkey as its puppet in the occupied area.
Legally, morally and politically this entity has no territory of its own except the areas controlled by the
Turkish occupation troops, the latter having genotidally uprooted the whole indigenous Greek Cypriot
population constituting 80 per cent of the population
in the area and having implanted settlers from the
mainland of Turkey in the homes and lands of those
expelled. This fictitious entity which Turkey is promoting is, I repeat, the offspring of aggression and
usurpation of the Greek Cypriot properties and the
outcome of a continuing criminality against my country
and people. Its true significance is a sinister attempt by
Turkey to render permanent the genocidal expulsion of
the Greek Cypriots of the occupied area and definitively to rob them of their ancestral homes and country
in an unabashed manner that cannot and should not be
tolerated in a civilized world society .in the United
Nations era. It Is. therefore inconceivable
that any
Member State of the United Nations would be willing to
suffer the indignity of recognizing such a State created
by unparalleled international
crimes.

25. It is very heartening, however, that humanity
seems to have realized the true designs and real aims of
Turkey. This is clearly reflected in the universal condemnation of the latest manifestation of Turkish expansionism.
26. This condemnation must, however, take practical
form so that the aim of reversing the illegal attempt at
the secession of part of the territory of the Republic of
Cyprus may be achieved and an end may be put to
Turkey’s annexationist designs, which are tantamount
to the abolition of international law and order and are a
real threat to peace and security in the area.
27. Turkey’s frivolous argument that the secessionist
move came freely from the Turkish Cypriots living in
the north received the international contempt which it
deserved. For it was Turkey, in line with its separatist,
divisive and segregationist policy, which conceived,
instigated and carried out this abominable act against
the territorial integrity and unity of the Republic of
Cyprus. It was Turkey which pulled the strings of the
puppet regime of Mr. DenktaS; and the latter, in absolute response to the dictates of his masters, acted in full
conformity with his doctrines of bantustanization.

21. The Government of Turkey, which is deservedly
taking its place among the most regressive regimes of
the world, proceeded, during the six-month period
under review, with a series of illegalities culminating in
the attempted secession designed to dismember my.
country, to dissect what was created as one and indivisible and to incorporate part of it into the mainland of
Turkey. That Turkey’s final aim has all along been
expansionist and the annexation of part of Cyprus is
now made abundantly clear, even to those who were
non-believers.

28. Furthermore, the Turkish argument that the Turkish Cypriot community in the area can exercise the right
to self-determination,
is doubly fallacious. First, it is a
distortion of this lofty principle, embodied in General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), which is to be exercised by a people as a whole and not on the basis of
factional, religious, communal or ethnic criteria. Secondly, the reality is that they cannot exercise such a
right on a part of the territory of Cyprus, on which they
have all along been but a small minority, while the large
majority--80
per cent-has, as already explained, been
genocidally expelled and supplanted, through the force
of arms, by Turks from Anatolia and by the Turkish
military occupying forces.

22. The Turkish Prime-Minister-elect,
Mr. Ozal, in
his latest statement unequivocally and bluntly put forward Turkey’s expansionist designs in Cyprus. The
statements that Cyprus is a “dagger stuck in the belly
of Turkey” and that “Cyprus, lying only 40 miles from
Turkey’s southern coast, is particularly important for
the nation’s security” and that “if controlled by a
hostile force it can be extremely dangerous” demonstrate the designs of Turkey against an independent

29. The Turkish argument that in Cyprus there are
two peoples is an untenable and unacceptable position. In Cyprus, as in so many other countries, there
3

.

are people of more than one ethnic background. Some
are of Greek ethnic background and others of Turkish
ethnic background; there are still others of Armenian,
Maronite and Latin background, all forming a precious
and inseparable part of one people in one, undivided
country. The present forced separation of our people
carried out by Turkish bayonets is not-a’ reality; it is
artificial. But even if one assumes that the Turkish
Cypriot community
of 120,000 persons, which was
forced by the occupier to reside in the north, is a separate people and that it can exercise separately that right
to self-determination-which
is not the case-this community is at present as much under occupation and
foreign domination
as the rest of our people. the
35,000 Turkish troops, the 50,000 Turkish settlers
brought in from Turkey and the continuing yoke of
occupation are not the necessary prerequisites for the
free exercise of the will of the Turkish Cypriot community.
30. As a result of this illegal action taken by Turkey,
the Security Council, by its resolution 541 (1983), of
18 November, deplored in unequivocal terms the declaration of the purported secession of a part of the
Republic of Cyprus to establish the so-called Turkish
Republic of Northern Cyprus and considered it legally
invalid. The Council also called on all States to refrain
from recognizing this fictitious entity and, more importantly, demanded the withdrawal of the declaration and
the urgent and effective implementation
of Council resolutions 365 (1974) and 367 (1975). The resolution, in
addition, requested the Secretary-General to pursue his
mission of good offices in order to achieve the earliest
possible progress toward a just and lasting settlement
of the problem.
3 1. In another international forum, the heads of State
or Government of the Commonwealth
Countries condemned the declaration issued on 15 November to
create a secessionist State in the area under foreign
occupation. Fully endorsing Security Council resolution 541 (1983), they denounced the declaration as
legally invalid and reiterated the call for its non-recognition and immediate withdrawal. They further called
upon all States not to facilitate or in any way assist
the illegal secessionist entity. They regarded this illegal
act as a challenge to the international community and
demanded the implementation
of the relevant United
Nations resolutions on Cyprus. The Commonwealth
heads of Government pledged their renewed support
for the independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity,
unity and non-alignment
of the Republic of Cyprus,
and, in this respect, they expressed their solidarity
with their colleague the President of Cyprus. Furthermore, they agreed to establish a special Commonwealth
Action Group on Cyprus, at high level, consisting of
Australia, Guyana, India, Nigeria and Zambia, to assist
in securing compliance with Council resolution 541
(1983).
32. Another international
forum, the Committee of
Ministers of the Council of Europe, deplored the dec-

laration, considered it legally invalid and called for its
withdrawal. Furthermore it declared that it continues to
regard the Government
of the Republic of Cyprus,
which is represented in the Committee of Ministers, as
the sole legitimate Government of Cyprus.
33. Turkey, the perpetrator of the conspiracy and the
only country which recognized that illegitimate
entity
in order to further its long-standing plans to incorporate
it into the mainland of Turkey, has, as it has always
done, contemptuously
disregarded the mandatory provisions ,of resolution 541 (1983) and all other expressions of world public opinion to the effect that it should ’
withdraw all recognition.
34. The primary task, therefore, of the Security Council and of the Secretary-General
is to force Turkey to
take all the necessary steps to vacate this illegal declaration, which is aimed at the dismemberment
of one of
the Members of the United Nations. Very correctly, the
spokesman of the Secretary-General said on 25 November, “It is now necessary to work both for the implementation of the Security Council resolution in all its
aspects and for the defusing of tensions in this critical
area”.
35. The Council, therefore, must give fresh thought to
its historic mission and decide what practical steps and
measures should be taken to reverse and neutralize this
illegal act and to make Turkey comply with the Council’s decision. The purported secession is illegal,
immoral and contrary to the Charter of the United
Nations, to international
law, to the resolutions of
this body, to the international treaties establishing the
Republic of Cyprus and to the Helsinki Final Act, article IV of which states that: “No such occupation or
acquisition will be recognized as legal.” The Council
must stand firmly in defence of the unity and territorial
integrity of States by doing everything within its power
to uphold in practice the rule of law and the principles
enshrined in the Charter and enunciated in its resolutions on the question of Cyprus.
36. Odious as acts of aggression may be, they are,
unfortunately,
not infrequent, and the resilience of
mankind in the face of invasions and occupations has
been displayed in all its breadth and strength. This is the
first time within decades that an act aimed at the dismemberment of a State Member of the United Nations
has been perpetrated. Therefore I hope to be judged
leniently if I state solemnly that we, all the Members of
the United Nations, are faced with a grave challenge:
are we to be the States which did not do enough to
neutralize this illegal act?
37. Mere condemnation
of this heinous act will not
suffice. What is needed is decisive, practical steps,
restoring the unity and territorial integrity of Cyprus.
The Security Council should also consider practical
steps against Turkey, which challenges the provisions
of the Charter, contemptuously
disregards the Council’s decisions and thus tarnishes even further United
Nations credibility and effectiveness.

38. Turkey, like South Africa, has since 1974, when
the act of aggression was perpetrated against my country, been following a policy of contemptuous disregard
of the mandatory decisions of this body. It continues
and escalates the illegalities with the aim of further
consolidating the results of its aggression and occupation of almost 40 per cent of the territory of my country
and blatantly violates the human rights and fundamental freedoms of all our people. Can it be denied that as
of now not a single refugee has been allowed to return
to his home and land, that not an inch of occupied
territory has been vacated in compliance with General
Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX),
made mandatory
when endorsed by the Council’s resolution 365 (1974)?
And can it be denied that not a single missing person has
yet been accounted for and not even a single file on the
hundreds of missing Cypriots has been investigated?

43. First, we responded within the time-frame set by
the Secretary-General.
Secondly, our response was
in writing, and it is a matter of record. Thirdly, we
accepted the personal involvement and initiative of the
Secretary-General.
Fourthly, we accepted his methodology of devising indicators. Fifthly, we submitted,
again in writing, our specific observations, suggestions
and comments to the indicators, as he requested when
my President met with him on 14 September. The Secretary-General
himself has described our response,
both publicly, through an official statement of his
spokesman, and privately, as “a positive and constructive step”.
44. The Turkish attitude, on the other hand, was from
the very day of the adoption of resolution 371253 a
negative one. First, they rejected outright the initiative of the Secretary-General.
They demonstrated this
rejection by postponing their meeting with him until
after 30 September, the deadline set for the Turkish
response, so as to demonstrate that they met him outside the framework of his initiative. Secondly, they did
not submit a written response. Thirdly, they rejected
the methodology
devised by the Secretary-General.
Fourthly, they submitted no suggestions or comments
to the indicators, as he requested. In fact, we know that
Mr. Denktas, in his meeting with the Secretary-General, angrily rejected any notion suggesting activation
of this approach and flatly refused to present written
comments on the Secretary-General’s
three indicators.

39. Consequently the Security Council has no choice
but to consider itself warranted in taking those measures provided for in the Charter to ensure the withdrawal of Turkish occupation troops and Turkish settlers from Cyprus, the withdrawal of the declaration
and the rescinding of the Turkish recognition of the socalled Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus. The usefulness and prestige of the United Nations as an instrument for the maintenance of international
peace and
security are at stake. Lofty principles of the Charter are
being violated by Turkey, and the situation cries out for
remedial action by the Council.
40. Bearing in mind those thoughts and appeals to the
Council, my Government has agreed to the renewal of
the mandate of UNFICYP
for another period of six
months. In spite of-its limited mandate, which was again
so sadly demonstrated during the last escalation of the
continuing aggression against the Republic of Cyprus,
we believe that UNFICYP’s
presence is indispensable
and that it has played a positive and constructive role in
the island in maintaining peace and security, which are
the sine qua non of a peaceful settlement.

45. With regard to paragraphs 54 and 55, on the subject of the possibility of a high-level meeting between
my President and Mr. Denktas, which was worked
upon by the Secretary-General,
the good faith of the
Government of Cyprus was again amply demonstrated.
Also revealed is the hypocrisy of the Turkish side and of
Mr. DenktaS, who requested the meeting himself.
46. Our appreciation of and faith in the offtce of the
Secretary-General
are for us a matter of principle from
which we can never waver. The United Nations and the
Secretary-General
are the cornerstones of our foreign
policy upon which we have since independence placed
our faith for a better world and for a just solution of
our problem. We have consistently and constructively
worked for the strengthening of the Organization and
for the full exercise of the authority, functions or mandate of the Secretary-General,
as provided in the Charter. Our diplomatic missions abroad need no special
instructions to support what strengthens the sphere of
activities and enhances the prestige of the United Nations. And that is the case with the high office of its chief
administrator, to whom we extend our assurance of full
and constructive co-operation in his initiative and personal involvement.
We also express to him personally
the appreciation of the Government and the people of
Cyprus.

41. In this regard and in view of the humanitarian role
UNFICYP
is playing, we express our deep appreciation to the countries contributing in the form of funds
and men, to Major-General
Greindl and to the officers
and members of UNFICYP
for their dedicated service
to the cause of the United Nations and of peace in
Cyprus.
42. I should like now to refer briefly to some parts of
the report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations operations in Cyprus [S/16292] dated 1 December
1983, and particularly
to paragraphs 51, 52 and 53,
relating to his personal involvement
and initiative in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 37/253,
of 13 May 1983. A careful reading of these paragraphs,
although they are couched in diplomatic language, indicates that the response of my Government to his soundings, as handed to the Secretary-General
by the President on 30 September, was positive and constructive
and was described as such by the Secretary-General
himself.

47. Our appreciation
is extended also to the Secretary-General’s
able colleagues,
Mr. Urquhart,
Mr. Sherry, Mr. Holger and Mr. Picco. It was with
5

pleasure that we learnt of the high appointment
of
Mr. Gobbi in the Government of his country, Argentina. At the same time, we are equally pleased that he
has agreed to continue his valuable services to the
Secretary-General.

vember, deplored that action, and in paragraph 2 considered it legally invalid and called for its withdrawal. It
is obvious that that paragraph contains the main thrust
of that highly important resolution. Moreover, in paragraph 4 of the same resolution, the Council requested
the Secretary-General
to pursue his mission of good
offices, in order to achieve the earliest possible progress towards a just and lasting settlement in Cyprus.
Consequently, resolution 541 (1983) thus becomes one
of primary importance with regard to the Cyprus question as a whole. As is natural, it is therefore directly
related to the present resolution, which reaffirms the
provisions of resolution 186 (1964), of 4 March 1964,
and other relevant resolutions.

48. Little Cyprus, whether bleeding or temporarily
mutilated, whether assisted or alone, will survive this
ignominious
act of aggression and continue through
its history as one people and one undivided and free
country.

,
_‘_

49. We reiterate our feelings of friendship and common destiny to our Turkish Cypriot compatriots. We
shall spare no efforts and fear no obstacles until we
succeed, with the help of this respected body, in freeing
our common country from the yoke of occupation by
Turkey and reunite our people now separated by force
of arms in a ‘free, territorially
integral and united
Cyprus.

56. My Government wishes to state that it maintains
the hope that the Secretary-General,
with the support
of the Council and the General Assembly, will be able to
contribute to the implementation
of paragraph 2 of resolution 541 (1983), so that favourable conditions can be
created in the search for a solution to this protracted
international dispute.

50. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Greece, on whom I call.

57. In the context of this analvsis of the situation, mv
Government welcomes the renewal of the UNFICYP
mandate with particular satisfaction, because a highly
explosive situation endangering peace in the area might
be created at any moment in a republic whose con-.
siderably smaller forces are confronted, on its own
territory, by 30,000 Turkish troops. The danger for
peace becomes greater if one takes into account numerous factors emanating from the historical background of the Republic of Cyprus and its location in an
area which is already overcharged with the risks of war.
That is why the presence of UNFICYP,
with its great
prestige, is an element which contributes to averting
dangerous crises. It is a true peace-keeping force. It
might also help create an atmosphere of moderation and
confidence.

51. Mr. DOUNTAS
(Greece): I should like to thank
you, Mr. President, and the other members of .the
Council for acceding to my request to participate in this
debate under rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure .
52. Allow me at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
the month of December. In your person we pay a tribute
both to a distinguished European statesman and experienced diplomat and to the country which you represent. I should also like on this occasion to congratulate the representative of Malta, Mr. Gauci, for the
skilful manner in which he guided the Council’s work
last month.
53. The renewal of the mandate of UNFICYP
since it
was established has been based on a proposal by the
Secretary-General,
endorsed by the Security Council,
and on the subsequent consent of the Government of
Cyprus, which alone expresses the sovereignty of the
Republic of Cyprus over all its territory.

58. In conclusion, I should like to express our appreciation to Major-General
Greindl and the officers and
men of UNFICYP
for the efficiency and dedication
with which they are discharging the important mission
entrusted to them. Particular thanks go to Australia,
Austria, Canada, Denmark, Finland, Ireland, Sweden
and the United Kingdom,
which contribute contingents, as well as to those countries which are helping
with financial contributions.

54. The Government of Greece, as in the past, concurred in the proposal of the Secretary-General for the
renewal of the Force’s mandate for another six months.
But it did so deeply disturbed by, and fully conscious
of, the dangers entailed by the presence of 30,000 Turkish occupation troops on Cypriot territory. Despite the
earnest and natural desire of the Government of Cyprus
to contribute to a just and lasting solution based on
democratic principles accepted world-wide, the Turkish side not only has not responded positively but has
exacerbated the situation by the purported proclamation of the Turkish Cypriot pseudo-State.

59. I should like also in this context to express the
appreciation of my Government for the continued interest and involvement of the Secretary-General
and his
staff in the effort to promote conditions conducive to a
just, democratic and viable solution to the problem of
Cyprus, the epicentre of which remains the withdrawal
of the Turkish troops of occupation from the Republic
of Cyprus.
60. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is Mr. Nail
Atalay, to whom the Council has extended an invitation
in accordance with rule 39 of its provisional rules of

55. In view of those developments,
the Security
Council, in its resolution 541 (1983) adopted on 18 No6

64. It is for all those concerned to consider seriously
whether pushing the Turkish Cypriot people to take
such unavoidable steps in order to assert its treaty
rights as a result of the one-sided decisions and conduct
in support of the Greek Cypriot position alone will, in
the long run, be conducive to finding a peaceful, just
and lasting solution of the Cyprus problem.

procedure. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
61. Mr. ATALAY:
I thank you, Mr. President and,
through you, the other members of the Council for
giving me this opportunity to participate inithe debate
on behalf of the Turkish people of Cyprus, an equal cofounder partner in the independence and sovereignty of
the Republic of Cyprus established in 1960.
,f 1.
62. I am sure the Council will recall what I said six
months ago, on 15 June [2453rd meeting];during
the
deliberations of this body on this very subject but, by
way of refreshing members’ memories, I should like to
quote from my speech that day. I then said:

65. A well-known Greek Cypriot author, Zenon Stavrinides, in his book The Cyprus Conflict: National
Identity and Statehood, published by Louis Stavrinides
Press, Nicosia, quotes from the humorist George Mikes
as follows: “The Cypriots know that they cannot become a world power; but they have succeeded in
becoming a world nuisance, which is almost as good.”

“The Turkish people of Cyprus and its Government have been doing and will continue to do their
utmost in order to bring about . . . a solution. However, in spite’of the repeated assertions by the Greek
Cypriot leadership that sovereignty in Cyprus belongs exclusively to them, the Turkish Cypriot people must also assert that, in reality, the independence
and sovereignty of Cyprus can be the outcome only
of an equal partnership between the two communities. And I must warn all concerned that every time
the Greek Cypriot people rejects this partnership by
word or by deed, each time it violates the inalienable
rights and status of the Turkish people of Cyprus, my
community will, as a last resort, consider itself at
liberty, and even duty-bound, to do everything possible to defend its right of partnership and its inherent
right to self-determination,”
[Ibid., -p&. 121.1

66. Why are the Cypriots singled out for this notoriety? The same author on pages 62 and 63 in his book
sheds light on this humorous observation. He says:
“From the beginnings of the Greek Cypriot nationalist movement, the Greeks spoke of Cyprus as ‘their
island’, and claimed that she belongs to the glorious
Greek people and that the existence of the Turkish
community is a regrettable aberration of history. The
Turks could point to many statements made by Greek
leaders even during the ‘partnership’
years, which
implied that the Turkish presence mars the purity of
the Greek island. For example, Makarios himself
said on 4 October 1962, that is, while he was head of
the bicommunal
State, in a speech at his home village, Panayia:
“ ‘Until this small Turkish community that forms
part of the Turkish race and has been the terrible
enemy of Hellenism
is expelled, the duty to the
heroes of EOKA cannot be considered as terminated.’

63. If, in the intervening period, the Greek Cypriot
wing of the bicommunal
Republic of Cyprus could
continue without any legal, moral and practical justification, on any basis whatsoever, to represent the
whole of Cyprus including the Turkish Cypriot people
and areas, in which their writ has never run since the
Greek Cypriot onslaught on the Turkish Cypriots in
December 1963; and if the ‘Greek Cypriot administration could claim to speak for the Turkish Cypriots and
be allowed to consider them as being “non-existent”
since December 1963; and if the United Nations organs
chose to ignore the facts and the legal and political
issues and implications involved; then it should be fully
understood that the Turkish Cypriot wing of the bicommunal partnership Republic was left with no other
alternative but to declare that it had nothing whatsoever to do with that entity which was wrongly recognized as the Government of Cyprus, that is to say, the
racist Greek Cypriot administration.
The Turkish Cypriot wing was and is entitled, in law as well as in fact,
to assert its partnership rights, duties and responsibilities in the sovereignty of the Republic of Cyprus, as
recognized in the state of affairs created by the Cypriot
Constitution and the international treaties in 1960, and
to declare itself a separate State, while leaving the door
open to establishing political links, in a federation,
between the two wings of a bicommunal Republic of
Cyprus.

“In response to such Greek attitudes, Turkish
nationalism asserts the dignity of the Turkish community and the rights and values of the Turks of
Cyprus. This sentiment has been expressed in 1973
by my President, Mr. Denktag, in his Rotary Club
address as follows:
“ ‘We are part of Cyprus. You can’t throw us out.
So accommodate us. Let’s accommodate ourselves.
We don’t want to be “not wanted”. That is the difficulty. For years we have been told by words and by
action that we are not wanted in Cyprus, that Cyprus
is not ours. And that makes any community
very
angry, and makes any community entitled, at least in
their own conscience, to take all steps in order to
prove that a land where they have lived for centuries
is theirs and they intend to keep it as such.’ ”
67. The Turkish Cypriots’ struggle then can only be
understood as a necessary effort to resist the absorption
of the Turkish Cypriot people by a Greek State or a
Greek-dominated
Cypriot State. I continue from the
same book, page 61:
7

“To understand the nature of the offtcial Turkish
Cypriot nationalist position after 1963, it is necessary
to see what the Turkish leaders had.leamed . . .. from
their years of ‘partnership’
and their study of the
Akritas Plan” -this plan is the extermination
plan
of the Greeks, how to exterminate the Turks of Cyprus- “First of all it is impossible to resist the conclusion that Makarios and the other Greek leaders
never honestly intended to co-operate with the Turkish leaders under a bicommunal type of constitution,
let alone be satisfied with a mere 13 amendments of
the 1960 Constitution.
As the Akritas Plan makes it
clear, the demand for ‘reasonable’
amendments
would be only the first step of reducing the Turkish
community to the status of a mere minority unable to
effectively control the will of the Greek Cypriot
majority. Once this was achieved, and the Treaty of
Guarantee’ nullified, there would be nothing stopping
the Greek leadership from appealing to the principles
of self-determination,
‘which means, in the context of
Cyprus, that a monolithic
majority of Greeks can
decide for a monolithic
minority of Turks too, and
proclaim enosis. Further . . . the Greeks believed
that the objective of enosis justified, if necessary, the
use of violent means”.

71. After a long and arduous struggle of no less than
two decades against this Greek Cypriot aggression and
tyranny, at great sacrifice and cost in lives, and as a
result of the events initiated by the Greek coup of July
1974, the Turkish Cypriot people for the first time in
years have been able to live in peace and security.
72. It is futile for Mr. Moushoutas and the Greek
representative to try to present Turkey as an invader
and appeal to international organizations for remedy to
the prevailing situation.
73. As a lawyer himself, Mr. Moushoutas must know
the tenet of the law which says, “He who comes to
equity must come with clean hands”. Yet, had he taken
a glance at the bloodstained record of his administration, so appropriately portrayed in the following quotation, he would have seen that the hands of his leaders
are far from clean. This is a quotation from Le Cunard
enchains’, Paris, 19 February 1964:
“iast Saturday he, Makarios, was seen receiving
journalists and laughing his head off for a full minute.
That day the corpses of massacred Turks were piled
up at the other side of the island . . . He will arrive
with his hands pure. And yet all the perfumes of
Cyprus . . . yes, yes, all the perfumes of Cyprus, will
never clean those hands.”

These are not my words. I have quoted these words
from a book written by a Greek Cypriot.
68. For 20 years, one fourth of the island’s population, the Turkish Cypriots, were politically,
socially,
economically and physically oppressed by their Greek
Cypriot co-founder partners and neighbours. The
leaders of the Greek Cypriot community and of Greece
personally encouraged and conducted this oppression
both in thought and in action. As far back as 4 September 1962, the late Archbishop Makarios is on record as
saying what I have already quoted above, but I will
nevertheless read it once again: “Unless this small
community, forming a part of the Turkish race which
has been the terrible enemy of Hellenism, is expelled,
the duty of the heroes of EOKA can never be considered as terminated.”

This is, as I said, a quotation from a French newspaper.
74. If Mr. Moushoutas and his leaders have any conscience, they should ask the forgiveness of the Turkish
Cypriot people, as well as of their own people, instead
of continuing with profuse dissemintition of anti-Turkish propaganda for their ignoble purpose of distorting
the facts to deceive world public opinion, and reinforcing and justifying untenable posture in Cyprus.
75. Alas, Greek and Greek Cypriot leaders, even at
this late hour, have not recanted and are showing no
signs of repentance for their abominable and unspeakable crimes in Cyprus which turned the island into a
“lost paradise”. Even at this late hour, they do not
appear to concede one iota from their age-old, anachronistic ideal of enosis, which cost so much in terms
of innocent human lives, resulted in horrifying mass
graves and, on the whole, brought Cyprus to the edge of
a precipice on so many occasions, and for so long.

69. During the same year, 1962, one of Makarios’
ministers, Mr. Yorchajis, went even further than his
master, to say, “There is no place in Cyprus for anyone
who is not Greek, does not think Greek and who does
not constantly feel Greek.”
70. With such concepts and sentiments in mind, thousands of Turks were uprooted from their villages; hundreds were rounded up by Greek hordes and taken to as
yet undisclosed destinations. Many were discovered
buried in common graves and ditches, and many were
forced out of Cyprus, out of their centuries-old homes
and country. As to those who remained, they lived for
12 years in utter poverty and in most primitive conditions, while their Greek neighbours grabbed all that
Cyprus could provide for its population. Above all, the
Turks were constantly harassed and wantonly killed
whenever an opportunity made itself available.

76. To elucidate my point, I would like now to refer to
the message of the Greek Premier, Mr. Andreas Papandreou, to his nation on the forty-third anniversary of the
Ohi Day, on 28 October 1983-this was in ANA, the
official bulletin of Greece-and,
in particular, to the
slanderous remarks about Cyprus contained therein,
which constitute the latest demonstration of hypocrisy
that has come to characterize the Greek policy on Cyprus. In the message, Mr. Papandreou had the audacity
to refer to Cyprus as “part of the Greek national area”,
and in so doing he signalled the continuation
of the
8

inhuman and racist policies emanating from the archaic
goals and principles of the centuries-old Greek Megali
Idea, which envisaged the resurrection not only of’
the Byzantine Empire, but also that of the empire of
Alexander the Great.

as a solution to the Cyprus problem and that he was
against dialogue of any kind with any party, putting a
host of other unacceptable preconditions as obstacles
to a fruitful dialogue between the two national communities in Cyprus.

77. As members are well aware, the enosis movement
in Cyprus is a natural extension and an obvious outcome of this Megali Idea and, as such, still constitutes
the main impediment to the finding of an overall peaceful, just and lasting solution to the Cyprus problem.

81. It must be noted here that for reasons known only
to himself Mr. Papandreou felt the need to include
confederation amongst the solutions unacceptable to
him. May I stress here again that a confederal solution
has never been on our official agenda; we have never
made any proposal to this effect nor approached anybody with confederation in mind. Mr. Papandreou may
have -mentioned confederation because he lacks a good
grip on the subject, or he may be indulging in pure
polemics. We do not know. But what is important about
his latest de’marche is the fact that he is rejecting a
federal solution to the conflict.

78. Since 1 April 1955, when the enosis movement
was actively launched in Cyprus, the Greek Cypriots,
under the command and with the encouragement and
support of Greece, have executed vicious armed
attacks on whomever they considered to be an obstacle
to the achievement of their racist, inhuman and expansionist aims, in total disregard of the lives and rights of
the Turkish people of Cyprus. Those armed onslaughts
have since 1955 caused great misery and loss of life in
Cyprus-all
in the name of enosis. An excerpt from
a speech given by the then Prime Minister of Greece,
Mr. George Papandreou, at the University of Salonica
on 27 October 1964 will help prove the point:

82. I shall now attempt to contrast Mr. Papandreou’s
rejection of a federal solution with the very clear relevant provisions of the 1977 and 1979 high-level agreements and with the Secretary-General’s
announcement
made immediately after the 1977 summit. These are the
facts.

“All Greek Cypriots are for enosis. Cyprus must
become the spring-board for the dreams of Alexander
the Great in the orient. Cyprus alone is a small island
and cannot achieve such dreams, but united with
Greece the Cypriot people will have the opportunity
of performing its historic task in the Middle East.”

83. The first guideline
of the Denktag-Makarios
agreement of 12 February 1977 [see S/12323, para. 51
reads as follows: “We are seeking an independent, nonaligned, bi-communal
Federal Republic.”
Furthermore, point 2 of the DenktaS-Kyprianou
agreement of
19 May 1979 [see S/13369, para. 5Z], endorsed the
Denktas-Makarios
guidelines as the basis for the talks.
And, lastly, I draw the Council’s attention to United
Nations Press Release SG/T/752 of 17 February 1977,
from which I quote verbatim:

79. Speaking on the same occasion 19 years later, it
was George Papandreou’s son, Andreas Papandreou,
who sent an irresponsible message, which only goes to
prove the continuation of the expansionist policies of
the Greek Megali Idea. What is more regrettable is the
fact that this latest message is only one in a series of
such aggressive statements which are revealing manifestations of a train of thought ‘which shows no sign
of abandonment.
Furthermore,
in line with the context and spirit of the message of Greek Prime Minister
Andreas Papandreou to his nation, the Pan-Hellenic
EOKA Fighters’ Association, in commemorating
the
same occasion, Ohi Day, has declared its opposition
not only to the principles and framework agreed upon in
the 1977 and 1979 summit meetings but also to the
process of intercommunal
talks in general aimed at
finding a peaceful solution to the Cyprus problem.
Moreover,
that organization
has boldly called on
Greece to redeploy its armed forces in Cyprus, thus in
effect envisaging a return to the tragic years of 1963 to
1974, when the road to enosis seemed so open and
clear.

85. It seems evident to us that the Prime Minister of
Greece is categorically rejecting the principles and decisions embodied in the agreements reached between
the two national communities
in Cyprus, agreements
which have obviously been approved, supported and
adopted by successive Secretaries-General
and by the
Security Council.

80. That is hardly surprising to us, for such organizations have as their mentor the Greek Prime Minister
himself who, as reported on 23 November by the Greek
daily Ta Nea, has at last let the cat out of the bag by
publicly declaring what we rightly suspected all along:
that he had never accepted federation or confederation

86. On the other hand, if we take a cursory look at the
latest pronouncements,
announcements
and declarations on the Cyprus issue made by both the Greek
Cypriots and the Greek Government, we see that the
sameness of opinions and concurrence of views is
pointedly emphasized by all of them.

“Asked whether the term ‘bi-communal’
introduced a major change as against ‘cantonal’ or ‘bizonal’, the Secretary-General recalled that President
Makarios had used the term ‘bi-communal’.
The
Secretary-General thought that what was meant was
a bi-zonal federal constitution. He added it was also
agreed that the country should be non-aligned.”
84. Those are the facts, and Andreas Papandreou,
Greek Prime Minister, does not want federation.

9

the

87. Can we not, then, reach the conclusion that the
Greek Cypriots, too, reject the above-mentioned
cardinal principles and agreements which are to form the
very foundations of a solution? I shall now ask them
officially here: do they accept these principles of the
1977 and 1979 agreements, the Secretary-General’s
own opening statement of 9 August 1980 [S/14200,
annex] and the November
1981. “evaluation”
document of the Secretary-General? I hope they will answer
my question affirmatively.

able-only
a few days ago, on 1 December, we heard
Mr. Papandreou referring to Mr. Kyprianou as the
President of Hellenic Cyprus.
92. For the Greek leaders, Cypriot or mainlander, the
bicommunal
Republic of Cyprus was and still is destined to become, politically, a Greek island or, at worst,
a unitary Greek Cypriot State in which the Turkish
Cypriot birds no longer sing. And they seem to be under
oath to go to any length, irrespective of the cost in
human and material terms, to realize their anachronistic aspirations.

88. Furthermore,
Mr. Papandreou’s
aversion to a
serious dialogue did not escape the critical appraisal of
Mr. Averof, the opposition leader, who so rightly pointed out that

93. It is because of such regressive colonialist sentiments expressed by the Greek leaders and the neocolonialist and expansionist policies pursued by them
that we have arrived at our present position.

“Mr. Papandreou .was not only being inconsistent.
but could not muster the courage to terminate the
intercommunal
talks, to which he was strongly
opposed, because those talks were supported by
the countries of the West and the East and the nonaligned. What Mr. Papandreou really wanted was to
make Cyprus an international issue.”

94. As far as the Turkish people of Cyprus are concerned, we are here before the Council to reiterate once
again the sentiments expressed by the President of the
Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus before this body,
on 17 and 18 November 1983 [249&h and 250&h meetings], which are contained also in the declaration
of independence circulated in’ a United Nations document [S/16148, annex]: that we are ready to resume,
in a result-oriented
manner, the intercommunal
talks
with our Greek Cypriot counterparts in co-operation
with the Secretary-General’s
mission of good offices
entrusted to him by the Security Council in its resolution 367 (1975) and on the basis of the already mutually
agreed existing framework comprising the high-level
agreements of February 1977 and May 1979, the Secretary-General’s
opening statement of 1980 .and the
,$(,,
“evaluation”
document of 1981.
. E7
95. Our proposal for a summit meeting between the
leaders of the two sides still stands. Our efforts contained in the peace package concerning the resettlement of Varosha and utilization
of Nicosia International Airport [see Sf16159, annex] are still on the table.

89. There is a wide concurrence in the view that internationalization
of the problem of Cyprus was Mr. -Papandreou’s hobby-horse. Such efforts received a shot
in the arm with the advent to power of Mr. Papandreou,
at the expense of a serious, result-oriented dialogue on
the basis of the agreed framework-that
is, the highlevel agreements of 1977 and 1979, the opening statement and the “evaluation”
document.
90.’ The statement of Mr. Glafcos Clerides, the opposition leader, which appeared in the Greek Cypriot
daily Simerini on 1 November 1983, is, in a nutshell, an
accurate-albeit
with some shortcomings-explanation of the Greek side’s approach to the intercommunal
negotiations. Mr. Clerides said:
“We did not sit at the negotiating table with Turkish Cypriots to find a solution to the constitutional
problem when we were-in a stronger position, with
10,000 Greeksoldiers
on the island and Turkish Cypriots in enclaves, on 2 per cent of the island. Now in
a weak position, after Greek soldiers had left Cyprus,
.we began negotiating.”
‘.

96. We are ready to enter into substantial negotiations
with the Greek Cypriot side on the basis of equal partnership. We do not make any conditions, and we sincerely believe that the change in the name of an entity
which to all intents and purposes was an independent
entity in every respect should not be allowed to be used
as an excuse by the Greek Cypriot side~to run away
from the talks, which are, as the whole world admits,
the only viable medium for a final solution of the
conflict:

91. Mr. Clerides should also have added that, even
after the clandestine Greek army in Cyprus was withdrawn under pressure from Turkey and international
opinion, the Greek side’s commitment
to the talks was
more apparent than real. For them, and especially after
the premiership
of Mr. Papandreou, the talks have
always been a cosmetic exercise in international
forums. Despite the express provisions to the contrary in
the ten-point agreement of 19 May 1979, point 6-tonstructive intercommunal
talks-has
always played
second-fiddle to the utmost intemationalization
of the
conflict. And today, after 20 years, we are saddened to
observe the Greek leaders echoing the same neo-coloniaiist sentiments as in the past. And this is remark-

97. On the question of missing persons, I am glad to be
able to say this much. As far as the Turkish Cypriot side
is concerned, there is no obstacle remaining in the way
of the resumption of the investigatory work and deliberations of the autonomous tripartite Committee on
Missing Persons in Cyprus. We were very pleased to be
informed through the usual channels that the Greek
Cypriot side had withdrawn its procedural precondition, which was preventing the commencement
of the
actual work of the committee.
10

98. The third member of the Committee, Mr. Pilloud,
accompanied by the Turkish Cypriot representative,
paid a courtesy visit to President Denktag on 28 November and was duly informed of the wish of the Turkish Cypriot side that the Committee should commence
its investigative work as soon as possible. The Turkish
Cypriot side was then informed that the Greek Cypriot
side was unable to give the final go-ahead and was
waiting for the return of Mr. Kyprianou to the island to
reach a political decision on the subject. Mr. Pilloud is
at present waiting for the Greek Cypriot decision in
order to return to the island and, it is to be hoped, to
commence the work of the Committee.
99.’ As for the resolution, Security Council resolution 186 (1964) of 4 March 1964 is the unfortunate resolution in which Archbishop Makarios and the Greek
Cypriot wing of the bicommunal
Republic of Cyprus
were accepted as the Government of Cyprus, while the
Turkish Cypriot wing was ignored and referred to
merely as “the Turkish Cypriot community”.
And it
was that unrealistic resolution, which was contrary to
the constitutional arrangements in Cyprus, which gave
the green light to Greek armed elements to attack the
Turkish Cypriots throughout Cyprus.
100. Turkish Cypriot resistance to the Greek Cypriot
attacks and the refusal of the Turkish Cypriot community to bow to Makarios’s illegitimate
will were quite
honourable and constitutionally
sound. The Turkish
Cypriots owed no allegiance to the Greek Cypriot wing
of the bicommunal
Government of Cyprus and were
not under any constitutional,
legal or moral obligation or requirement to be so bound and therefore did
not intend to bow to brute force. Hence our plight for
11 years until 1974: 103 of our villages were destroyed;
30,000 Turkish Cypriots became refugees; all constitutional rights were denied us; all Turkish Cypriot elements were ousted from the bicommunal
administration; all budgetary payments, dues and grants were
stopped; half of the Turkish Cypriot population was in
need of aid; all Turkish Cypriots were treated as outlaws, were unlawfully arrested, killed or disappeared
for good. And now the Security Council is again trying
to impose on my people the illegal will of the Greek
Cypriots.
101. No, we cannot accept and we shall not bow &he
Greek Cypriots. We have not submitted to them for two
decades, and we shall continue to reject the false pretence of the Greek Cypriot side to the effect, first, that
the Greek Cypriots form the Cypriot nation and that
they alone are the people of Cyprus; secondly, that they
are and that they will continue to represent the legitimate Government of Cyprus; thirdly, that the Turkish
Cypriots are an ethnic group or minority within the
Cypriot nation and, fourthly, that the Turkish Cypriots
have no right to self-determination
as a people.
102. We must once and for all give up this makebelieve and stop this unrealistic reference to a nonexistent entity, the so-called Government of Cyprus.

Exactly 20 years ago Archbishop Makarios, in order to
achieve his dream of mods, unleashed his secret
armies to kill Turkish Cypriots. This killing, harassment and abduction continued for 11 years, until 20 July
1974.
103. Was UNFICYP
effective in preventing
the
killing of the Turks by the Greek hordes? No. It has
never been effective. The only effective element was
the Turkish armed forces. At the last hour we were
saved by Turkey’s legitimate and timely intervention.
Thank God-and
thanks to our saviour the Turkish
armed forces. Our protector is and will continue to be
the guarantorship of Turkey until a final settlement is ”
achieved. Without this guarantee the Greeks will need
only 24 hours to slaughter us. Do you want this to take
place in Cyprus? UNFICYP
has been ineffective in
preventing the murdering of Turkish Cypriots by the
Greeks.
104. Some of vou asked me whether or not our security would be in jeopardy if UNFICYP
withdrew. My
answer was “No”.
Our security, as I have already
stated, has been and can only be effectively guaranteed
by the Turkish armed forces for the time being. Therefore the withdrawal of UNFICYP
will not affect the
security of the Turkish Cypriot people. The past events
have sadly demonstrated
that neither the Security
Council nor UNFICYP
as a force is prepared to ensure
my people’s very existence, survival and liberty.
105. -When for 11 years we were treated as secondclass citizens by the Greeks we were advised to show
patience. We have shown it for 20 years. We were told
that we must not leave the negotiating table because the
world would condemn us. It is not the Turkish Cypriots
who have left the negotiating table and trotted to international forums for one-sided resolutions which, if
applied, would mean the end of the Turkish Cypriots as
co-founders of the Republic of Cyprus. We have not left
the table, but we have been condemned all the same.
We have not left the table, where we thought we were
sitting as equals talking about the re-establishment
of the partnership Republic, only to find out that the
United Nations General Assembly has given the mandate to the Greek side to wipe us off the map of Cyprus,
if need be with the help of the United Nations.
106. This time we had hoped that the Security Council
would take this opportunity swiftly to fulfil two overriding aims of the moment: extend the mandate of
UNFICYP
and support the good offices mission of the
Secretary-General.
We sincerely believed that it was in
the interest of all for the Council to adopt a concise,
clear-cut resolution attending to the immediate tasks
before it without giving rise to an acrimonious debate.
We also believed that the Council had precedents before it to follow-as
it did on 29 November 1983, in
resolution 543 (I983), in the case of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force-to avoid delving into
the substance of the conflict, to avoid contentious
issues and to keep an equidistance from both sides
involved in the conflict.

107. With such reasons and aims in mind we proposed
a simple, concise draft resolution which would address
the immediate tasks before the Council, namely, the
extension of the mandate of UNFICYP
and the expression of support for the continuation,
without further
ado, of the Secretary-General’s
good offtces mission
entrusted to him by Council resolution 367 (1975).
108. We also sincerely believed we had the right to
expect a more balanced approach from the Council in
the light of the latest developments. On 15 November
we appealed to the whole world to stop giving credence
to the unconstitutional,
illegal and illegitimate regime of
the Greek Cypriots, which has been sailing under the
fake banner of the Government of Cyprus. On that day
the Turkish people of Cyprus voiced to the world its
irretrievable objection to the perpetuation of the pretention to and the occupation of the seat of govemment by this unlawful racist regime of Greek Cypriots.
This play-acting by the Greek Cypriot wing of the bicommunal Republic of Cyprus, which had gone on for
20 years and, to an extent, with the connivance of the
world, had to be stopped.
109. The Turkish people of Cyprus have been appealing continuously
to the world to act upon and
correct the naked injustice done to it and thus terminate
this unconstitutional
state of affairs. For 20 years we
have watched patiently the usurpers of central power in
Cyprus masquerade as the legitimate Government of
Cyprus before the eyes of the world while the political
status of the Turkish Cypriot wing in the body politic of
Cyprus was constantly eroded from that of a co-founder
partner in the independence and sovereignty of the
Republic of Cyprus to that of an inferior minority community or ethnic group destined to become the servile
subjects of the Greek Cypriot masters in a Greek Cypriot republic.
110. The proclamation
of the Turkish Republic of
Northern Cyprus is the manifestation of the right of
the Turkish people of Cyprus to self-determination
conjointly acquired by the two communities when Cyprus
achieved independence. After all, it is axiomatic that
in a country or a State like Cyprus, where no nation
existed as such and where the State came to birth as a
result of the mutually-consented-to
partnership of the
two national communities,
irrespective of the population ratios and where exercise of the right to selfdetermination of one of the national communities, especially
the way it manifested itself, would have resulted in the
enslavement of the other, both national communities
possess the right to self-determination.
111. Proclamation
of independence by the Turkish
people of Cyprus represents not only a resounding
“no” to en&s, but also a categorical rejection of
minority status and an unequivocal comment on the
illegitimacy of the Government of Cyprus represented
by the Greek Cypriot imposters.
112. For the last 20 years, as regards the resolutions,
extending the mandate of the UNFICYP,
our approach

has been quite consistent. We have been giving our
consent to the resolutions extending the mandate of
UNFICYP
only after registering our strong reservations on the references to the so-called Government of
Cyprus. Furthermore,
we have always stressed the
self-evident phenomenon that as long as the legitimacy
and constitutionality
of the Greek Cypriot administration posing as the Government of Cyprus was not
called into question, it would not ‘negotiate, with the
Turkish Cypriot side on an equal ‘footing in a resultoriented manner, with a view to reaching a’solution on
the already agreed basis. The same grave mistake was
also made in the Security Council’s latest resolution,
541(1983) of 18 November. This resolution was the last
drop, convincing us that the present unconstitutional
state of affairs is being favoured by the many at our
expense.
113. I am saddened to say that the resolution before us
does all this and more. I feel duty-bound, therefore, to
spell out our reaction to this unrealistic resolution-not
in so many words perhaps; sufftce it to say that it is
unacceptable to us. The Council has even decided,
upon the insistence of the Greek Cypriot side, to delete
from this resolution the .paragraphs referring to the
intercommunal
talks which had appeared in the previous resolutions.
.114. Therefore,
the Government
of the Turkish
Republic of Northern Cyprus, for reasons enumerated
in this statement, rejects this resolution in roto, and
from today onwards the principle, the scope, the modalities and the procedures of the co-operation between
the authorities of the Turkish Republic of Northern
Cyprus and UNFICYP
shall be basedonly on the decisions which shall be taken solely by the Government of
the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus.
115. As regards UNFICYP
operations in Cyprus, our
position has been quite consistent and clear. We have
never been against the operations and mandate of
UNFICYP
in Cyprus, and we have had good working
relations with UNFICYP.
What has really been disturbing us recently is the behaviour and attitude displayed by some of the troop-contributing
countries. We
are of the opinion that the political posture adopted by
troop-contributing
countries in a given peace-keeping
operation is of crucial importance to the effectiveness
and smooth functioning of peace-keeping duties in the
field. In those cases where the United Nations peacekeeping forces operate with the consent of the parties to
the conflict, as is the case in Cyprus, it is doubly important that these operations be carried out impartially,
unhindered and unburdened by the policy of the respective troop-contributing
country as regards the
political substance of the issue. Similarly, it is crucial,
therefore, that the troop-contributing
countries maintain a posture of impartiality
and even-handedness in
their approach to the parties involved and on the substance of the issue in question as a sine qua non of the
effectiveness and success of the peace-keeping operation. Without the trust and confidence of the parties

involved, it is difficult to imagine peace-keeping forces
operating effectively. The utmost care should be taken
by all concerned not to impair the trust of one or the
other of the consenting sides to the operation.

121. Mr. KIRCA
(Turkey)
(interpretation
from
French): Mr. President, permit me at the outset to
thank you sincerely. During the difftcult consultations
that you have conducted concerning today’s resolution, you have shown exemplary impartiality
and
unfailing patience. I am grateful to you for this and
shall not forget it. Allow me also to convey my compliments to Mr. Victor Gauci, representative of Malta,
who guided the Council’s work last month with exceptional diligence. I wish also to pay my respects to the
Secretary-General
and once again to assure him of my
Government’s
complete confidence in him.

116. The behaviour and voting record of some of the
countries contributing troops to UNFICYP on General
Assembly resolution 37/253 and on Security Council
resolution 541 (1983) have, I must stress, impaired our
trust and confidence in UNFICYP’s
operations. The
time-honoured tradition of maintaining impartiality
on
the political substance of the conflict was broken on
those occasions by these Member States, including
even some represented here. Although we do not in any
way question the right of any country to exercise its
sovereign right to vote the way it deems fit on any issue,
we are trying to stress that peace-keeping is a noble
objective, the fulfilment of which requires meticulous
impartiality.

122. Resolution
544 (1983), ‘which has just been
adopted by the Council, has been rejected in its entirety
by the Government of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus. In the view of my Government, that decision by the Turkish Cypriot Government is totally justified. Therefore, for my part, I must inform the Council
of the Turkish Government’s complete rejection of that
resolution.

’ 117. I should like to take this opportunity to convey to
the Secretary-General
our profound appreciation of
and admiration for his unfaltering dedication to a just
and durable solution of the Cyprus conflict. The Government of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus
would like to pay a tribute to the excellent diplomatic
qualities and exemplary sense of justice and understanding displayed by Mr. Perez de CuCllar in his long
years of involvement with the Cyprus issue. We should
like also to reiterate our complete trust and confidence
in him and our wish to have him continue his mission of
good offices, to which we hereby pledge our full and
ungrudging co-operation.

123. In rejecting in its entirety the resolution in question, the representative of the Turkish Cypriot Government a few moments ago made a statement on behalf of
his Government that “from today onwards the principle, the scope, the modalities and the procedures of
co-operation between the authorities of the Turkish
Republic of Northern Cyprus and UNFICYP
shall be
based only on the decisions [see paru. 114 supru] which
shall be taken solely by the Government of the Turkish
Republic of Northern Cyprus”. The Turkish Government supports that statement and confirms that contacts between the Turkish authorities in Cyprus and
UNFICYP will henceforth be conducted on the basis of
that Turkish Cypriot statement.

118. Our warm appreciation and thanks go also to
Mr. Hugo Gobbi$who, as the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General
in Cyprus, has demonstrated an
exceptional ability to adopt a balanced and dextrous
approach to the tasks at hand. His involvement with the
Cyprus problem is total and sincere. We wish him all
the success in the world in his present lofty task. We are
happy to hear that he will be continuing as the Special
Representative
of the Secretary-General
in Cyprus.
Moreover, I should like to convey our sincere thanks to
all the members of the Secretariat dealing with the
question of Cyprus.

124. UNFICYP
was dispatched to the island in 1964,
following aggression by the Greek Cypriots against
their Turkish compatriots. However, the deployment
of that Force on the island did not have the expected
result. From 1964 to July 1974, the date when the Turkish troops arrived on the island, the Turkish Cypriot
community and its members continued to be subjected
to the most severe harassment. Incidents of that type
did not completely come to an end until the arrival
of the peace force sent from Turkey. These are historical facts, irrefutably proved by the course of events.
I should like to add that the Turkish armed forces will
remain in the territory of the Turkish Republic of
Northern Cyprus, at the request of the Government of
that Republic, until the attainment of a final solution
recognizing and guaranteeing the rights and security of
the Turkish community on the island.

119. I shall not bother to answer the preposterous
humbug of the representative of the racist regime, because it is an exact repetition of the speech made by that
regime a month ago, and it was totaliy refuted at that
time by my President. I shall be positive and constructive and shall not answer his allegations. Although
I have an extra five pages about his accusations on the
subject of occupation, I will not read them to the Council. I request you, Mr. President, to instruct the Secretariat that these five pages be included in the Official
Records of the Security Council [see S/16232, annex].

125. Today UNFICYP
is supervising the cease-fire
zone and rendering certain humanitarian
services.
While the activities I have just mentioned are duly
appreciated by the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus and by Turkey, we should not lose sight of the fact
that the cease-fire will in any event be respected and
that those humanitarian services will be rendered, since

120. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Turkey, on whom I now call.
13

that is the shared desire of the Turkish
Northern Cyprus and of Turkey.

Republic

of

131. It is in that same context that we should understand the complete rejection of the resolution in question by the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus and
by Turkey.

126. It remains a fact that the presence of that Force in
Cyprus demonstrates the interest of the United Nations
in Cyprus. The Force in this way fulfils a political
function to which the Turkish Republic of Northern
Cyprus and Turkey are not, in principle, opposed.
However, the way in which that eminently political
interest is expressed and directed must be consistent
with the basic principles of law and justice. That, unfortunately, is not the case.

132. I have just spoken of scepticism and exaspera‘tion. Indeed, it is extremely difficult for the Turkish
Cypriot and Turkish peoples to grasp the reasons for
this disregard, this systematic flouting, of the most
fundamental rights of the Turkish Cypriot community.
There are indeed few cases in which law and justice are
so clear from a simple process of deduction. There are
few cases in which logic and morality are so perfectly in
harmony. States, like persons, communicate according
to logical processes. States, like persons, must behave
in accordance with -justice and morality, otherwise
harmony is lost in inter-State society between conscious awareness and categorical imperative.
How,
then, is it possible to be surprised at the scepticism of
the Turkish people and the exasperation of the Turkish
Cypriot people, when international bodies refrain from
heeding the principles of both logic and justice?

127. How often must the representatives of Turkey
and of the Turkish community of Cyprus be compelled
to reiterate the following facts, which they have already
had to explain on many occasions? These facts are that
the Republic of Cyprus is a State created by international treaty; that a special treaty guaranteed the
Basic Articles of the Cypriot Constitution; that one of
those Basic Articles prohibits any amendment to those
same Basic Articles; that the Treaty of Guarantee’ not
only is binding on Cyprus, Greece, Turkey and the
United Kingdom but also constitutes an integral part of
that Cypriot Constitution; that the unamendable Basic
Articles of that Constitution, ensuring the bicommunal
nature of the State, were trampled underfoot by the
Greek Cypriots and by Greece; that following the coup
&&at in 1963 the constitutional
rights of the Turkish
Cypriots were abolished and constantly violated; that
the exclusively Greek Cypriot administration
resulting
from that coup cannot, either under constitutional
law
or under international
law, legitimately
and legally
claim the title of Government of the Republic of Cyprus, since that State owes its existence to international
treaties; and that respect for the supremacy of the rule
of law and of the principle of the inviolability
of international treaties should prevent third States, and in
particular the guaranteeing Powers, from recognizing
as a legal and legitimate
Government
an usurper
administration
which can only claim to represent its
own community.

133. A striking example can be found in a particularly interesting paragraph of Security Council resolution 541 (1983). In that paragraph the Council makes a
point of recalling the Treaty of Guarantee of 16 August
1960, twenty-three and a half years after its entry into
force. That the Council should recall it is itself an event,
an important and positive event. But the Council recalled it solely in order to attack the proclamation
of
independence by the Turkish Cypriot community. I am
very grateful to the speaker who, during this debate,
explained that that paragraph does not imply a denial of
the existence of other cases of violation-of that Treaty.
It is quite true that the original sin m the Greek Cypriot coup &.&at of 1963. That co/&which
manifestly
violated the Treaty of Guarantee, has never been criticized by the Security Council or the Generai Assembly.
Furthermore, by recognizing the Greek Cypriot administration as the Government of the Republic of Cyprus
those international
organs have given absolution for
original sin, and they are now condemning those that
refuse to be sullied with that original sin.

128. We shall never tire of repeating those truths. We
shall firmly defend them as well as the rights of the
Turkish Cypriot community,
since we Turks have the
means of defending them.

134. The proclamation
of Turkish Cypriot independence is only.an act of retortion which draws its own
legitimacy and legality from the illegitimacy
and illegality of the unilateral destruction by .the Greek Cypriots of the institutions of the Republic of Cyprus. That
is all the more so since, in accordance with the general
principles of law, that act of retortion has as its only
goal the restoration of “the state of affairs established
by the Basic Articles of its Constitution”,
as stipulated
in the Treaty of Guarantee; and since in its proclamation of independence the Turkish Cypriot community
has declared that its sole aim is to reach understanding
with the Greek Cypriot community with a view to the
regeneration and restructuring of the destroyed institutions of the Republic of Cyprus on a bicommunal,
bizonal and federal basis, on a footing of equality.

129. To those who, for reasons that are difficult to
understand, persist in condoning a violation of law, we
would say that their message can have no credibility
whatsoever as far as the Turkish people and the Turkish Cypriot people are concerned. That is why I must
aflirm that the interest shown in the Cypriot problem by
any international organ, as long as that organ continues
to support and endorse usurpation, will leave the Turkish people sceptical, but it will exasperate the Turkish
Cypriot people.
130. Thus it is in that context that UNFICYP’s
presence must be placed, a presence which bears testimony
to the political interest of the United Nations in the
question of Cyprus.
14

143. Mr. MOUSHOUTAS
(Cyprus): I am compelled
to speak in exercise of my right of reply, even though
the many allegations, distortions and outright falsehoods have been repeatedly and fully exposed in this
forum during previous meetings of the Council every
six months, and more recently during its meetings of
16 to 18 November [2497th to 2500th meetings]. As
usual, I consider the statement made by my compatriot,
Mr. Atalay,.as made by the oppressor, the aggressor
and by the usurper of our homes and lands. He who
speaks through others speaks for himself.

135. I must say quite frankly that, when the Security
Council recalls the 1960 Treaty of Guarantee in order to
deplore Turkish Cypriot independence and immediately relegates it to oblivion to honour the Greek Cypriot
usurper, the destroyer of the bicommunal
Republic,
that attitude provokes smiles in Turkey and anger in the
Turkish Cypriot community.
As for those who traditionally do nothing but talk, we do not even hear their
clamour.
136. However, in,the hoDe that the simnle truth will
reappear and that everyone will understand that it is
impossible through injustice to arrive at a lasting solution based on justice, let us now concentrate on the
possibilities of a definitive settlement. In. this regard,
my Government considers it to be its duty to try to
dispel certain illusions.

144. First let me say that I consider it to be the
epitome of audacity when the aggressor, Turkey, the
usurper, the oppressor ,of our people, all our people
-Greeks,
Turks, Armenians, Maronites, Latins-and
the occupier of 40 per cent of our territory, contrary to
repeated United Nations resolutions, accuses its victim
of usurpation of power. To what usurpation is the Turkish representative referring? To the country? We are in
Cyprus and we shall remain there because we belong
there. It is the ancestral homeland for the Greeks,
Turks, Armenians, Maronites and the Latin Cypriots.
It is our country, little as it is, unfortunate as it is. It has
been our country for centuries.

137. In certain circles it seems that some nourish the
hope, however futile, that the Turkish Cypriot community might be persuaded to rescind its decision or,
failing such a reversal, that Turkey might at least be
persuaded to withdraw its recognition of the independent Turkish Cypriot State. Such hopes are not only
contradicted by a simple political analysis of the elements surrounding the problem but also reveal complete ignorance of the psycho-social structure of Turkish society. We are still, fortunately, a society whose
well-being lies in the preservation of its-sense of honour. No one should venture to try to bring the Turkish
nation to its knees.

145. Turkey is the alien and undesirable element in
Cyprus. Its presence in Cyprus, by Mr. OzaI’s own
admission, is for expansionist reasons and to safeguard
-hear ye, hear ye-Turkish
security! A small population of half a million is a threat to mighty Turkey-what
a preposterous argument indeed!

138. In 1921-and this is a date full of memories for
some-we struggled against adversity, and since then
we have sworn never to suffer defeat. And for us dishonour is even worse than defeat. Those who hope for
the impossible will have to wait until the end of time, if
they have the patience.
.139. But the Turkish Cypriot community, supported
by Turkey, is open to understanding, negotiation and
compromise. It sets no preconditions for negotiation,
and no one should try to impose any on it.

146. We are here in the Council because we are the
sole and legitimate Government of Cyprus, a democratic Government at that, duly elected. We are here
because we are duly recognized by the whole world but,
thankfully, not by the aggressor. Our Government and
system is free, not a travesty of democracy, asit is in his
case. We did not expel anyone, and of course not the
Turkish Cypriot offtcials from the Government;
The
Turkish Cypriot ministers and other officials are not at
present in the Government,
not by our choice, but
because of threats to their lives by the aggressor, so as
to undermine the Government of theRepublic
of Cyprus. I repeat, they were not expelled; they were forced
by Turkey to abandon the Government and they did so.
As a matter of fact, we yearn and struggle for their
return. As my President solemnly stated in the General
Assembly in October, at the 15th meeting of the thirtyeighth session, they are welcome to return, and I dare
the representative of Turkey to accept the 1960 Constitutional order.

140. Efforts must therefore be concentrated not on
trying to humiliate the Turkish Cypriot community and
Turkey-they
will not let themselves be humiliatedbut only on bringing about a meeting at the same negotiating table of the two parties to the eternal dialogue on
:
the island of Cyprus.
141. I will say one last thing. This resolution, adopted
in spite of the legal precedent created by the Council
itself in its resolution 543 (1983), of 29 November, is
not, unfortunately, such as to reduce tension and facilitate understanding.

147. The members of the Turkish Cypriot community
were never and are not today considered by us as
second-class citizens. Our sense of fairness and pride
-in the good sense, not in the sense used by the representative of the aggressor-would
not allow us to do
so. I repeat here that the Turkish Cypriot community
constitutes a precious and inseparable part of our people, and so they have been treated. When 18 per cent of,

142. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of Cyprus
has asked to be allowed to speak in exercise of the right
of reply, and I call on him.
15

my country-that
is, the Turkish Cypriot community
-have had 30 per cent of the civil service posts, 40 per
cent of the police and national guard positions, it takes
much arrogance for anyone to speak of oppressed or
unwanted people.

152. This type of numerical equality strikes at the
roots of every democratic principle. In fact it creates
inequality, which in turn strikes at the balance upon
which the federal system should be based. The Turkish
claims that there is agreement of two partners, peoples,
which will form the federation and will live in their own
areas under the administration
of their own federated
State is a distortion of the Makarios-Denktag
agreement of 1977. Furthermore, the statement in the United
Nations resolutions on Cyprus that the talks are to be
carried out “on an equal footing”: indicates that the
negotiations should be conducted freely without the
handicapping of any side in the intercommunal
dialogue
and does not in any way predetermine or prescribe the
nature of the solution, which must be based on the
United Nations resolutions.

148. It is true that the Turkish Cypriot community
suffered, but this was due to their leadership’s divisive,
partitionist,
segregationist policies. We heard the reasons for their suffering from the representative of the
aggressor. Members of the Council have a choice: on
the one hand they have his version; on the other hand
they have the highest independent authority, the sagacious Secretary-General,
and I will quote again from his
report of 1965, which I consider is a reply to silence
these falsehoods:
“The Turkish Cypriot leaders have adhered to a
rigid stand against any measures which might involve
having members of the two communities
live and
work together, or which might place Turkish Cypriots. in situations where they would have to
acknowledge the autharity of Government agents . . .
The result has been a seemingly deliberate policy of
self-segregation by the Turkish Cypriots . . . the
hardships suffered by the Turkish Cypriot population
are the direct result of the leadership’s self-isolation
policy, imposed by force on the rank and file.”
[S/6426, para. 106.1

153. The Turkish representative referred to the intercommunal talks. A record of broken promises and reneging on solemn commitments
undertaken has been
the history of the intercommunal
talks, which were
held, not freely-as requested by the General Assembly and the Security Council resolutions-but
instead
under the pressure of the occupation troops. By a series
of fairs accompZis and other illegalities
carried out
methodically
while the talks were under way, Ankara
sought to consolidate its military stranglehold over the
occupied area and to complete its partitionist
aims.
While paying lip service to the talks, Turkey used them
as a smokescreen and a shield to mislead and silence the
international community, thereby gaining time to complete its insidious aims against the territorial integrity
and unity of the Republic of Cyprus.

149. The Turkish representative spoke about enosis.
It is no secret that the right of self-determination
claimed by the Cypriots during the colonial years was
aimed at enosis. The records of the General Assembly
are here and cannot be disputed. But what about today?
Now there is an independent, sovereign, non-aligned
State, Member of the United Nations, which struggles
to remain so in spite of Turkish acts of genocide against
our people. Its House of.Representatives
declared on
20 September 1979 and on 2 October 1981:

154. “Why do you complain”,
Ankara would ask
whenever confronted with d&marches about its failure
to comply with United Nations reso&@ns. “There are
inter-communal
talks under way. We have to wait to
see their outcome before we withdraw our troops.”
155. In the meantime, they saw to it, of course, that
through delaying tactics and policies of diktat that the
talks led nowhere. In other words, the talks were useful
to Turkey as long as they went on interminably
and
conveyed some expression of hopeful results to the
anxious international community and to the anguished
victims of Turkish aggression. In this interminable
process, the Government of Cyprus made painful concessions in its desire to break the impasse created by
Ankara’s dilatory tactics and its recalcitrant intransigence.

“its immovable aim to full independence and its rejection of any solution which would abolish this independence or would annex in any way the whole or
part of the tenritory of the Republic of Cyprus to any
other State. It further stipulates its rejection of any
partition or the declaration of any part of Cyprus as
an independent State.”
150. I have, I believe, covered the question of enosis.
The question of attempted dismemberment
and secession is a matter for the Turkish representative
to
explain.

156. First, we were asked: “Why not be realistic?
Never mind about the resolutions of the General
Assembly and of the Security Council, which specified
that there must be, first, withdrawal of the occupation
troops and cessation of the foreign interference in the
Republic of Cyprus and then negotiations on the internal aspects of the problem. Make a gesture towards
Turkey. Agree to negotiate and call the bluff of the
Turks, who say they are ready to negotiate a solution
along the lines of the resolutions of the General Assem-

151. As we have stated before, we .have all along
accepted the equality of our citizens. We accept that for
every man there is a vote, that they are equal before the
law, that they are entitled to equal treatment and equal
opportunities;
but we cannot accept numerical equality. We cannot agree that 18 per cent, the Turkish
‘Cypriot community, equals 82 per cent, the Greek Cypriot community.
/

16

bly and of the Security Council.” We called the bluff of
the Turks and agreed to negotiate without demanding,
as we were justified in doing under the Charter, international law and the United Nations resolutions, the
prior withdrawal of the forces of occupation. What
happened next? The Turkish side came along with another demand, and a promise: the Cyprus Government
must accept in advance that the solution of the constitutional aspect of the problem must be a federal one.
If this is done, then, they promised, there will be rapid
progress towards a solution and withdrawal of the
Turkish troops.

really bloody and genocidal, and this is an area in which
they have excelled in exterminating peoples.
161. The Turkish side should have done a little more
research on the book from which they quoted. This
book is neither authoritative nor objective. The quotations it contains are motivated by political aims and
have nothing to do with the truth. The specific quotation attributed to Archbishop Makarios is particularly
false and malicious. Archbishop Makarios’ stature is
too great to be tarnished by cheap fabrications and
falsehoods such as those the Turkish side regurgitated
ad nauseam.

157. When the Government of Cyprus heeded the
advice and the strong pleas of the Secretary-General
and of Governments in a position to influence Turkey,
we were then-predictably,
I must add-confronted
with a set of further demands, coupled with an alluring
assurance: if only the Cyprus Government accepted
further that the agreed federal solution of the constitutional aspect will be implemented
on a bi-regional
basis as opposed to the multi-regional
approach advocated by the Cyprus Government, then we would really
be close to an agreement and to a pullout of the occupation troops.

162. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the representative
Greece, in exercise of the right of reply.

of

163. Mr. DOUNTAS
(Greece): I admit my inability to
follow the Turkish side’s lengthy, monotonous and
mainly out-of-context
recital of newspaper articles,
statements, speeches and obscure authors. They have
been harping on these themes for years now. Replies
have been given to them and they are on the record.
164. But I am compelled to invite the Council’s attention to the last part of Mr. Kirca’s intervention, which
contained statements made in his characteristic style
-pompous
and provincial
arrogance. We consider
those statements as veiled threats to the peace of the
south-eastern Mediterranean area. I invite members of
the Council to read them very carefully, and I should
like to assure them that, if Turkey and the Turkish
people have a sense of honour-and
at least the people
of Greece have a sense of honour-and
if those st.atements were to be implemented and those threats acted
upon to the point of implementation,
peace would be
gravely disturbed in our area of the Mediterranean.

158. There were again strong pleas and arguments put
forward for a more unilateral concession, coupled with
the assurances of quick progress for a just solution,
given by those who were in a position to influence
Ankara. The Cyprus Government, in its desire to see an
end to the ordeal and to the daily trauma of our people,
Greek and Turkish alike, once more heeded these pleas
and agreed to call the bluff of the Turkish side one more
time.
159. But, alas, once the Turkish side had cashed in on
the new concession by the Government of Cyprus, as it
had done earlier in the case of the August 1975 humanitarian agreement, it proceeded to create a new deadlock in the negotiations and defiantly demanded further concessions from the other side while making none
of its own. This, then, is the sad history of the intercommunal talks. These talks were not free, as called for by
the resolutions of this body; they were negotiations at
gunpoint. I challenge the representative of Turkey to
dare point to a single reciprocal step taken by his Government to comply with any of the provisions of General Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX), endorsed by
resolution 365 (1974) of this body, a resolution for
which, hypocritically,
Turkey itself voted.

165. I should like also to draw the attention of certain
Governments and authorities which, under the pretext
of impartiality,
have for years now been according the
same treatment to the criminal and the victim, thus
managing by this attitude offalse impartiality to give the
Turkish representative the audacity to come to the
Council and launch veiled threats against my country.
I think this highly respected international body should
take very seriously into account the statements made in
the last part of Mr. Kirca’s intervention.
166. The PRESIDENT:
There are no further speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

160. The Turkish side spoke about the law of estoppel. I am grateful to my fellow countryman for remembering that I studied law. The usurper of our land, the
aggressor, one who uprooted our people from their
homes and lands and brought settlers to change the
demographic character of my country is estopped from
claiming such defence; for, as he said, in accordance
with the law of equity-and
up to this point we agreeTurkey came to the fold not with clean bands; theirs are

The meeting

rose at 6.35 p.m.

NOTE
’ United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 382, No. 5475.

17

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United Nations
world. Consult
COMMENT

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

publications
may be obtained from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sates Section. New York or Geneva.
SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences depositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous
aup& de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
g : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou Geneve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas estfin en venta en Iibrerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes de1 mundo. Cons&e a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations,

New York

00400

!%60205-March

19!32-2,050
