S/PV.7254

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7254th meeting

Thursday, 28 August 2014, 3.30 p.m.
New York

President:

Sir Mark Lyall Grant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Bliss
Mr. Gombo
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa
Mr. Wang Min
Mrs. Le Fraper du Hellen
Mr. Omaish
Mr. Baublys
Mr. Maes
Mr. Laro
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. Klein

Agenda
Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

14-52070 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1452070*

S/PV7254

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

The meeting was called to order at 3.30 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Implementation of the note by the President of the
Security Council (S/2010/507)
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the United Kingdom.
Let me start by thanking Council colleagues for
their support during what has been another busy month.
It has only been with their help that we have been able
to get through that business efficiently and effectively.
August has not been a quiet month for the Security
Council for some years now. This year was no exception,
with simultaneous crises in Gaza, Iraq, Ukraine, Syria,
Libya and South Sudan, to name just six. The Council
has addressed all of those conflicts this month. I hope
that the resolutions we have adopted, in particular in
confronting the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in
resolution 2170 (2014) and tackling Libya in resolution
2174 (2014), will have real and lasting impact on the
ground.
Much of that crisis work is a matter of public record.
I will therefore focus my remarks on a key thematic
priority for the United Kingdom presidency, which was
conflict prevention. I will also touch on the working
methods of the Council.
Let me start by recalling the Council’s visit to
Belgium on 9 and 10 August, the first leg of the wider
visit we undertook to Europe and Africa. The aim of
the Belgian leg was to commemorate the start of the
First World War, to pay tribute to those who died and
to learn lessons from the past for our current work.
Our discussions in Belgium and The Hague came
back time and again to what more the Council can and
must do to effectively discharge its conflict-prevention
responsibilities.
As I said in last Thursday’s debate (see S/PV.7247),
the Council needs to take conflict prevention more
seriously than it currently does. The moral, humanitarian
and political imperatives of early preventive action
are unarguable. The question is, how can the Council
better fulfil this role. Part of the answer relates to the
Council’s working methods. The Council’s agenda is
2/17

28/08/2014

full and our capacity is stretched as we struggle to cope
with persistent and complex crises. But acting only in
crisis mode, responding and reacting, will never allow
us to get ahead of events and intervene early enough to
have a preventive effect.
Actions we can take to free up the Council’s
workload and to ensure that we get through routine
business more quickly could help to create time for
more valuable overseas visits, more exploration of the
activities outlined for us in Chapter VI of the Charter of
the United Nations, more time for horizon-scanning and
more time to act on the indicators of emerging conflict.
But time is not our only constraint. The perceived
tension between the principle of sovereignty and
conflict prevention also constrains Council action.
That has been used in the past to justify taking no
action for fear of offending a State or being seen to
impinge on sovereignty. My hope is that the lessons the
Council learned during its visit to Belgium, the debate
last Thursday, this week’s briefing by the Department
of Political Affairs and the adoption of resolution 2171
(2014) will allow us to tackle that head on.
If we want to be more effective at preventing
conflict, we have to find ways of holding discussions,
public or private, on situations that may exhibit some
alarming indicators but might not yet constitute a fullblown conflict, without that being seen to constitute an
encroachment on sovereignty.
The use of “Any other business” has provided one
useful vehicle to raise issues of concern privately and in
a timely manner. So far this month, 13 issues have been
raised under “Any other business” in consultations. I
take this as an indication of the Council’s readiness
to respond quickly, even, on occasion, to the point
of discussing issues before a descent into full-blown
conflict. We should continue to use that particular tool
and consider whether we can raise issues even earlier as
indicators start to flash red.
Talking of flashing lights, sometimes the simplest
efforts can make a difference. Starting meetings
promptly, encouraging speakers to keep to time limits
and moving discussions on smartly have this month all
contributed to allowing us to get through large amounts
of business.
The open debate last Thursday included 59 speakers
but finished by 4.30 p.m. I hope that colleagues around
the table and in the wider membership will agree that
this has been a boon, and not an imposition. There
14-52070

28/08/2014

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

is much more that could be done by clustering some
discussions, spreading out the periodicity of others,
avoiding repetitive statements, et cetera, which could
free up more Council time for both tackling the crises
of the day and preventing the conflicts of tomorrow.
I thank Council members once again for the
support throughout our presidency. I look forward to
hearing their views on our collective work this month.
I wish the United States delegation every success in its
Council presidency in September.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): Let me begin
by congratulating you, Mr. President, and the United
Kingdom delegation on your successful presidency
in the month of August. We appreciate in particular
your efforts to maximize effectiveness through the
efficient and timely management of the Council’s
work. We would also like to thank the United Kingdom
presidency for having led the Security Council mission
to Europe and Africa. The visit was very substantive
and constructive and has greatly enriched the work
of the Council. The visit to Europe enabled us to gain
valuable insight in the areas of conflict prevention and
long-term reconciliation, as well as the fight against
impunity. The visit to South Sudan and Somalia helped
us to take stock of the achievements so far and the
challenges we face today in the situations of the two
countries.
Regarding Gaza, we welcome the recent
announcements of an open-ended ceasefire brokered
under Egyptian auspices. All parties should fully
implement the agreements and work towards building a
more durable peace. For that purpose, we believe that a
sustained and regular flow of goods and people through
the Gaza crossings should be ensured, while Israel’s
legitimate security concerns are duly addressed.
The threat posed by Islamic State of Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) is an unprecedented challenge to the
stability of Iraq and the region as a whole. In that regard,
resolution 2170 (2014) is an important and timely step
in the right direction by the Security Council. It reflects
the collective will of the international community to
address the ever-growing threats posed by terrorist
groups such as ISIL.

S/PV7254

Turning to the thematic issues, the open debate
on conflict prevention was especially noteworthy (see
S/PV.7247). The difficulty of dealing with conflicts
that have already begun reminds us of the importance
of conflict prevention. The Security Council and the
international community should improve their capacity
to read early warning signs in order to take swift action.
In that connection, resolution 2171 (2014) provides a
solid basis to explore all possible preventive measures
through efforts across the United Nations system. We
look forward to the Secretary-General’s reports on
actions to promote and strengthen conflict-prevention
tools.
Finally, with regard to non-proliferation, the
Council had a valuable opportunity to take stock of the
work of the Sanctions Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1718 (2006) during the past three months.
In the meeting the Council members condemned
the continued ballistic launches by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea as violations of the relevant
Security Council resolutions. In that light, we urge the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to heed the
solemn warnings of the Council and to refrain from any
further provocations.
Once again, in thanking the presidency of the
United Kingdom for the achievements in August, we
would also like to congratulate the incoming President,
the United States, and assure it of the full support of the
Republic of Korea.
Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I thank you, Mr. President, and
your delegation for organizing this wrap-up session,
which provides us with an opportunity to assess the
work of the Council during the month of August. My
comments will focus on three issues, namely, working
methods and the conduct of Security Council business,
the Council mission to Africa and briefings.
With regard to the conduct of meetings, we
commend the presidency for its efforts during the past
month to encourage participants in Council meetings,
including Council members, to deliver their statements
in five minutes or less. That is in consonance with
paragraph 29 of the annex to document S/2010/507. The
efforts of the United Kingdom helped to substantially
improve time management during Council meetings,
and that allowed for greater efficiency in the conduct
of business. We strongly encourage the continuation of
that practice.

14-520703/17

S/PV7254

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

I would also like to comment on the Security
Council mission to Africa. According to the paragraph
66 of the Council’s 2010 Working Methods Handbook,
the value of Security Council missions lies in the
fact that they allow the Council to understand and
assess particular conflicts or situations on its agenda.
The mission to South Sudan afforded members an
opportunity to interact with the key political leaders of
the country and to get a first-hand assessment of the
current situation on the ground and of the prospects
for a peaceful resolution of the conflict. The Council
was able to deliver an important message directly to the
leaders of South Sudan, that there could be no military
solution to the conflict in the country and that both
sides should work towards the formation of an inclusive
Government of national unity.
The Council mission to Somalia, the first since 1994,
was also very significant. It allowed close interaction
between Council members and the Government of
Somalia, whereby they could hear directly from the
Somali authorities their aspirations and challenges and
convey the concerns of the Council.
The meeting of Council members with the President
of Kenya and officials of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) was also a notable
Council achievement in August. Kenya as a country
and IGAD as a subregional body have been key players
in the efforts to resolve the conflict in South Sudan.
Kenya has also been an important player in ongoing
efforts to stabilize Somalia.
Close engagement between the Council and
regional organizations, as well as with countries with
influence in countries dealing with conflicts, remains
a crucial tool for Council use in conflict resolution.
Our assessment is that the Council effectively used the
mission to Africa to further its work in the maintenance
of international peace and security. It is a significant
demonstration of transparency on the Council’s part
that the briefing on the mission was conducted in the
Council Chamber and was open to non-members (see
S/PV.7245).
With regard to briefings, we are pleased to note that
several of the country-specific briefings in August were
held in public and that concerned countries were able to
participate under rule 37 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure. The monthly briefing by the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs on the
humanitarian situation in Syria, which used to be held
in the Consultations Room, is now being held in public,
4/17

28/08/2014

with the country concerned participating. That has
helped to improve transparency in the Council’s work.
I would now like to comment on the open debate on
conflict prevention held on 21 August (see S/PV.7247).
The participation of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights in the debate was significant in highlighting the
often-overlooked link between human rights violations
and conflict. The High Commissioner noted that while
the Council’s interest in human rights had increased
during her tenure, principled decisions by Council
members to end crises were hampered by short-term
geopolitical considerations and narrowly defined
national interests. Those were the words of the High
Commissioner. The question that then arises is: are
Council members willing to sacrifice their narrow
national interests in the larger interest of humankind?
There is no doubt that the pursuit of national interests
sometimes hampers the effectiveness of the Council.
The debate also brought to the fore the importance
of identifying and addressing the root causes of conflict.
We believe that it is necessary for the Council to focus
attention on this, not only in the context of conflict
resolution but also to prevent a relapse into conflict in
post-conflict settings. In our view, that will enhance
the capacity of the Council to carry out its mandate to
maintain international peace and security.
In conclusion, we commend and thank the
delegation of the United Kingdom for the effective
way it conducted business in the month of August. We
congratulate the delegation of the United States for its
upcoming assumption of the presidency in September
and give assurances of our full support.
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We join in congratulating your delegation and your
presidency, Mr. President, for the effectiveness and the
leadership you have shown throughout the month of
August. We also thank you for convening this wrap-up
session.
We welcome your choice of conflict prevention
as the theme of your presidency. We also welcome the
holding of the open debate (see S/PV.7247) and the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2171 (2014). That
reaffirms the commitment of Member States and of the
Council to the peaceful settlement of disputes through
mechanisms established in the Charter of the United
Nations and elsewhere, based on the principle of free
choice and the strictest respect for international law and
international treaties in force. That made it possible to

14-52070

28/08/2014

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

acknowledge the need to continue working on the use,
implementation and improvement of the mechanisms
for prevention and early warning that we rely on today
and the need to improve communication among the
various actors of the system and of the system with civil
society.
An analysis of the Council’s efficiency must
necessarily include its response to the situation in
Gaza. We welcome the consensus reached among the
members on the idea that the status quo in Gaza is
unsustainable and on the need to address at one time
the issues underlying the conflict. We hope that after
the ceasefire agreed between the parties last Tuesday,
26 August, the Council can speak in a firm and
consistent manner on this issue, shouldering its role in
the maintenance of international peace and security.
A forward-looking analysis indicates that the
situation in Iraq will continue to occupy a central
place on our agenda. We believe that the adoption of
resolution 2170 (2014), on terrorism in Iraq and Syria,
which Chile co-sponsored, will provide us a useful tool
that will enable us to be prepared. The adoption of that
resolution shows that the Security Council, when it
so intends, is capable of finding, quickly and through
dialogue, common elements to contribute to tackling
serious threats to international peace and security.
The Council’s visit to Europe and Africa was a
milestone in the month’s work and has special value
in supporting the discussions in New York. While
this has already been discussed, at our meeting on
19 August (see S/PV.7245), I would like to mention
that we appreciate the fact that in both South Sudan
and Somalia we met with civil society and women’s
groups and could pass along the message on the need to
ensure their full and effective participation throughout
all stages of the political processes.
Finally, we would like to point out that for my
delegation it was a special honour to co-chair, together
with Luxembourg, the segment on the international
courts and tribunals in The Hague. This reflects
the standing commitment of Chile to the peaceful
settlements of disputes.
We welcome the presidency of the United States
delegation and we wish it all the best.
Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President,
for your leadership in conducting the Council’s work

S/PV7254

during your presidency and to congratulate the entire
team that supported you in that endeavour.
We welcome the United Kingdom’s initiative in
organizing the visit by Council members to Europe and
Africa during its presidency. In spite of its brevity, that
important mission deserves to be repeated in the future
because, not only did it make it possible to really get a
feeling for the realities on the ground, but it also, above
all, fostered initiatives aimed at finding solutions to
problems that have arisen. That is the Security Council’s
mission first and foremost, and the conclusions need
to be drawn up and debated within the Council first,
before being the subject of a press statement.
Our delegation also notes that the time devoted to
each part of the mission was relatively short, which
did not make it possible for the mission to properly
manage the various meetings. That was the case with
the meetings with the International Criminal Court and
the visits to the missions in Somalia and South Sudan,
and it also was the case with the visit of international
authorities to South Sudan. In future, we suggest that
the Council set aside enough time to organize that sort
of mission.
My delegation appreciates the debate that you,
Mr. President, organized on the prevention of conflicts
(see S/PV.7247), which made it possible to enrich the
discussion on the underlying causes of conflicts, the
warning signs and especially the Security Council’s
role in prevention. We noted that all delegations
underscored the Council’s lack of rigour and efficiency
in implementing prevention mechanisms.
We also welcome the debate that you, Sir, organized
on the protection of civilians (see S/PV.7244), as well as
the draft resolution that is currently being drawn up on
that topic.
With regard to the situation in Libya, Chad
expresses its concern at the complex situation that our
neighbouring country finds itself in. We call on the
international community to help Libya restore peace
and security. In that connection, we welcome the
Security Council’s vote, during your presidency and
through your initiative, on resolution 2174 (2014), on the
situation in Libya. We also commend the initiative of
neighbouring countries, which have met several times
to discuss the situation in Libya in order to contribute
to finding a solution to the crisis in that country.
By the same token, we welcome the Council’s
adoption of resolution 2173 (2014), which extends the

14-520705/17

S/PV7254

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

mandate of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur so that it can continue to pursue
its mission of protecting civilians and providing
humanitarian assistance in that region. We think that
a military solution is not viable for that country and
that dialogue should be fostered in the framework of the
Doha agreement and regional initiatives.
With regard to the Central African Republic, we
would like to see the Council accelerate the process
of deploying the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic, which is planned for 15 September. We
hope that the United States, which will take over the
presidency of the Council from the United Kingdom
next month, will focus attention on the issue of refugees.
Finally, Chad welcomes the adoption of the
presidential statement, during your presidency, on
the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel
(S/PRST/2014/17).
In conclusion, we would like to thank the President
of the Council for his insight and leadership in the
Council’s work. We would like to also congratulate the
entire United Kingdom team that accompanied him
throughout his work. We take this opportunity to wish
the United States luck when it assumes the presidency
of the Council during the month of September and to
assure it of our full support.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Council’s heavy agenda during your presidency in the
month of August, Sir, included many problematic issues
in the Middle East and Africa. The Council, under
your presidency, also organized visits to Europe, South
Sudan and Somalia. China appreciates the great amount
of work done by the United Kingdom as President of
the Council for this month. In reviewing the Council’s
work this month, I wish to focus on three issues.
First, with regard to the situation in Gaza, since
the outbreak of the current Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
China has worked to bring about peace talks through
many means and channels. During his recent visit to
Egypt and the headquarters of the League of Arab States,
Chinese Minister for Foreign Affairs Wang Yi set forth
a five-point peace initiative. The Chinese Special Envoy
on the Middle East Issue also made many mediation
visits. We have also provided humanitarian assistance
to the people of Gaza to the best of our abilities. In the
Council, China supported the draft resolution submitted
by Jordan on behalf of the Arab/Islamic countries and

6/17

28/08/2014

the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. We also took
an active part in the negotiations and repeatedly called
upon the Council to heed the voice of the international
community and act to stop the violence through peace
talks.
We appreciate the recent ceasefire agreement
reached on Gaza and the unremitting efforts made by
Egypt and other parties. They represent an important
step in easing the tension and the suffering of the people.
We hope that the two parties will attach importance
to achieving peace, put people first and effectively
maintain the ceasefire, seize the opportunity to resume
peace talks and bring about an early, fair and reasonable
settlement of the Palestinian question.
The situation there is still fragile. The international
community should continue its efforts to consolidate
the ceasefire and push for the lifting of the blockade of
Gaza so that the peace talks between Israel and Palestine
can resume. On that issue, the Council should play an
active and effective role. China is a firm supporter and
sincere mediator of the peace between the two parties.
We will continue our unremitting efforts aimed at
achieving peace between Israel and Palestine, as well
as stability in the region.
Secondly, with regard to counter-terrorism,
terrorist activities have recently become more rampant
and pose a serious threat to regional and international
peace and security. Early this month, the Council
adopted resolution 2170 (2014), which reflects the
Council’s agreement to take measures to put an end to
support in terms of personnel, weapons and finance for
terrorist organizations, such as the Islamic State in Iraq
and Syria, and to stop their efforts to instigate, plot and
carry out terrorist activities through the Internet and
social media. We hope that the resolution will be fully
and genuinely implemented.
Terrorism is an enemy common to all humankind.
All terrorist acts — regardless of their motive, where
and when they occur and who commits them — are
unpardonable felonies. The international community, in
combating terrorism, should not apply varying criteria.
We hope that the high-level counter-terrorism meetings
of the Security Council scheduled for next month will
enable the parties to further forge consensus so as to
increase international solidarity in the common fight
against terrorism.
Thirdly, with regard to the situation in South Sudan,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development

14-52070

28/08/2014

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

(IGAD) recently held a special summit on South
Sudan. The leaders of the parties signed a protocol on
agreed principles on transitional arrangements to end
the crisis in South Sudan. The representatives of the
Government and the opposition signed the cessation of
hostilities agreement implementation matrix. That is
an important effort on the part of IGAD to promote a
political settlement to the question of South Sudan, and
China welcomes it. However, the tension there does not
inspire optimism. The international community will
need to make greater efforts to end the crisis. China
urges the parties to the conflict to put an end to the
violence and cease their fire immediately, implement
the cessation of hostilities agreement and work with all
ethnic groups and factions in the context of an inclusive
political dialogue.
We are in favour of Africans solving African
problems themselves through African means, and
we firmly support IGAD’s leadership and mediation
efforts. Since the outbreak of the conflict in South
Sudan, Chinese leaders, the Foreign Minister and the
Special Representative on African Affairs have made
efforts aimed at fostering mediation. We took the lead
in providing emergency assistance to South Sudan. We
will continue to work with the international community
to press for the holding of peace talks and, in the light
of the need, for the provision of more humanitarian
assistance in order to promote a rapid return to stability
in the country.
Finally, I congratulate the United States of America
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of September. I wish it every success and
smooth sailing in its work.
Mr. Baublys (Lithuania): I wish to congratulate
the United Kingdom delegation for its wise steering of
the Security Council with an experienced hand during
the month of August. During this very busy month, on
more than a dozen occasions, the Council was called
upon to react on an emergency basis, including today,
to unfolding situations affecting international peace
and security — Iraq, Libya and Ukraine, to mention
but a few.
The debate on the protection of humanitarian
personnel (see S/PV.7244) was particularly timely and
important. Resolution 2171 (2014) encapsulates United
Nations efforts in the fields of conflict prevention and
mediation. Council members visited the International
Criminal Court in The Hague for the first time.
Council members delivered clear messages to the South

S/PV7254

Sudanese leaders to cease violence in the face of the
looming famine and the disintegration of their State
(see S/PV.7250).
As was stressed in the open debate on conflict
prevention (see S/PV.7247), the Council is currently
grappling with an unprecedented number of bloody
conflicts and four level-3 humanitarian emergencies.
Lifesaving activities chronically run short of funds. The
international community needs to make a qualitative
leap forward in the area of conflict prevention and make
better use of early warning, mediation and ensuring
accountability.
In recent days, the Middle East has seen some
of the most dramatic efforts ever made at mediation.
Lithuania welcomed the announcement of an openended ceasefire for Gaza brokered under the auspices
of Egypt. Lithuania will support an international
mechanism to address the modalities of the ceasefire
and looks forward to a serious discussion of the matter
in the Security Council.
In Iraq, early warning proved insufficient to stop
radical and violent extremists and terrorists, who swept
through the country, violently expelling communities
that had cohabited along the Euphrates and the Tigris
Rivers since Roman times. Resolution 2170 (2014) sets
forth initial measures against the Islamic State of Iraq
and the Levant, Jabhat Al-Nusra and other individual
groups associated with Al-Qaida. The effectiveness
of the sanctions will depend on the swift and coherent
actions taken by States Members of the United Nations,
in particular the States of the region.
Throughout the month, the Council, no less than
five times, addressed the situation in the east of
Ukraine, as unrelenting escalation along the RussianUkrainian border continued. Unequivocally strong
calls, including from the majority of Council members,
called on the Russian Federation to cease its support
for illegal armed groups, respect Ukrainian sovereignty
and territorial integrity and seek political solutions.
Today we heard many Council members ask Russia
to withdraw its troops from Ukraine (see S/PV.7253).
However, those calls have fallen on deaf ears.
Month after month, reports from the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe have attested
to egregious human rights violations in territories
controlled by pro-Russian militias. Earlier this month,
United Nations Assistant Secretary-General Šimonović
spoke of the sharply deteriorating human rights situation

14-520707/17

S/PV7254

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

28/08/2014

in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions, where illegal but
professional foreign fighters have been engaged in
abductions, detentions, torture and executions. The
Lithuanian Honorary Consul in Luhansk, Mykola
Zelenec, was kidnapped by such fighters and was found
executed by them last week. In the last month, civilian
casualties almost doubled in those areas.

First, when the Council workload is very heavy,
as we have witnessed this month and today, we should
abbreviate informal consultations to have only the
briefer speak, followed by questions or comments that
do not exceed three minutes. No showcasing should be
allowed, so that we can free up time for thinking about
the problems presented outside the Chamber.

Lastly, I would like to say a few words about
sanctions regimes. Increasingly, United Nations
sanctions regimes are becoming more complex, as
more United Nations peacekeeping operations are
called on to cooperate with expert groups and provide
assistance to national Governments. The effectiveness
of sanctions hinges on many factors, including the
willingness and capacity of neighbouring States to
implement them. As Chair of the Yemen and Central
African Republic Sanctions Committees, Lithuania
has repeatedly encouraged the neighbouring States of
Yemen and the Central African Republic to work with
the United Nations Sanctions Committees and groups
of experts. The United Nations is ready to provide
assistance, expertise and advice.

Secondly, in order to place more of the responsibility
on Council members themselves, briefings should be
followed in consultations by our questions addressed
only to the briefers, as is the norm. The Secretariat
should then leave the Consultations Room so that we
can have a discussion among ourselves on how to move
the agenda item forward, after which we can inform the
Secretariat accordingly.

Reacting to the alarming situation there, the
Security Council has also strengthened sanctions with
respect to Libya. Unsecured arms and ammunition
proliferate freely in Libya and beyond. We need to
support Libya and the region in their efforts to address
those issues. We would welcome the Secretary-General
providing the Council with possible options as to how
the United Nations system could assist Libya and its
neighbours in order enhance the implementation of the
arms embargo.
In conclusion, let me once again thank the United
Kingdom delegation for its dedicated work in the
presidency of the Council during the month of August.
We wish the incoming United States presidency the
best of success.
Mr. Omaish (Jordan): First of all, I would like
to join all other speakers today in thanking you,
Mr. President, and your colleagues for the exceptional
manner with which you have handled the affairs of the
Security Council during what has been a very busy
month.
I will not review the substance of what has been on
the Council’s agenda over the month of August. Rather,
I will focus on the Council’s methods of work by
making some basic suggestions, which we have raised
in the past.

8/17

Thirdly, we should commit ourselves to making
concise statements focused on reaching beyond the
surface features of a violent crisis and on trying to
understand its deeper complexities.
Fourthly, Secretariat briefings should include a
deep analysis into why a particular crisis was triggered
in the first place, and not just a description of the
unfolding of the events of the crisis at hand, so that
Council members can understand the very DNA of the
crisis.
Fifthly, it is important, when the Council is
managing several hot crises simultaneously, to create
space for thought between our statements. We as
Council members need time to think and consult in the
proper non-United Nations sense of the term.
I thank you again, Mr. President, and wish the
delegation of the United States of America all the best
during the month of September.
The President: I thank the representative of Jordan
for his helpful suggestions. I think that the proposal of
no showcasing might be a challenge for some members
of the Council.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
will focus on three important activities in the month
of August, namely, the Security Council mission to
Europe and Africa, the briefing on the protection
of humanitarian workers in armed conflicts (see
S/PV.7244) and the open debate on conflict prevention
(see S/PV.7247).
The visit to Belgium and the open debate on conflict
prevention, in bringing us back to the origins of the First
World War, which began 100 years ago this year, gave
14-52070

28/08/2014

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

us an opportunity to honour the culture of memory and
to remember that conflicts are avoidable. Accordingly,
the Security Council should do more to prevent
conflicts within the framework of its responsibilities,
but without exceeding the responsibilities entrusted
to it under the Charter of the United Nations, not only
because preventing conflicts is less costly in terms
of the Organization’s and its Members’ resources for
resolving conflicts, but essentially because prevention
has the potential to save human beings from the
physical, psychological and material devastation caused
by armed conflicts. The Council has enormous power
to respect human beings in their full dignity. However,
we have seen just the opposite in the situations in Syria,
the Middle East, Iraq, Ukraine, the Central African
Republic and South Sudan, among other places.
The visit to Belgium also allowed us to observe that
the consequences of the use of chemical weapons are
lasting, as evidenced by the fact that, nearly 100 years
after the use of chemical weapons in that country, the
international community has still not managed to locate
and destroy all of the weapons, and people continue to
die as the result of accidental explosions. The chemical
weapons attack against the people of Ghouta in Syria
just a year ago reminds us of the lasting nature of the
threat of chemical weapons and the need to eradicate
them completely and definitively, given the magnitude
of the damage they cause and their potential for lasting
negative effects.
The visit to The Hague also enabled us to reflect
on the contribution of the International Court of
Justice to the peaceful settlement of disputes between
States and that of the international criminal tribunals,
including the International Criminal Court, which is at
the centre of today’s international penal justice system.
Accountability helps prevent a relapse into conflict and
consequently prevents it.
It is important that the Security Council deepen its
dialogue and cooperation with the courts in The Hague
by establishing a specific mechanism to keep better
track of the situations that it refers to the International
Criminal Court. The reminder by the President of the
International Court of Justice that Latin America, my
region, is the Court’s main “client”, and the fact that
that region is a zone of peace allows us to infer a link
between the use of international judicial mechanisms
and the prevention of armed conflict. It is important that
the Security Council use its powers under Article 36,
paragraph 3, of the Charter to recommend the referral

S/PV7254

of disputes of a judicial nature to the International
Court of Justice as appropriate.
Regarding the trip to South Sudan and our efforts
to coordinate positions with the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, including our meeting with
the ministers of that regional organization in Nairobi,
one could, as Ambassador Oyarzábal, who represented
our country, stated, write a book about it, and I believe
him. I will say here only that we believe that, while
the Security Council should respect the leadership of
regional and subregional organizations in conflict
resolution by supporting their efforts without hindering
them, it cannot cease seeking to fulfil its own primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations.
Finally, the trip to Somalia and the meeting with
the President of Kenya shed light on the cost in terms
of human lives and on the deepening of humanitarian
crises, both of which are often the unintended
consequence of counter-terrorism efforts. That extends
beyond the situation in Somalia, as has been observed
in Iraq, Afghanistan and Yemen. The protection of
civilians and respect for international humanitarian
law and human rights must always be part of the fight
against terrorism and must certainly be determining
factors in the Security Council’s authorization of the
use of force.
Allow me to say that we must not understand
the fight against terrorism as developing solely on
the military front. Our approach is and needs to be
broader, as can be seen from our work within at least
four subsidiary bodies of the Security Council. One
of the most notable advances in those bodies has been
the establishment of the office of an independent and
impartial ombudsperson to review applications from
individuals, groups and entities wishing to be removed
from the Al-Qaida sanctions list. Due process is a
cornerstone of the defence of human rights, because it
is itself one of the fundamental rights of human beings.
That involves the guarantee of people’s right to know
the substantive reasons why the Committee has decided
to delist them or keep them on the list.
Argentina unhesitatingly reaffirms the obligation
for the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011),
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals and
entities, to include the substantive reasons for the
Committee’s decision to keep a person or entity on the

14-520709/17

S/PV7254

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

list or delist them and any other relevant information
for the Ombudsperson to transmit to the author of the
request, in accordance with annex II, paragraph 16, of
resolution 2161 (2014) and, ultimately, in accordance
with the human right to due process, which is broad
in scope and does not end with the decision to delist a
person or entity.
Finally, the briefing on the protection of
humanitarian personnel (see S/PV.7244) cast light
on the whole world of difference that exists between
rhetoric and the facts when it comes to the protection of
civilians, including humanitarian personnel, and more
generally, respect for international humanitarian law.
Nevertheless, the reaction of the Security Council has
not measured up to the challenge. It is equally serious
to attack humanitarian workers in Afghanistan, the
Central African Republic, Darfur, Gaza, Syria, Somalia
or South Sudan, and it is significantly more serious
when the attacks come from Government forces, whose
duty it is to protect the people who risk their lives to
bring needed relief to the suffering population. At a
minimum, the Security Council must be able to show
that it has joined in condemning those attacks and
has risen above the legitimate national interests and
geopolitical considerations at stake.
As this is close to the last meeting during your
presidency of the Council, Sir, I thank you and
congratulate you most sincerely for the manner in
which you led our work during the month of August.
I thank you and, through you, your team. I also avail
myself of this opportunity to wish the United States a
good presidency and to offer all the support they may
need.
The President: This is not in fact the last meeting,
but I nonetheless appreciate your kind words.
Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): Thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this monthly wrapup meeting in a public format, thus enhancing the
transparency of the Council’s work. I would also like to
congratulate you, Sir, and your team for your dynamic
and effective presidency of the Security Council during
the month of August, which removed any lingering
doubts that there might have been as to the fact that the
Council does not take summer breaks.
Most of the situations on the Council’s agenda this
month have seen their share of suffering for civilian
populations. The deepening of the crisis in Ukraine,
which we addressed again today (see S/PV.7253); the

10/17

28/08/2014

continuing violence in Gaza up until the ceasefire of
26 August; the continuing deterioration of the situation
in South Sudan and Libya; the unspeakable barbarity
displayed by the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria; the
humanitarian situation in Syria, which remains dire
despite the modest gains in terms of humanitarian access
obtained thanks to resolution 2165 (2014) — all are
situations that should concern us and cause us to ponder
the best way to strengthen the work of the Council in
the maintenance of international peace and security.
They lead us to ask the question: what can we do to
prevent such situations from arising and prevent the
suffering on the part of civilian populations?
The open debate on conflict prevention (see
S/PV.7247) that you, Sir, organized on 21 August
provided some answers to that question. A vast
majority of the participants in that debate stressed
the importance of the Security Council adopting a
proactive posture to conflict prevention rather than
reacting after the fact. We welcome the adoption, at
that open debate, of resolution 2171 (2014), which lays
out a whole range of instruments aimed at promoting
conflict prevention. We must now make use of them
and give full expression to Article 99 of the Charter of
the United Nations. We hope that the Secretary-General
and his Special Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide
and the Responsibility to Protect, to mention but two,
will inform us as soon as warning signs of potential
conflict situations appear.
We believe that a significant deterioration in
the human rights situation often precedes conflict.
Such warning signs must be noted and brought to
the attention of the Security Council. The SecretaryGeneral’s Rights Up Front initiative is the instrument
of choice for warning of such situations, and we hope
it will be fully implemented with the assistance of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights.
This month, as several others have mentioned,
featured a field visit by the Security Council that
enabled us to better assess the crises affecting Southern
Sudan and Somalia. We were able to see with our
own eyes the complexity of the environment in which
United Nations staff and humanitarian actors carry out
their tasks. They are on the front lines of the efforts
to restore peace and provide support and assistance
to people trapped in conflict situations, at great risk
to themselves. In the open debate on 19 August (see
S/PV.7244) we honoured the memory of the many

14-52070

28/08/2014

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

humanitarian workers and United Nations personnel
who have paid for their commitment with their lives.
We support the initiative to update resolution 1502
(2003) in order to adapt it to the realities of today, and
we hope that tomorrow we can adopt a new resolution
on the protection of humanitarian personnel. It is our
individual and collective responsibility to ensure that
humanitarian assistance is not diverted from its primary
purpose and to ensure that the principles governing
it are respected. The credibility of humanitarian aid
depends on it, as does the safety of those who provide
it.
One of the important lessons we have learned from
past conflicts is the importance of combating impunity
for the perpetrators of violations and abuses of human
rights and violations of international humanitarian
law. Making it clear that the perpetrators of such acts
must atone for them can help to deter others from such
heinous acts. Our recent visit to The Hague once again
enabled us to highlight the significant contribution
of the International Criminal Court and international
criminal justice in general not only to the maintainance
of peace but also to the prevention of conflicts.
The Security Council bears a special responsibility.
Only our collective commitment will make a difference.
In that regard, as the United States prepares to take over
the presidency of the Security Council, I would like to
wish the American delegation every success and to
assure it of our full support.
Mr. Bliss (Australia): We thank you, Mr. President,
and your entire United Kingdom team, for your able
leadership this month. I will focus my remarks on the
Security Council visit as well as our enduring interest
in and responsibilities for conflict prevention, a key
theme of our work in August.
The Council’s visit to the Peace Palace in The Hague,
established following the 1899 Peace Conference there,
was a reminder that for more than a century the inherent
link between peace, justice and the rule of law has been
understood. The Peace Palace is of course now home
to the International Court of Justice. The Council’s
exchange of views with the Court, the International
Criminal Tribunals established by the Council and
the International Criminal Court (ICC) reinforced
the role those bodies can play in conflict prevention.
It underlined the central role of accountability in our
joint efforts to prevent and deter conflict and to build
sustainable peace. The visit was a vivid reminder of the

S/PV7254

challenge of agreeing on and upholding international
norms concerning the conduct of conflict.
A year after the Peace Palace opened its doors,
in 1913, the First World War broke out. Our visit to
Belgium underlined the horrific consequences of that
entirely preventable conflict. Of course, during that
conflict many of the fundamental norms established at
The Hague Peace Conference were blatantly violated.
Just 24 hours after leaving The Hague, we were at a
protection site at an United Nations Mission in South
Sudan base in Malakal. We saw the consequences
of conflict, including large-scale displacement and
desperate humanitarian need. We heard testimonies of
massive human-rights violations, massacres and ethnic
targeting. United Nations staff told us of approaching
famine. Civil society representatives pleaded with us to
do more to end the conflict.
That jarring juxtaposition of lofty international
aspirations and the harsh reality of conflict is reflected
in many of the crises before the Council, including
Syria, Iraq, Ukraine, the Central African Republic,
South Sudan, Gaza and Libya. While the causes and
consequences differ, there is a common element
to the conduct of those conflicts — the erosion of
fundamental norms. We see that in the brazen defiance
of fundamental provisions of human rights and
international humanitarian law. In Iraq, the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) is committing
unspeakable atrocities against civilians on the basis
of their religion or ethnicity. That is a stark challenge
for the Council — a terrorist group acting as a rebel
insurgency, acquiring and holding territory and brutally
repressing the civilian population. The role of foreign
terrorist fighters in such groups deserves the Council’s
urgent attention.
We see that erosion of norms in the frequent use
of civilian facilities, including schools and hospitals,
for military purposes, and in the deliberate targeting of
such sites. That has been a feature of conflicts in Syria,
Iraq, South Sudan, the Central African Republic and
Gaza. We see it in attacks on cultural heritage, often part
of a deliberate strategy to destroy the very foundations
of cultures and religions. ISIL’s destruction of the Musa
Bin Oumair Mosque in Iraq’s Diyala province is only
the latest shocking example.
We see that erosion of norms reflected in the
deliberate targeting of humanitarian actors. As we
marked World Humanitarian Day on 19 August, we

14-5207011/17

S/PV7254

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

heard that 155 humanitarian workers were killed in
2013, the highest level for a decade. We have also
seen it in the use of chemical weapons in conflict. In
adopting resolution 2118 (2013) a year ago, the Council
reaffirmed the absolute prohibition of the use of such
weapons anywhere. The completion of destruction
processes for Syrian chemical weapons on the United
States vessel MV Cape Ray this month was welcome,
but the job is not yet complete, and allegations of the
use of toxic chemicals in the Syrian conflict must be
investigated.
We have even seen violations of the very foundations
of the Charter of the United Nations, the obligation of
non-interference and the prohibition on the use of force,
with the annexation of part of Ukraine’s territory and
active destabilization of other parts of the country. And
we have seen the tragic and far-reaching consequences
of this, including the downing of Malaysia Airlines
Flight MH-17.
It is tempting to think that, having established
the normative framework for international peace and
security and its supporting institutions through treaties
and Council resolutions, our job is complete. We cannot
take such a view. We cannot just work at the margins.
We must protect the very foundations. We must take
every opportunity to reinforce these fundamental
norms — through Council resolutions such as 2170
(2014), on ISIL, and 2171 (2014), on conflict prevention;
through the inclusion of listing criteria in our
sanctions regimes for those who violate international
humanitarian and human-rights law, as we have just
done on Libya (see S/PV.7251); through accountability
mechanisms, including commissions of inquiry and
support to the ICC; and through timely Council visits at
critical moments, such as the one to South Sudan.
There was one another important event in The
Hague: the Council’s meeting with Dutch Prime
Minister Rutte, who conveyed his gratitude for the
adoption of resolution 2166 (2014) and called for its full
implementation. As Council President, Sir, you laid a
wreath on our behalf at the memorial site at Schiphol
Airport for the victims of Flight MH-17. It was a
powerful reminder of the awful and unpredictable
consequences of conflict, and the stake that every United
Nations Member State has in the Council fulfilling its
primary responsibility to maintain international peace
and security.
Mr. Klein (United States of America): Thank you
very much for your strong leadership of the Council
12/17

28/08/2014

this month, Mr. President. You and your very capable
team have guided us efficiently and kept us on track
and on time throughout this busy month of August.
Today I would like to share my delegation’s views
on some areas where the Security Council has been
productive this month, and also to look ahead to a
few areas that will require our continued attention in
September and beyond.
The Council’s trip this month allowed us to
witness first-hand the stakes of our deliberations. The
visit to South Sudan was particularly timely, given
the deteriorating political, humanitarian and security
crisis unfolding there. The visit allowed the Council to
hear from many stakeholders and to directly convey a
number of important messages, including the fact that
the Council is prepared to impose consequences on
spoilers of the peace process, and that we will continue
to focus closely on developments. Another area where
we saw a measure of progress this month was related
to the removal and destruction of chemical weapons in
Syria. We commend the efforts of the United Nations,
particularly those of the personnel working on the
ground. Our international partners have been absolutely
instrumental in the removal and ongoing destruction
of Syria’s declared chemical weapons. Still, serious
questions remain, and the international community,
including the Council, must continue to hold the
Syrian regime accountable for meeting its international
obligations.
We found our two thematic debates this month — on
the protection of humanitarian workers (see S/PV.7244)
and on conflict prevention (see S/PV.7247) — to be
complementary and worthy of our continued attention.
Some 108 million people are now in need of humanitarian
assistance worldwide, and violence is displacing more
people than ever before. Humanitarian workers are often
the vulnerable first responders to crises. The increasing
frequency of attacks on humanitarian workers and the
number killed in 2013, especially in Syria, alarm us.
Our discussion on conflict prevention drove home
the need to head off humanitarian crises before they
occur. The United States commends the United Nations
efforts, particularly those of the Department of Political
Affairs, to monitor and analyse developments around
the world and to alert the Security Council and the
international community to brewing crises.
In addition to the humanitarian crisis in Syria,
which I mentioned just now, many topics will require

14-52070

28/08/2014

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

our continued attention in September and beyond. Five
issues stand out.
The first issue is the Central African Republic. We
will see an important transfer of authority to the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
next month, and we will need to closely track the
political transition progress and humanitarian issues.
We expect the Secretariat to keep us informed on
progress in bringing MINUSCA up to full strength and
on any help that it needs in that regard.
The second issue is the Middle East. The
announcement of the ceasefire in Gaza on Tuesday
was welcome. We hope very much that this ceasefire
will prove to be lasting, that it will put an end to rocket
and mortar attacks and that it will allow for talks
under Egyptian mediation to continue and to address
the underlying issues and achieve a durable and
sustainable solution. That includes a stronger role for
the Palestinian Authority, reconstruction and relief and
addressing the need for demilitarization. As Secretary
of State Kerry said, the delivery of urgently needed
humanitarian assistance to the people of Gaza must be
accelerated. The United States is prepared to work with
our international partners on a major reconstruction
initiative. We look forward to working with the Council
on suitable ways for us and for the United Nations to
support long-term solutions in Gaza.
The third topic is Ukraine, which is clearly an
issue that the Council must continue to follow closely.
We look forward to Assistant Secretary-General
Šimonović’s new report on human rights, scheduled
to come out tomorrow. But as the Council showed just
earlier this afternoon (see S/PV.7253), the security
situation remains troubling. As Ambassador Power
just said in this Chamber, Russia’s action amounts to
a deliberate effort to support, and now fight alongside,
illegal separatists in another sovereign country.
Fourthly, next month we will need to extend the
mandate of the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL) while addressing the impact of ebola in
Liberia and on the Mission. We strongly support
UNMIL and express our deep appreciation for the
willingness of countries to continue to contribute troops
to it. The United States Embassy in Monrovia remains
open, and our peacekeepers remain in the Mission. We
share concerns regarding the safety of peacekeepers
and hope the Secretariat will keep the Council informed
about measures it is taking to allow the Mission to keep

S/PV7254

operating. For our part, we are working intensely with
the World Health Organization and others on this issue
and are providing considerable resources of our own in
the fight to contain ebola in Liberia and elsewhere.
This month also concludes with peacekeepers of
the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
under assault and the downing of a helicopter of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan. Next month
we will have to consider what measures are necessary
to deal with threats to peacekeepers.
Finally, the adoption of resolution 2170 (2014), on
the threat of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and
the Nusrah Front, was welcome. But it also underlines
that more needs to be done, particularly to address the
problem of foreign terrorist fighters. To highlight the
importance of that threat, President Obama will chair
a high-level Council briefing on that topic during the
General Assembly high-level week next month.
Lastly, I would like to thank delegations for their
expressions of support. We look forward to working
with the Council on these issues and so many others
during our upcoming presidency in September.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): For Russia, the central topic of the Security
Council’s discussion in August was the situation in
Ukraine. Unfortunately, we are forced to conclude that
the Security Council, due to the destructive efforts of a
number of its members, was unable to play the kind of
role in resolving that crisis that is in line with its mandate
as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. We
saw that once again in today’s discussion on Ukraine
(see S/PV.7253). The draft statement proposed by the
Russian delegation on a ceasefire was blocked on the
basis of a frivolous pretext.
Despite that opposition, we have continued
throughout the month to draw the attention of
the international community to the catastrophic
humanitarian situation in eastern Ukraine. In the
course of a briefing convened at the initiative of Russia
on 5 August (see S/PV.7234), representatives of United
Nations humanitarian agencies provided an assessment
of the situation that was closer to the reality. We
welcome that development. At last, information about
the real situation is beginning to seep through a wall of
silence and blatant denial.
We were shocked by the furious criticism and
distortion of facts with regard to the convoy of Russian
humanitarian assistance that was sent to Luhansk. We

14-5207013/17

S/PV7254

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

have already discussed more than once the reasons
and purposes for our actions, and I do not wish repeat
them. However, I would like to stress that we will
continue efforts to provide humanitarian assistance to
the inhabitants of Luhansk and Donetsk, in cooperation
with the authorities in Kyiv and the International
Committee of Red Cross. We hope that our future
efforts will be met with a more constructive attitude.
The Security Council was unable to act with due
responsibility in the matter of international support
in the inquiry into the tragic crash of the Malaysian
airplane. Unfortunately, we continue to see attempts
to hinder the implementation of resolution 2166 (2014).
For more than 10 days, the Ukrainian authorities
disregarded the demand for a ceasefire in the region
of the disaster, and then they officially declared a
resumption of military activities. On two occasions
we introduced draft press statements in support of
resolution 2166 (2014). Both times they were blocked
by a number of Council members, who are evidently
not interested in the implementation of that resolution.
All we see here is an attempt to whitewash Kyiv under
any circumstances.
We would like once again to remind the Secretariat
that, in accordance with resolution 2166 (2014), the
United Nations must provide comprehensive assistance
in the inquiry, as well as identify possible options for
such assistance and report to the Council on relevant
developments. The United Nations and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe must play a more
active role, including as coordinators, in conducting a
comprehensive, thorough and independent international
inquiry.
With respect to the situation in Gaza, the Security
Council continued to act timidly. Discussions about
a product expressing the reactions of the Council
continued throughout the month. However, there is
no result. We came away quite disappointed from
yesterday’s discussion of Libya (see S/PV.7251). That
country is essentially in free fall. The members of the
Council responsible for that situation — because they
are the ones that gravely violated resolutions 1970 (2011)
and 1973 (2011) — are acting as if they had nothing to
do with it. They are calling on the United Nations or
Libya’s neighbours to do more. In that regard, we would
like to raise another point.
We sometimes hear that, if not for the right of veto,
the Security Council would be effective in preventing
or resolving conflicts. In the case of Libya, no veto was
14/17

28/08/2014

used. I would like to ask those who were satisfied with
the result to raise their hands. The issue is not the veto,
but rather a policy of adventurism, which further stokes
conflicts.
In conclusion, we would like to note that the
current work of the Council is taking place against a
whole range of deteriorating regional crises. Given that
the Council has too much on its plate, we need to work
towards a more in-depth and effective consideration
of the issues on its agenda, related first and foremost
to specific situations and countries. Today’s wrapup session seems artificial, especially since we will
continue our work tomorrow with discussions on two
important items. We would like to say that the British
presidency did not always act correctly, although it
worked a lot. We wish the United States delegation
every success in September.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I thank the President
for organizing this wrap-up session, the sixth since the
beginning of the year, and the second in a row in the
format of a public meetingn. The convening of these
meetings, which provide an opportunity for the Security
Council to assess its work and critically examine its
progress and effectiveness, should be encouraged. I
hope that more Council members, current and future,
will continue this practice and that non-members of the
Council will continue to participate.
The delegation of Rwanda appreciates the way you,
Mr. President, presided over the Council during the
month of August, particularly your focus on effective
management of time. We extend our appreciation to
the Deputy Permanent Representative and the political
coordinator and his alternate, as well as to the whole
Security Council team of the United Kingdom.
I take this opportunity to congratulate Ambassador
Samantha Power of the United States on assuming the
presidency of the Council for the month of September.
We note that during its last presidency, in July 2013,
the United States organized an open debate on the
protection of journalists in armed conflicts (see
S/PV.7003), and that this September, the United States
has chosen foreign terrorist fighters as the main topic
for its presidency. The barbaric killing of James Foley,
a United States journalist, by a member of the Islamic
State, including foreign terrorist fighters, is a tragic
example of the need for the Council to tackle this
scourge while enforcing the protection of civilians,
including journalists.

14-52070

28/08/2014

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

In connection with the protection of civilians, we
also thank the United Kingdom for organizing, on the
occasion of the World Humanitarian Day, on 19 August,
a briefing on the protection of humanitarian workers
(see S/PV.7244) in memory of Sergio Vieira de Mello,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Iraq, and his colleagues killed in the terrorist attack
against the Canal Hotel in Baghdad 11 years ago.
Rwanda supports the draft resolution that the United
Kingdom presidency has introduced in that regard.
While we appreciated the successful Security
Council trip to Belgium, the Netherlands, South
Sudan and Somalia, we noted that the maintenance
of international peace and security continued to be
gravely challenged during the month of August. From
Ukraine to the Central African Republic and through
Syria, Iraq, Libya and South Sudan, conflicts around
the world continued unaffected, many of them without
any prospect of a peaceful resolution.
More worrying is that terrorist organizations
have moved beyond committing terrorist acts, and the
Islamic State, Boko Haram and others have acquired
the military might to conquer territories with a view to
creating an Islamic caliphate. Although Rwanda usually
advocates for the peaceful resolution of conflicts, we
believe that when the world faces terrorist and genocidal
organizations, the only solution is to fight them and to
defeat them. We cannot afford to contain or appease
those violent groups. Cooperation and coordination
among regional countries and world Powers on the
Security Council are critical to achieving that goal.
However, in this dark picture of international
peace and security, we noted a glimmer of hope for the
conflict in Gaza. The open-ended ceasefire in Gaza,
brokered early this week by Egypt, could provide a
fresh start for a political solution to the long-standing
conflict in the Middle East. Nonetheless, the Security
Council should closely follow the situation and be ready
to take appropriate measures to help the parties achieve
sustainable peace and stability.
On eastern Ukraine, considered in an earlier
meeting today (see S/PV.7253), we welcomed the
regional summit held in Minsk on Monday, but we
continue to be concerned at the dangerous escalation
of the situation on the ground. We again call on the
parties concerned to exercise restraint in respect to the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Ukraine and to continue dialogue for a political and
diplomatic solution to the crisis.

S/PV7254

The situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo was also discussed in August during a high-level
debate (see S/PV.7246) focused on the neutralization
of the Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda
(FDLR). Recalling the press statement (SC/11533)
adopted on Tuesday, 26 August, Rwanda welcomes the
Security Council’s clear and unreserved support for the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region and
the Southern African Development Community, which
have clearly stated that a six-month period provided
to the FDLR for its disarmament must be followed
by military action should that genocidal organization
continue its delaying tactics.
We all know that the dramatic increase in and the
worsening of conflicts around the world has enlarged
the agenda for the Security Council. Unfortunately, the
situation has also made our methods of work worse.
I will not dwell too much on the need to shift our
approach from a culture of management of conflicts to
a spirit of prevention of conflicts. We have appreciated
the thematic open debate convened by the United
Kingdom in the past week (see S/PV.7247) and the
briefing provided by the Department of Political Affairs
this week. But we believe the effective prevention
of conflicts should be oriented towards regular,
country-specific scanning based on actual threats to
international peace and security.
Beyond that, Rwanda noted over the past weeks
and month not only the increase in emergency meetings
but also the emergence of a practice whereby a Council
member requests a meeting on an aspect of a particular
crisis, while another one requests a meeting to discuss
another aspect of the same crisis within the same
period. We believe that this practice undermines the
Council’s ability to effectively address conflicts in a
comprehensive manner. The Council should have a
serious conversation on how to be more flexible and
more efficient and how better to manage its agenda.
We believe that the frequency of our meetings should
depend on the evolution of crises on our agenda, which
should be addressed in a holistic manner, including
sanctions. While some situations should be considered
on a biannual or quarterly basis, other situations
deserve monthly or even semi-monthly meetings, with
a clear strategy on the part of the Security Council.
To conclude, I wish to thank the Secretary-General
for his usual availability to interact with members of
the Council. I extend our appreciation to members of
his administration, including members of the Security

14-5207015/17

S/PV7254

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

Council Affairs Division, for their usual assistance to
Council members.
Mrs. Le Fraper du Hellen (France) (spoke in
French): As previous speakers have done, I would like
to warmly thank the British delegation — you yourself,
Mr. President, and your entire team — for a very
effective presidency in August.
I simply wish to touch upon a few topics.
First, on a positive note, I appreciate the unity of
the Council and its productivity on a number of topics
that are important for us, including the renewal of the
mandate for United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL), which is very important in the context of
the regional crisis. We need to limit the repercussions
of that crisis in Lebanon, and we hope that all Member
States will continue to support the role of UNIFIL.
Another example of a unified approach in the fight
against terrorism is that this month the Council finally
took measures against the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL). We welcome the efforts of the British
delegation to achieve the adoption of resolution 2170
(2014), which finally condemns the terrorist acts of
ISIL and in which for the first time the Council also
mentions foreign combatants. That was very important
for us. We hope that the Council summit that is being
prepared by our American partners for the upcoming
ministerial week on the topic of terrorist combatants
will be another opportunity for deepen our action on
this topic at the highest level.
There was further relative unity on Libya, since the
United Nations has a role to play on this issue, and the
Council acted in a very timely way. Just as the issue of
Libya’s future was in question, the Council adopted a
resolution (resolution 2174 (2014)) that strengthens the
arms embargo and extends individual sanctions against
those who hinder political transition. The President
of the French Republic has indicated that exceptional
United Nations support for the Libyan authorities
to re-establish the State is necessary. This is a topic
that we will continue to follow closely in the month of
September.
There was also unity in the Council regarding a
number of crises in Africa. In that regard, my delegation
would like to welcome the meeting on 7 August (see
S/PV.7237), presided over by the British Minister
for African Affairs, which made it possible to bring
together the key countries of the Great Lakes region

16/17

28/08/2014

and to recall the major priorities of the Council. Those
priorities were set out in a press statement (SC/11533)
adopted on 26 August, which recalls in particular that
the implementation of resolution 2147 (2014), on the
neutralization of armed groups, notably the Forces
démocratiques de libération du Rwanda, is required.
Also on an optimistic note, we saw the renewal of
the mandate of African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur, the accent in that resolution 2173
(2014) being on the strategic review of the force and on
the importance of stronger public reporting on human
rights.
On the other hand, and our second point — and the
Secretary-General mentioned this during the public debate
that you organized, Mr. President (see S/PV.7247) — in
the Council there are serious divisions that undermine
the Organization’s capability to act. We continue to
regret that, in the context of Syria, the tireless support
of certain delegations for a repressive regime did not
enable coordinated action by the Council, thereby
clearing the way for extremists and terrorists. France
will continue to take action against the abusive use of
the veto by delegations, which was evident in the case
of Syria. Of course, there are divisions on the issue
of Ukraine that were just revealed in the Council (see
S/PV.7253). It is clear that Russia’s persistent attitude is
to simply destabilize the country.
The third point I would like to make is on another
topic. The Council may now have an opportunity to
play a role that it has not played to date. I am thinking
of Gaza. An unlimited ceasefire has been announced
by the Egyptian authorities. We encourage the parties
to comply with the ceasefire and to participate in
the discussions organized under Egyptian auspices.
However, in coordination with our partners from the
European Union and from the Security Council, we
would like to make further progress by contributing to
a solution based on such an agreement. We believe, as
do others, that the Security Council has a role to play
in that matter.
Finally, I would like to conclude with the focus on
conflict prevention that was put forth by the British
presidency, particularly from the early warning
perspective. I would also mention the visit to Europe
that recalled, through history, the importance of
preventing crises. We consider that very important.
The adoption of resolution 2171 (2014) was also a
welcome event.

14-52070

28/08/2014

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

The debate on conflict prevention (see S/PV.7247)
allowed the Council to listen for the last time to
Ms. Pillay, United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, as she will be completing her term.
Under her mandate, the interaction between the
Security Council and the High Commissioner grew
ever closer, which nevertheless poses a heavy burden
on our work — if I may say so. We have noted that
among her final recommendations she suggested a
monthly briefing to the Council by her successor to the
post of High Commissioner of Human Rights.
We believe that requires careful consideration, as it
would provide opportunities for the High Commissioner
to play the role of providing early warning, rather than
coming to brief the Council, at our request, when a
crisis is already under way. During the debate convened
by the presidency, the Council also had a chance to

S/PV7254

reinforce the expanded role of the Secretary-General in
early warning efforts, which was important.
In conclusion, I would also like to thank you,
Mr. President, for your efforts to address working
methods and to limit our speaking time. We also share
the presidency’s concern to have public discussions
in the Chamber, for reasons of transparency, but also
greater use of interactive consultations to accelerate
decision-making, as decisions signal the Council’s
unity, as I had mentioned earlier.
I would like to express to the United States our
every wish for success in the month of September.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m.

14-5207017/17
