United Nations

S/PV.5204

Security Council

Provisional

Sixtieth year

5204

th meeting
Thursday, 16 June 2005, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. De La Sablière . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (France)

Members:

Algeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Benin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Greece . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Philippines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Romania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United Republic of Tanzania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Djacta
Mr. D’Alotto
Mr. Zinsou
Mr. Tarrisse da Fontoura
Mr. Zhang Yishan
Mr. Faaborg-Andersen
Mrs. Telalian
Mr. Oshima
Mr. Mercado
Mr. Motoc
Mr. Denisov
Sir Emyr Jones Parry
Mrs. Taj
Mrs. Patterson

Agenda
The situation concerning Iraq
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 30 of resolution
1546 (2004) (S/2005/373)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

05-38861 (E)

*0538861*

S/PV.5204

The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Iraq
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
paragraph 30 of resolution 1564 (2004)
(S/2005/373)
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Iraq, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. al-Istrabadi
(Iraq) took a seat at the Council table.
The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2005/373, which contains a report of the
Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 30 of
resolution 1546 (2004).
At this meeting the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Danilo Türk, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs. I now give the floor to
Mr. Türk.
Mr. Türk: I am pleased to present the fourth
report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph
30 of Security Council resolution 1546 (2004)
(S/2005/373). The report provides an update on United
Nations activities in Iraq since the Secretary-General’s
last report, of 7 March 2005 (S/2005/141 and Corr.1). I
will therefore focus my remarks on the political
process that has developed since the convening of the
Transitional National Assembly and the formation of
the Transitional Government and on the implications

2

for the work of the United Nations in the coming
months.
One year after the adoption of resolution 1546
(2004), this report comes at what may be a critical
moment for Iraq — internally, regionally and
internationally. This is also a moment to take stock of
what has been achieved so far and to take a hard look
at the road before us.
Despite dire predictions about the evolution of
the internal situation, Iraq has been able, with the
support of the United Nations, to meet each benchmark
of its political transition so far. Most important, Iraq
has regained its sovereignty and has a newly elected
Government now in place following last January’s
successful elections. We know from experience how
difficult it is for any society with a history like Iraq’s
to go through such a fundamental transition. To be
sure, there have been inevitable setbacks along the
road, and today’s problems cannot be addressed
through quick fixes. That is why it is important for
Iraq’s new Transitional Government and Transitional
National Assembly to preserve the initial achievements
and address, most seriously, the challenges ahead as
Iraq moves forward into the next steps of its transition.
Many inside and outside Iraq see the political
transition process as having entered a decisive phase in
the process of national reconciliation. Our experience
around the world demonstrates that national
reconciliation requires a constructive relationship
between the majority in power and political minorities.
Democratic processes are most successful when the
majority allows minorities the full exercise of their
political rights and the opportunity to contribute to the
governance and reconstruction of their country. On the
other hand, political minorities have an equal
responsibility to contribute to the democratic process
and to support the national reconstruction effort. Those
goals are difficult to achieve. They are particularly
difficult to achieve in countries such as Iraq, where
ethnic and religions loyalties play an essential role in
the shaping of political choices.
For that reason, the report emphasizes that the
inclusion of all constituencies, public participation and
transparency in the political process and its
responsiveness to the key demands of all political
constituencies constitute a sine qua non for the
credibility and, therefore, the success of the transition
process. A credible political process will be crucial to

S/PV.5204

maintain the necessary political momentum to carry
Iraq through the remainder of the transition process.
Only by ensuring the confidence of Iraqi constituencies
in the process can their key concerns be addressed and
accommodated. That obviously is not a new
realization. The United Nations has worked
consistently for an inclusive political process in Iraq
ever since our political presence was established two
years ago. It continues to be essential that all intensify
their efforts to reach out to one another and to develop
relations of trust through dialogue and consensusbuilding.
The new Government and Assembly have a
mandate from the Iraqi people to continue to engage all
citizens and political groups, particularly among those
who continue to feel disenfranchised. In that regard,
we are pleased that the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ashraf Qazi, and his team in
the Office of Constitutional Support of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) were
able to help in facilitating the agreement in principle
reached today between the Constitutional Drafting
Committee of the Transitional National Assembly and
representatives of the Sunni Arab community to
expand the Drafting Committee by 15 new members
and 10 experts. We hope that that breakthrough will
now enable the Iraqis to make progress in drafting their
new constitution on time.
Flexibility and the capacity to compromise will
be required on the part of all — obviously a tall order
in Iraq. The process through which the constitution is
to emerge is therefore as important as its content and
its completion on time. If handled right, it can produce
a broadly acceptable constitutional framework for
durable peace and stability. At the request of the Iraqi
Government, Special Representative Qazi and UNAMI
will continue to work closely with Iraqi representatives
to help facilitate dialogue and consensus-building
among Iraqi parties and promote a constitutional
process that is procedurally and substantively
inclusive, participatory and transparent. UNAMI is
also increasingly coordinating international assistance
to the constitutional process.
At the same time, we are putting in place the
necessary capacity for UNAMI to continue supporting
the Independent Electoral Commission of Iraq and
other relevant authorities with regard to planning,
training and operational requirements for the upcoming
referendum and elections. A new Chief Electoral

Officer has been appointed to direct UNAMI’s
electoral team. We are aware that the timing and the
substance of the new constitution may have a profound
impact on electoral preparations, especially as may
pertain to new electoral legislation. As was the case for
the January elections, substantial international
assistance will be required for a successful referendum
and successful elections.
In order for the transition to succeed, advances in
the political process will need to be complemented by
tangible improvements in the reconstruction,
development and humanitarian areas. After so many
years of deprivation, Iraqi citizens are now looking to
their leaders to deliver the dividends of their vote in
terms of basic services, employment and living
conditions. Promises of better lives must translate into
real improvement for Iraqis. The United Nations,
through creative arrangements with Iraqi implementing
partners and on the basis of Iraqi priorities, continues
to deliver its reconstruction and development
assistance inside Iraq, including in the key areas of
governance, human development and poverty
reduction, health, education and rural development. An
increased focus on institutional capacity-building at the
various levels of government is contributing to the
improved management of public affairs. UNAMI is
also stepping up its efforts to play an enhanced aid
coordination role between international donors and
designated Iraqi authorities. As in many other
situations around the world, the coordinating role of
the United Nations represents an example of added
value in the context of international efforts to help.
All those efforts are taking place within a security
environment that remains extremely challenging. Of
particular concern is the increasingly sectarian logic
that appears to be inspiring much of the violence. Our
paramount concern is that innocent Iraqi civilians
continue to bear the brunt of the violence and the use
of force. No cause can ever justify terrorist acts that
maim and kill innocent men, women and children. At
the same time, it is incumbent upon all parties to fully
respect
their
obligations
under
international
humanitarian law and to ensure that the use of force is
minimized in order to avoid civilian casualties.
Ultimately, in order for security initiatives to
yield the enduring results intended, they need to form
part of a broader credible political process that can
address the underlying political problems. Two years
after the demise of the former regime, it is also

3

S/PV.5204

imperative for the new Government, with the support
of the international community, to deliver basic
services effectively and to do more to promote the rule
of law and respect for human rights so that all Iraqis
can live free from fear and in dignity.
Having accompanied the Iraqi people and
Government thus far in their efforts, the United
Nations is determined to continue to implement its
mandate under resolution 1546 (2004) to the fullest
extent possible, as circumstances permit. The report
makes clear that, although a great deal of progress has
been made in cooperation with the multinational force
in terms of security and support arrangements, UNAMI
continues to face severe constraints that could
potentially affect the planned expansion of our
activities in Iraq.
UNAMI
has
already
demonstrated
that
effectiveness can be achieved with limited capacity on
the ground. Our willingness to deliver on expectations
of the United Nations, both inside and outside Iraq,
must necessarily be tempered by a realistic assessment
of prevailing security and operational conditions.
Consistent with our approach since the return of
UNAMI to Iraq, we will continue to make every effort
to determine how prevailing circumstances can enable,
rather than limit, UNAMI in the implementation of its
tasks. In doing so, Special Representative Qazi and his
UNAMI staff deserve the full support of the Security
Council and the General Assembly.
The report also comes on the eve of a major
international conference on Iraq to be held on 22 June
in Brussels. This is the latest in a series of regional and
international initiatives, including the Sharm el-Sheikh
ministerial gathering of November 2004, all of which
helped to maintain attention on the need for the
reconstruction process outlined in resolution 1546
(2004) to succeed. It provides a new opportunity for
the international community to widen and deepen
consensus in support of Iraq’s transition and the role of
the United Nations. Benchmarks for success will
include a greater degree of international burdensharing, a positive impact on the situation on the
ground and an effective follow-up process.
Both inside and outside Iraq, there is no shortage
of financial resources, advice, expertise and goodwill
to support the Iraqi people in their historic endeavour.
Both Iraq and the international community have no
option but to succeed. It behoves all concerned — the

4

new Iraqi Government, the multinational force, this
Council and the United Nations — to rise to our shared
responsibility to ensure the full implementation of
resolution 1546 (2004). Only through a broad-based,
concerted approach by all relevant actors will we
develop the necessary partnership with Iraq to help it
regain its rightful place in the international community.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Türk for his briefing.
I give the floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. al-Istrabadi (Iraq): At the outset, I should
like to take this opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month and to commend your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of
Denmark, for her tenure last month.
In making this statement, I am mindful that, only
two weeks ago, Mr. Hoshyar Zebari, the Foreign
Minister of Iraq, made a comprehensive report about
the situation in Iraq. I shall endeavour, therefore, not to
revisit the issues he raised. I am also aware that since
the last time I addressed the Council, in September
2004, it has become a matter of routine for Iraq’s
representatives to do so on occasions such as these.
Two significant events are now under way in
Baghdad. The first relates to Iraq’s domestic evolution
and internal transition to democracy. I refer, of course,
to the process of writing a permanent constitution. Let
me assure the Council that my Government is keenly
aware of the need to open the process of drafting to all
segments of Iraqi society. We understand the need for
wider acceptance of the process of drafting, as well as
the substantive results. Several proposals are now
under consideration for ways and means of
accomplishing this all-important task.
In the meantime, the work of establishing the
general mechanisms of drafting — such as the creation
of committees to consider various individual issues —
has begun. We are aware that the transitional
administrative law requires the work of drafting to be
completed by 15 August, and that resolution 1546
(2004) endorsed that schedule. The Government of Iraq
remains committed to producing the draft text of a
permanent constitution by 15 August 2005.
The second event now being planned is the
international conference to be held in Brussels next
week. It will be a major step towards the reintegration

S/PV.5204

of Iraq into its rightful place in the community of
nations. The invitations to the conference were issued
to 85 participants, based upon the request of the
Government of Iraq, which has been playing a leading
role in organizing the conference. The purposes of
convening the conference, pursuant to resolution 1546
(2004), are to garner international support for Iraq
generally; to extend practical assistance in
implementing
the
political,
economic
and
reconstruction processes; and to promote the rule of
law. I am pleased to note that, in support of those aims,
the European Troika visited Baghdad on 9 June 2005.
Allow me to discuss a few salient points made in
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2005/373) about
Iraq’s transition to democracy. The report states that
there is ongoing concern about the state of human
rights in Iraq. Let me assure the Council and the world
community that the Government of Iraq is also
concerned about, and committed to continually
improving, the state of human rights. While we have a
way to go, we have also covered much ground in the
past two years.
We have created a Ministry of Human Rights to
assist in implementing Iraq’s commitments under
international human rights law. Civil society
organizations committed to promoting human rights,
tolerance and women’s rights have flourished in Iraq
over that time. International human
rights
organizations, which had to work outside the country
in the past, relying on anecdotal evidence gathered
from expatriates, are now free to work within Iraq.
They have offices in Baghdad and throughout the
country, and have also had unprecedented access to
governmental institutions, including our judicial and
penal systems. Such access may well be unparalleled in
our region.
We will continue to explore ways of improving
the state of human rights in our country, and we look to
the world community to assist us in this endeavour.
After 35 years of utter brutality, it will take some effort
for our State institutions again to be acculturated
towards respect for basic human rights, but we are
determined to accomplish that goal, so vital to our
transition.
The Secretary-General notes in his report that
many of the funds expended in Iraq by the United
Nations Development Group (UNDG) and the World
Bank have been for capacity-building and the training

of trainers. My Government welcomes those
disbursements and notes that enhancing capacity is an
important part of our reconstruction. However, funds
expended on the ground in Iraq — developing
infrastructure, for example — should be the priority at
this time. Capacity-building does not have the
multiplier effect of dollars spent in direct economic
development, an essential element for stability.
Although we appreciate that UNDG and World Bank
disbursement rates may be higher than those of some
other donors, we believe it essential to increase rates of
disbursement and to increase the amount of dollars
spent inside Iraq.
We welcome the appointments to the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq noted in the
Secretary-General’s report. Nicholas Haysom, as the
head of the Office of Constitutional Support, and
Michael von der Schulenburg, Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Political
Affairs in Iraq, will bring a wealth of technical
expertise to bear as we begin drafting the permanent
constitution and complete the political process. My
Government notes with particular satisfaction that at
least those two officials have taken up their
responsibilities within Iraq, and once again urges all
their United Nations colleagues in neighbouring States
to join them — if not in Baghdad, then in Basrah or
Erbil. We welcome the appointment of an elections
adviser to assist in preparations for the constitutional
referendum and end-of-year elections.
Over the past two years, whenever a
representative of Iraq has sat in this Chamber, we have
called
for
an
ever-greater
assumption
of
responsibilities and duties by the United Nations in
Iraq. It is now appropriate for Iraq — with its first
elected Government in 51 years — to raise the issue of
its own obligations and the duty it owes to this
Organization.
Aside from being a good world citizen, the first
among these is the duty of all Member States to pay
their dues to the United Nations in a timely fashion.
While the previous regime allowed itself to accrue
arrears for over 11 years, my Government regards the
full payment of Iraq’s dues as an essential step towards
our continued reintegration into the community of
nations and the assumption of our normal
responsibilities like any other Member State. To
accomplish this step, Minister Zebari addressed a letter
to the Secretary-General asking him to transfer a

5

S/PV.5204

sufficient amount of funds from the escrow account
established by resolution 986 (1995) to extinguish all
of our outstanding contributions to the United Nations.
We greatly appreciate the positive responses of the
members of the Security Council and the Secretariat
with respect to that issue.
Last month, the Security Council appropriately
considered the mandates of the multinational force and
the International Advisory and Monitoring Board.
Resolution 1546 (2004) mandated that review. Yet we
respectfully remind members of the Council that, in
paragraph 22 of the resolution, the Security Council
asserted its “intention to revisit the mandates of the
United Nations Monitoring, Verification, and
Inspection Commission and the International Atomic
Energy Agency”.
We recognize that this is one of the more complex
issues relating to our full reintegration into the world
system. Yet we believe that it is appropriate to begin
discussing this issue and ways of garnering consensus,
we hope, in the relatively near term.
In this regard, I refer to the national report of Iraq
submitted in accordance with resolution 1540 (2004),
document S/AC.44/2004/(02)/116, in which Iraq stated
that it is “strongly committed to the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1540 (2004) and ready to
cooperate with the Committee established under that
resolution”.
There are thus certain fundamental considerations
that should guide the discussion for which I have
called. The first fundamental consideration is that Iraq
has no desire to acquire, manufacture or stockpile
weapons of mass destruction. The people of Iraq were
among the first to suffer from the use of those
weapons. I need only to mention Halabja to make the

6

point. The second fundamental consideration is that, as
Iraq continues to reintegrate itself into the world
system, including by accepting international norms
governing those weapons systems, Iraq expects to be
treated no differently than any other Member State.
I cannot help reflecting on the fact that next
month it will be two years since the first Iraqi
Governing Council delegation arrived from Baghdad to
meet with the Security Council. It has been a long road
for us, and, despite many difficulties, we have made
remarkable progress. We have gone from occupation to
reasserting our sovereignty, a year ago. Now, for the
first time in my lifetime, we have freely elected a
Government in elections whose outcome was uncertain
and unknown until after the votes were counted. The
Government’s term of office is fixed and known. By
the end of the year, we expect to have a permanent
constitution in place and another set of elections. It has
been a remarkable journey, from a rogue and outlaw
State whose Government retained power by terrorizing
its citizens to an elected Government substantially on
the way to reintegrating us, with the help of the
international community, into the society of civilized
nations. Our transformation is not yet complete, but I
believe the process is by now irreversible. We have
tasted freedom, and we will not turn back.
The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I should now like to
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion of the subject.
The meeting rose at 3.45 p.m.
