UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1999/1072
18 October 1999
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 15 OCTOBER 1999 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to convey the attached communication, dated
14 October 1999 (see annex), which I have received from the Permanent
Representative of Australia to the United Nations.
I should be grateful if you would bring the communication to the attention
of the members of the Security Council.

(Signed)

99-30180 (E)

181099

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1999/1072
English
Page 2

Annex
Letter dated 14 October 1999 from the Permanent
Representative of Australia to the United
Nations addressed to the Secretary-General

In accordance with Security Council resolution 1264 (1999) of
15 September 1999, I attach the second periodic report on the operations of the
International Force, East Timor (INTERFET) (see appendix). I would appreciate
your making the report available to the Security Council.

(Signed)

Penny WENSLEY

/...

S/1999/1072
English
Page 3

Appendix
Second periodic report to the United Nations on the operations
of the International Force, East Timor (INTERFET), 29 September
to 12 October 1999

I.

INTRODUCTION

1.
Since the first periodic report was forwarded to the Security Council, the
International Force, East Timor (INTERFET) has continued to deploy multinational
forces and conduct patrols further into East Timor. While many East Timorese
are now returning to Dili, militia activity remains a significant concern,
particularly in the western regions and other outlying areas.
2.
Humanitarian relief efforts have shifted away from air drops to the
distribution of aid on the ground. This decision was based on the ability of
aid agencies to undertake more effective distribution by means of road
transport, the improved security in some areas and safety concerns associated
with air drops.

II.

COOPERATION WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDONESIA

3.
INTERFET continues to consult with the Government of Indonesia on
operations. The Government has advised that it wishes to assist with the
repatriation of displaced persons from West Timor to East Timor, and this is
being coordinated with INTERFET.
4.
Since the first periodic report, Indonesia has continued to withdraw its
forces from East Timor. Approximately 1,300 TNI (the Indonesian military)
soldiers remain, with TNI-AU (Air Force) and INTERFET sharing security
responsibilities at Comoro airfield. INTERFET and TNI now also share joint
control of the power station in Dili.

III.

RESTORATION OF PEACE AND SECURITY

Deployment activities
5.
Members of the multinational force are continuing their deployments to East
Timor, following acclimatization and briefings in Townsville and Darwin,
Australia. As at 12 October, the total INTERFET deployment numbered around
5,650 personnel. The build up of multinational forces will continue through to
the end of October, when the total force will number around 7,500 personnel.
6.
To date, INTERFET is represented by contingents from Australia, Brazil,
France, Italy, Malaysia, New Zealand, Norway, the Philippines, Singapore,
Thailand, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America. Forces from Canada, Germany, Ireland and the Republic
of Korea will arrive in East Timor over the coming weeks. Negotiations are

/...

S/1999/1072
English
Page 4

continuing with a number of other Member States that have expressed interest in
contributing forces to INTERFET.
Restoring security
7.
INTERFET has conducted patrols to Com and Los Palos in the east and to
Balibo, Batugade and Maliana in the west. Significant forces remain in Baucau
and the western regencies. Further moves into outlying areas of East Timor will
be undertaken as force numbers build up over the coming weeks.
8.
Dili residents continue to demonstrate their increased sense of safety.
Despite the very poor state of the infrastructure in Dili, an estimated
64,000 previously displaced persons have now returned to the capital. On
12 October, Dili market reopened after reconstruction by INTERFET. These are
tangible measures of the impact of the INTERFET presence.
9.
INTERFET continues to enforce an apprehension and detention policy in
accordance with its mandate. All detainees are treated fairly and, as part of
its accountability efforts, the INTERFET detention centre was inspected by TNI,
the Indonesian National Police (POLRI), civilian police of the United Nations
Mission in East Timor (UNAMET) and representatives of the International
Committee of the Red Cross. All groups expressed their satisfaction with the
detention arrangements and the release protocols.
Activities of the militia
10. Since the deployment of multinational forces commenced, the various militia
groups have made threats to INTERFET, stating their intention to control the
western regencies. During the initial deployment of INTERFET, militia continued
to be active in areas outside Dili but did not attempt to engage INTERFET.
However, since operations have commenced close to West Timor, INTERFET forces
have exchanged fire with armed militia groups on four occasions.
11. On 6 October, INTERFET had cause to fire upon militia in East Timor on two
separate occasions in the vicinity of Suai. The first incident involved
INTERFET stopping militia vehicles attempting to crash through a road
checkpoint. Six militia were wounded, with four flown by helicopter to INTERFET
medical facilities in Dili. A total of 116 militia were detained and a number
of weapons confiscated.
12. The second incident occurred as an INTERFET vehicle escorting the detainees
from the first incident came under fire from a militia ambush. Two INTERFET
soldiers were wounded and repatriated to Darwin following treatment in Dili.
Two militia were killed in the exchange of fire and their weapons recovered.
13. The third incident occurred on 9 October when a militia group fired upon an
INTERFET patrol in the vicinity of Alto Lebos (1.5 km from the border with West
Timor). The INTERFET patrol returned fire and one militia member was killed.
14. A similar incident occurred on 10 October, when INTERFET forces were
patrolling towards the village of Motaain near the border. Militia, accompanied
by TNI forces and POLRI, engaged INTERFET forces. INTERFET troops were fired on
/...

S/1999/1072
English
Page 5

first. They returned fire in self-defence and the militia withdrew from East
Timor. Details of casualties have yet to be confirmed but at least one
Indonesian person may have been killed. INTERFET swiftly contacted the local
POLRI commander. After comparing maps, this officer agreed that INTERFET troops
were in East Timor when the incident occurred and that his troops had fired
first. However, there was some disagreement over the precise location of the
border.
15. These last two incidents illustrate the problems of maintaining security
along the border between East Timor and West Timor and the security problems
caused by militia crossing from West Timor into East Timor to engage INTERFET
forces. INTERFET is urgently seeking discussions with Indonesian authorities to
avoid future incidents.
16. The incident at Motaain also illustrates continuing support from elements
of the Indonesian security forces for the militias, which is a matter of serious
concern.
Contact with other groups
17. The Armed Forces for the National Liberation of East Timor (Falintil)
remain armed but they have not undertaken military activity except in selfdefence. INTERFET is seeking to disarm all groups in East Timor, other than
TNI. In order to maintain peace, INTERFET has instituted an interim working
policy of allowing Falintil to retain their weapons only while they remain in
designated cantonments. Carriage of weapons outside these areas would result in
INTERFET action to disarm them.
Protection and support of UNAMET
18. UNAMET has 58 staff in its compound in Dili. UNAMET has also
re-established its offices in Baucau, with INTERFET providing security.
Facilitation of humanitarian assistance operations
19. Humanitarian road convoys have successfully distributed food and emergency
supplies to Baucau and Los Palos (30 September), Manatuto and Kaurui
(3 October), Viqueque (4 and 5 October) and Liquica (6 October). Unescorted
United Nations aid convoys are now permitted on designated roads between Dili,
Baucau, Los Palos and Viqueque.
20. Based on advice from INTERFET concerning the security environment in Dili,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has undertaken
the repatriation of East Timorese from camps in West Timor. The first flights
carrying returning East Timorese commenced on 8 October.

/...

S/1999/1072
English
Page 6

IV.

OBSERVATIONS

Management of the INTERFET trust fund
21. Terms of reference for the INTERFET trust fund were agreed upon on
29 September. Portugal has contributed US$ 5 million, Japan has announced a
contribution of US$ 100 million and Switzerland has announced a contribution of
SwF 500,000. Other States are also considering contributions.
22. The fund will reimburse eligible countries for the costs of their
participation. Assistance will be available to contributors once contingents
have been called forward by INTERFET.

V.

OUTLOOK

Transition to the United Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
23. In order to secure a seamless transition to the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET), as envisaged in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/1999/1024), a Security Council resolution is a matter of
some urgency. On current planning, the People’s Consultative Assembly (MPR) of
Indonesia is likely to make its determination on East Timor before the end of
October. This underscores the urgency of a Security Council resolution,
notwithstanding that the mandate of INTERFET is not affected by the MPR decision
and that its authority continues until it is replaced by UNTAET. Given the
continuing volatile security situation in East Timor, the successor force to
INTERFET should have a robust operational mandate.
Civil administration
24. As indicated in the first periodic report, it is imperative that urgent
steps be taken to address the absence of effective civil administration in East
Timor and that the civil administration elements of UNTAET be brought forward as
much as possible.

-----
