S/PV.7901

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7901st meeting

Thursday, 16 March 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rycroft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Yelchenko
Ms. Sison
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
The situation in the Central African Republic

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-06764 (E)
*1706764*

S/PV.7901

The situation in the Central African Republic

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.

Onanga-Anyanga, whom I commend for his excellent
cooperation with the Central African authorities
and his ceaseless commitment to ensure peace and
protection for civilians in all regions of the Central
African Republic.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Central African Republic
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Central African Republic to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Faustin Archange Touadéra, President of the Central
African Republic. I request the Protocol Officer to
escort President Touadéra to a seat at the Council table.
Mr. Faustin Archange Touadéra, President of the
Central African Republic, was escorted to a seat at
the Council table.
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Mr. Hervé Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, and His Excellency Mr. Omar
Hilale, Permanent Representative of Morocco, in his
capacity as Chair of the Central African Republic
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to President Touadéra.
President Touadéra (spoke in French): It is both
an honour and a pleasure for me today to address the
Security Council for the first time on an issue that is of
particular importance to me, that is, peace in the Central
African Republic. I would like to take this opportunity
to thank you, Sir, and through you the entire Security
Council, for the time being devoted to my country
despite the Security Council’s busy schedule for this
month, as well as for inviting me to speak.
My country is grateful for the Security Council’s
full support for its efforts aimed at ending the violent
crisis that it has experienced and for its determination
to silence the guns so as to achieve a just and lasting
peace. I would also like to express our deep gratitude
to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) under the leadership of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Parfait
2/20

16/03/2017

This meeting provides a new opportunity to take
stock of the evolution of the political and security
situation in the Central African Republic, a major
focus of the United Nations, which has continued to
vigorously support us since the holding of the latest
general elections at the end of 2016.
We have come a long way, from the transition
period to the elections and the appointment of
legitimate national authorities. In taking the reins
of the country, I have audaciously bet on change,
reconstruction and economic development despite
a security environment that remains volatile. Our
priority continues to be security and the pacification of
the entire country. The establishment of the committee
on disarmament, demobilization, rehabilitation and
reintegration (DDRR) programme, the reform of the
security sector reform and national reconciliation
are the result of that prioritization, which affords an
opportunity for all armed groups to find solutions by
consensus with the Government with regard to the issue
of the DDRR programme and some of their concerns
through dialogue.
On this solemn occasion, I welcome the decision of
the Front populaire pour la renaissance de la Centrafrique
and Maxime Mokom’s anti-Balaka group to finally join
the process by nominating their representatives to the
advisory and monitoring committee for the national
DDRR programme. That is a decisive step that will
enable us to go further in the effective implementation
of that important programme for the return to peace.
All 14 armed groups will be represented at the next
meeting of the committee, scheduled for 23 March.
Although we have made some progress, the Central
African Republic needs substantial resources to launch
the necessary reforms. Since the Brussels Conference,
we have been working with our partners to develop
the monitoring and assessment framework for the
National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan, as well
as to implement the Mutual Engagement Framework.
Those fundamental elements for restoring peace and
rebuilding the economy must go hand in hand.
We regret the fact that, despite efforts by
MINUSCA, some armed groups refuse to lay down
17-06764

16/03/2017

The situation in the Central African Republic

their weapons and continue to mount their offensive.
By adopting a firm stance, through its mandate and
with my consent, MINUSCA has been able to protect
civilians, avert efforts to divide the country and, above
all, force armed groups reluctant to join the DDRR/
security sector reform/national reconciliation process
to at last appoint representatives to the DDRR advisory
and monitoring committee.
It is important to note that the ongoing military
action by MINUSCA in Bombari is an exception
and does not disregard the importance of dialogue
in achieving a lasting solution. I hope that that
initiative will lead to a final concrete outcome in the
operationalization of the DDRR/security sector reform/
national reconciliation process. I would like to express
our gratitude to the international community and to
neighbouring countries that have provided invaluable
support in the areas of DDRR and security sector
reform, in particular the Central African Economic and
Monetary Community, which allotted CAF 2 billion
to the DDR process. The ongoing recruitment of 500
police officers with the support of MINUSCA, training
for our security forces provided by the European Union
Military Training Mission in the Central African
Republic and the commitment of some countries in
the subregion have led to the establishment of Central
African Republic armed forces battalions.
At this juncture in my presentation, I would like
to highlight that I am concerned about the pace of the
training provided to the armed forces by the European
Union’s Military Training Mission. The training process
is slow and does not allow us in the short term to have
enough personnel to assist in restoring peace and calm
to the country and protecting civilians. It is for that
reason that I ask the Security Council to assist us in
finding a faster way — through bilateral or multilateral
cooperation — to train our armed forces, in addition to
the training provided by the European Union’s Military
Training Mission, because the security challenges are
immense. The country is very large, and that calls for
more training and the deployment of an even greater
number of soldiers. In addition, I would like to point
out concerns about furnishing trained armed forces of
the Central African Republic with military equipment
and other logistical tools, as it is very difficult for us
to put trained soldiers on the ground without adequate
equipment in areas of the country facing threats to
peace and people’s safety. We have approximately
8,000 soldiers whom we cannot deploy because

S/PV.7901

they have not yet completed their training due to
insufficient resources.
I mention those facts because there is a close
link between security and development in the Central
African Republic. After many years of conflict, the
entire population, so badly in need of infrastructure and
basic services, longs for development, and that can be
achieved only if security exists. The need for security
therefore demands a higher number of trained defence
and security personnel, with adequate resources and
deployed on the ground alongside United Nations
forces, currently working alone because Central
African Republic forces are not yet operational.
Conflicts between armed groups continue in the
interior of the country and result in many lives lost and
widespread destruction. That is why we are more than
ever determined to put professional national forces on
the ground, working in conjunction with MINUSCA, to
protect civilians. I thank the Security Council, which
approved a robust mandate for MINUSCA to help us
to emerge from the crisis. But it is also important to
consider strengthening MINUSCA by increasing its
personnel and material resources to enable it to better
discharge its mandate. For I can see for myself the
challenges it faces daily given the size of the country
and the complex problems on the ground that require
additional resources.
We are open to constructive dialogue. We support
African initiatives towards peace and reconciliation
aimed at bolstering our own efforts. However, I would
like to reassure the Council of our commitment to
respecting the recommendations put forward by the
Bangui Forum, in particular on impunity and justice
in the context of all political agreements. We ask for
amnesty be granted to the perpetrators of serious crimes
and other breaches of the law, forgetting that amnesty is a
legislative measure that cannot be used by the executive
branch. All efforts must reflect the legitimate hopes of
the Central African people as expressed at the Bangui
Forum, as well as the provisions of the Constitution.
Nonetheless, we remain open to discussions on the
issue. At the same time, justice will be handed down
in due course and without compromising on principles.
The appointment of a special criminal prosecutor and
the operationalization of the special criminal court,
with the support of our partners, will enable us to meet
the expectations of a people who have suffered so much
from this crisis and who quite rightly demand justice.

17-067643/20

S/PV.7901

The situation in the Central African Republic

As the Council is aware, the humanitarian situation
remains critical. We must meet immense needs.
People in the interior of my country continue to flee
their homes, seeking refuge elsewhere and ending
up in makeshift sites. I make an urgent appeal to the
international community to redouble its efforts and give
us the necessary support to enable displaced persons to
return to their homes.
Despite a challenging environment, our partners
continue to provide support. We commend their
commitment, which is a sign of international solidarity.
The visit to our country on 11 March by Mr. Makhtar
Diop, World Bank Vice-President for the Africa
Region, reflects that organization’s interest in helping
us relaunch socioeconomic development. We are also
reassured by the recent visit by Ms. Christine Lagarde,
Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund,
as well as other high-level partners. In turn, we reassure
them of our absolute willingness to demonstrate good
governance and to be unwavering in our fight against
corruption — a scourge that has long undermined
our institutions.
The Central African Republic is at a crossroads
in its quest for lasting peace, reconstruction and
development. Its people are tired of the crises caused
by armed groups that hold socioeconomic development
hostage. I have always advocated change. There is
indeed too little progress, however we firmly intend
to proceed along the path to the country’s development
and reconstruction.
The town of Bombari, in the prefecture of Ouaka, is
a pilot project. With the support of MINUSCA and our
partners, we hope to strengthen our presence, refurbish
administrative buildings and provide basic social
services — in short, ensure that some sense of normalcy
returns by restoring State authority. We must build
on efforts supported by the international community.
Rebuilding the country requires the participation of all
parties: central and local administrations, the private
sector, civil society and international partners.
I have given the Council a description of the
political and security situation in the Central African
Republic. We thank you, Mr. President, for having
given us this opportunity to speak about the Central
African Republic, in particular in the light of the current
challenges, and about the need for the international
community to continue its support.
4/20

16/03/2017

The President: I thank His Excellency President
Touadéra very much for his statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): It is a great
pleasure for me to address the Security Council in the
presence of His Excellency President Faustin Archange
Touadéra, whom I welcome to the Chamber. His
presence here provides us with a unique opportunity
not only to update the Council on the progress made,
but also to take a moment to reflect on the challenges we
face and the solutions we should envision as partners.
If we recall the situation almost a year ago, the
presidential and legislative elections were taking place.
They marked an important milestone in the country’s
history following a prolonged crisis that brought the
Central African Republic to the edge of the abyss. Much
progress has been made in the country over the past
12 months thank to the tireless efforts of the President
himself and the Government and the people of the
Central African Republic. That progress is especially
reflected in improved security in the capital, the
adoption of a number of crucial reforms and accelerated
efforts to advance security sector reform, establish
the rule of law and bolster the fight against impunity.
We must acknowledge that this progress is promising.
Nonetheless, there are still formidable challenges. That
is why we must remain more firmly committeed than
ever to this issue.
Since my briefing to the Council on 15 February (see
S/PV.7884), the political and operational engagement
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) has made it possible for important
progress to be made, that is, restoring State authority
in the strategically important city of Bambari, thereby
demonstrating the extent to which the peacekeeping
operation can be a critical tool to support change in the
country. MINUSCA used its air assets twice to prevent
the advances of the Front populaire pour la renaissance
de la Centrafrique (FPRC), which was directly
threatening the civilian population, and successfully
facilitated the departure from Bambari of the leader of
the Union pour la paix en Centrafrique, Mr. Ali Darassa,
and of other armed group commanders. MINUSCA
also apprehended, on 26 February, three leaders of the
FPRC-led coalition in Bambari, who have since been
formally charged by the national judicial authorities on
a number of counts.
17-06764

16/03/2017

The situation in the Central African Republic

MINUSCA did what was necessary to restore
security in Bambari and to fend off efforts by the
armed groups who were trying to take the town by
force. MINUSCA’s presence is also intended to pave
the way for the stabilization of the town over the long
term and to restore State authority. A detachment of
31 gendarmes arrived in Bambari on 9 March, and
three magistrates were in place the following day. The
United Nations system is also supporting a series of
coordinated short- and medium-term plans to promote
community dialogue and social cohesion, revive the
local economy and improve access to education and
health care.
As President Touadéra stated earlier, the operation
in Bambari yielded a political dividend in that both
the FPRC and the anti-Balaka faction led by Maxime
Mokom have now agreed to designate representatives to
the advisory follow-up committee on the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation (DDRR)
process, led by the President. All 14 of the main armed
groups have now joined the Committee, whose first
meeting, I believe, is scheduled for 23 March. That
would have not been possible without the tireless efforts
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of MINUSCA.
The progress that has been achieved is significant,
but it should not obscure the fact that neither military
force alone nor DDRR programmes will resolve
the armed group problem that plagues the country.
Successful disarmament requires that all groups
wholeheartedly commit themselves and that a broad
agreement that responds, first and foremost, to the
aspirations of the population and the armed groups is
put in place. Past experiences in the Central African
Republic and in other contexts demonstrate that we
must not give up on our efforts. We must persist, and
our efforts must be accompanied by financial support.
In that respect, allow me to express my appreciation
for the announcement by World Bank Vice-President
for the Africa Region, Mr. Makhtar Diop, together with
President Touadéra , that the World Bank would to
provide $30 million for the national DDRR programme.
This must all be carried out.
I would also like to underscore the importance
of President Touadéras determination to step up the
dialogue with the armed groups, while at the same
time ensuring that the voices of the population, and in
particular the victims of the conflict, are heard. The
subregion, which has stood by the Central African

S/PV.7901

Republic since the crisis erupted in 2012, has a critical
role to play in support of the dialogue efforts. That is
why the Secretary-General has publically expressed
his support for the African initiative for a peace and
reconciliation agreement between the Government and
all armed groups. We welcome the commitment of all
members of the African initiative and we hope that it
strengthens President Touadéra’s efforts in connection
with the armed groups, while respecting the outcomes
and recommendations of the Bangui Forum, including
by addressing in a mutually supportive way the
imperatives for justice and reconciliation in full respect
of the strong and legitimate expectations of the Central
African people.
The Government of President Touadéra has
demonstrated its support for the establishment of the
special criminal court to ensure that impunity does not
prevail for the most serious crimes. We are aware of
the consequences that the culture of impunity has had
in the past in his country. That must all be brought to
an end. The appointment of a special prosecutor of the
court, the current accelerating rate in the recruitment
process for national magistrates and judicial police, the
adoption of a strategy to protect victims and witnesses
and the support of Council members for the court are all
important so that transitional justice efforts are given
the means to finally address the deplorable legacy of
human rights abuses.
The international community’s solidarity with the
Central African people was demonstrated through the
pledging of over $2.2 billion at the Brussels Conference
in November. More than ever, I urge the countries that
demonstrated such generosity to keep their promises
so that development projects can finally begin
and accelerate.
We should also not forget the serious humanitarian
situation that the country is facing. More than 2 million
Central Africans, more than half the total population,
are in need of assistance, particularly food assistance.
I believe that number represents the highest ratio in the
world today, and we cannot ignore it. In that regard,
too, we need donors to make good on their generous
pledges so that we can do everything possible to
support the efforts of the Central African authorities to
facilitate the return of displaced persons and refugees
to their homes.
In conclusion, with regard to the vision that President
Тоuаdéra has just outlined to the Security Council, I

17-067645/20

S/PV.7901

The situation in the Central African Republic

would like to reiterate that he has the continued support
of the United Nations and MINUSCA, and in Bambari
we have been able to prove that. I believe that in its
entire history the Central African Republic has rarely, if
ever, received such a level of support and commitment.
We therefore count on the President more than ever
to ensure that all the priorities outlined in the Mutual
Engagement Framework and the National Recovery
and Peacebuilding Plan are fully implemented, with
a view to transforming the daily lives of all Central
Africans. It is also essential that the rest of the country’s
institutions work in concert with the Government
to advance those commitments in a spirit that must
be guided by the country’s interests. More than ever,
it is time for national unity if we are to overcome all
these challenges.
The gains that have been made in the Central
African Republic over the past three years, in particular
over the past 12 months, have shown that United Nations
peacekeeping operations in Africa can make a real
difference. When our operations have good leadership
and the right capabilities, they can play an irreplaceable
role — in support of national efforts and together with
international partners — in promoting and supporting
the reforms that are essential to a lasting solution to
a conflict and to stability. Since the beginning of the
crisis, the Council has provided indispensable support
to the Central African Republic. Now it is time to
consolidate our achievements and make practical
progress in stabilizing the country — and the region,
since everything is connected — and for that we need
major political support from the Council and robust
support and sufficient resources for MINUSCA.
Because, and let us say it out loud, if the situation
continues to develop as positively as it has been
recently, MINUSCA will not have to prolong its stay
in the Central African Republic. While we cannot deny
that the road will still be long and sometimes difficult,
I am firmly convinced that, with the commitment of the
Central African Republic and the sustained assistance
of the international community, the country will be
able to succeed in closing this sad chapter in its history
and move resolutely towards a promising future.
The President: I thank Mr. Ladsous for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Hilale.
Mr. Hilale (spoke in French): I have the honour
to speak today on behalf of the members of the
Central African Republic country configuration of
6/20

16/03/2017

the Peacebuilding Commission. It is an honour and a
pleasure to address the Security Council at this meeting
on the Central African Republic, held during the visit
of His Excellency Mr. Faustin Archange Тоuаdéra,
President of the Central African Republic. I would
also like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
today’s meeting despite the Council’s busy workload
this month, and for your kind invitation to me.
This meeting is a concrete demonstration of
the synergies between the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission, with the ultimate aim of
promoting the conditions necessary for sustaining peace.
And there is no better example of that than the Central
African Republic, where in the past, unfortunately,
the international community’s premature withdrawal
contributed to the country’s relapse into conflict.
Although the security situation remains volatile, with
a recent outbreak of attacks by some armed groups,
today we are in a better situation, with the restoration
of constitutional order, an ambitious National Recovery
and Peacebuilding Plan, which received strong support
at the Brussels Conference for donors, and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSСА),
a multidimensional mission with an expanded mandate.
This morning, we held a meeting of the Central
African Republic country configuration, elevated
by the presence of the President of the Republic and
Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General. The visit of President
Тоuаdéra sends a strong signal to the international
community of his own and his Government’s
determination to lead the efforts to restore peace and
security in the Central African Republic. The members
of the configuration unanimously reaffirmed to the
President their unwavering commitment to continuing
their productive collaboration with the Government of
the Central African Republic and to working with the
United Nations system as a whole under the leadership
of Mr. Onanga-Anyanga, whom I commend and thank
for his excellent cooperation with the configuration,
and with regional and subregional organizations and
international partners, in support of the efforts to
ensure lasting peace in the Central African Republic.
We were able to ensure the members’ support for
the configuration’s programme of work, which was
recently presented to the Council and which consists
mainly of meetings devoted to each of the three pillars
of the National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan,
17-06764

16/03/2017

The situation in the Central African Republic

bringing together all the relevant stakeholders — the
United Nations, the European Union and the World
Bank — to discuss how best to support the efforts of
the Government and its partners. To that end, we will
intensify our coordination and collaboration with the
three main partners handling the implementation of
the Recovery Plan, under the leadership of the Central
African authorities — the United Nations, for the first
pillar of support to peace, security and reconciliation;
the European Union, for the second pillar, the
restoration of the social contract between the people
and the Government; and the World Bank for the third
pillar, promoting economic recovery and support to the
productive sectors.
With its proposed programme of work for the
coming months, the configuration has established an
ambitious medium- and long-term goal, which is to
make the Central African Republic a model of success
for the United Nations, for peacebuilding in general
and in particular for the concept of sustaining peace,
enshrined last year in resolution 2282 (2016) and
General Assembly resolution 70/282. In that regard,
the main elements needed for lasting peace are, first,
responsibility on the part of the national authorities
for identifying national priorities and translating them
into strategies, as reflected in this case in the National
Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan; and, secondly, the
role of the Peacebuilding Commission in promoting
and coordinating all efforts and platforms by bringing
together the various peacebuilding stakeholders.
We are confident that the existing coordination
mechanisms, and those that are virtually finalized, will
enable us to facilitate coordination among key partners
and, through that, the implementation of the National
Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan. We should recall at
this point that the Peacebuilding Commission remains
committed to facilitating the coordination of the various
actors here in New York and to ensuring that the efforts
complement one another. In that regard, I intend to
visit the Central African Republic soon to talk to the
main national and international partners in the country
about the principal challenges to the implementation
of the National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan and
about ways and means of optimizing our support to the
Government in order to overcome those challenges.
When I return, I will consult with the members of
the country-specific configuration and the Security
Council how to garner the support necessary for the
national authorities.

S/PV.7901

In conclusion, I wish to thank the countries of
the region for their continuing support for the Central
African Republic and for their most recent mediation
initiative, involving the African Union, the Economic
Community of Central African States, the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, the Congo,
Chad and Angola. I also commend the Council’s
efforts to keep the Central African Republic high on
its agenda. The organization of an interactive dialogue
on African mediation is an excellent illustration of
that commitment and will allow Council members to
explore possibilities for support.
The Peacebuilding Commission stands ready to
lend its full support, knowing that all actors involved
in the process are members of the Central African
Republic country-specific configuration.
The President: I thank Mr. Hilale for his briefing.
I give the floor to those Council members who wish
to make statements.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the United Kingdom presidency for convening this
important public meeting. In addition to UnderSecretary-General Hervé Ladsous and the Permanent
Representative of Morocco, Mr. Omar Hilale, I
especially thank His Excellency President Faustin
Archange Touadéra for travelling to New York and
for the important briefing he has just provided to
the Council.
President Touadéra is well aware of the degree to
which the Council has mobilized to promote his efforts
to make the establishment of peace and reconciliation in
the Central African Republic an exemplary success. He
can count on our unwavering support. We also commend
the commitment of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Central African Republic
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA), Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga,
who is on the ground beside President Touadéra every
day in the Central African Republic.
The Central African Republic is not yet fully
stabilized, as fighting persists among armed groups. It
has been said and bears repeating that the perpetrators
are motivated by a criminal logic of predation, control
of territory and resources, and the perpetuation of
violence unconnected to any political claims. France
soundly condemns these criminal opportunists who

17-067647/20

S/PV.7901

The situation in the Central African Republic

thrive on civilian suffering and instability. In that
context, I wish to highlight three main messages.
First and foremost, I wish to convey to President
Touadéra, himself a message of support for him and
for his work. As we all know, he was democratically
elected under excellent conditions by a broad majority of
Central African citizens throughout the entire national
territory. He immediately positioned himself as the
President of all Central Africans under a reconciliation
and reform programme. His inaugural speech was
welcomed as a model of its kind and his travels in the
provinces, such as to Bambari and Ouaka on Sunday,
testify to his commitment.
Everyone knows that President Touadéra has
spared no effort in translating his message of peace,
justice, reconciliation and reform into action. I could
cite multiple examples, but I will highlight only two
very illustrative ones: his establishment of the platform
for dialogue and disarmament, whose work he himself
supervises; and his idea of creating a mixed Central
African Armed Forces (FACA) unit by integrating
demobilized veterans, for which he requested support
from the European Union (EU) military training
mission in the Central African Republic.
He is committed to a dynamic based on sustainable
reconstruction of the country, taking care to address
the root causes of the crisis, particularly the impunity
of perpetrators of crimes, which has long nourished
cycles of violence in the Central African Republic.
He is committed to the special criminal court and
to restoring the national justice system. Like usm
President Touadéra is convinced that the crisis plaguing
his country will find its solution through regional
cooperation. Based on that logic, he immediately
visited with the Heads of States of the region. In all
of those and other endeavours, he may rest assured of
France’s unwavering support and, I believe, that of the
Council as a whole for his efforts.
My second message is one of full support for the
efforts of MINUSCA and its Head, Special Representative
Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga. The Security Council
has deployed MINUSCA to support the President of
the Central African Republic, and its complex mandate
reflects the great variety of measures to be taken there.
A great deal has already been accomplished, despite the
numerous challenges remaining.
Today, MINUSCA is a fully operational partner. It
has a robust and comprehensive mandate focused on the
8/20

16/03/2017

strategic objective of reducing the presence of armed
groups and the threat they represent in the Central
African Republic. In that regard, I would like to send
a message of support to MINUSCA, particularly in the
light of its recent actions in the central region of the
country. By acting decisively, including by using force
to defend its mandate, MINUSCA is establishing its
credibility and demonstrating to the armed groups that
the only way ahead is the political path.
In terms of international support for the Central
African Republic, I also wish to highlight the initial
results of the EU military training mission, which
completed the reform and training of a first FACA unit.
A first battalion will be fully trained by May.
My third message concerns the need to work
together and in coordination in the same direction.
We are many in a position to help the Central African
Republic recover. There is the United Nations, of
course, and other international partners, including the
World Bank and the African Bank; regional partners,
including the African Union, the Economic Community
of Central African States, the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region; the EU and bilateral
partners. Such attention is good news. It has positive
effects, such as the financial mobilization in Brussels
in November, where France announced an €85-million
contribution over three years.
But that widespread mobilization — which, I
reiterate, is necessary — is beneficial only when
precisely coordinated in order to avoid duplication
of efforts. Ultimately, the important thing is that
the assistance will truly benefit stabilization and
development of the Central African Republic. The
coordination role is key. It is the responsibility, among
others, of the Peacebuilding Commission countryspecific configuration for the Central African Republic,
which was convened this morning by the Moroccan
leadership, and whose efforts I commend.
Moreover, the general mobilization is beneficial
only if based on the same frame of reference, with full
support for President Touadéra and his Government.
The frame of reference is clear — it is that identified
by the Central Africans themselves at the Bangui
Forum on National Reconciliation; reiterated in the
Republican Pact for Peace, National Reconciliation
and Reconstruction in the Central African Republic
and integrated in the programme of the President of the
17-06764

16/03/2017

The situation in the Central African Republic

Central African Republic; and further enshrined in the
relevant Security Council resolutions.
We are fortunate to support a dynamic that could
be virtuous and restore sustainable stability in the
country. That is why President Touadéra was elected
and why the Council has demonstrated its commitment.
In the coming days, we will propose a draft presidential
statement to the Security Council. I reiterate our
full support to President Touadéra in fulfilling his
noble mandate.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to welcome His Excellency
President Touadéra and express our deep gratitude for
his presence among us today. I also thank him for the
important messages in his statement that reflect the
great challenges that the Central African Republic is
facing and that at the same time affirm the determination
of the people of the country and their strong will to
overcome all their difficulties.
The preservation of the unity, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Republic and the restoration
of the constitutional order through the adoption of
legislation establishing a constitutional court and other
institutions were some of the successful steps taken in
the recent period. Today, we are at a critical juncture, in
which the crisis that began at the end of 2012 together
and the violence and recurring crises that have shaken
the country since its independence are settled and in
which sustained peace has been achieved. Accordingly,
we would like to refer to a number of priorities,
as follows.
First, national reconciliation is the main priority
for establishing solid grounds for peace. We therefore
support all the efforts of President Touadéra and
affirm the importance of the inclusivity of the process,
whose aim is to restore the social fabric and address
grievances, particularly those of marginalized parties,
including refugees and internally displaced persons.
We also affirm the importance of all regional and
international partners rallying in support of these
efforts. Accordingly, we welcome the African mediation
initiative launched at the latest Summit in Addis Ababa,
particularly in that it includes the African Union (AU),
African regional organizations and the main countries
of the region, all of which have offered critical support
to the Central African Republic, without which it would
have been impossible to emerge from the transitional
phase. These regional partners are the most qualified

S/PV.7901

to sponsor the national reconciliation and empower
President Touadéra’s efforts, assuming that it enjoys the
necessary international support. We also welcome the
ongoing dialogue between the Security Council and the
African Union to decide on the best way to support the
initiative and guarantee the coherence of efforts among
the partners.
Secondly, we affirm the importance of putting an
end to the violence of armed groups, which exacts a
great price from civilians and exacerbates the country’s
already difficult circumstances. In this regard, I
note the great responsibility of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), which
requires us to empower the Mission to carry out its
mandate. The strategic review of the mandate was
an important step in this regard. It affirmed the need
to halt the activities of armed groups. Accordingly,
the voluntary engagement of armed groups in the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process
is one of the important pillars of reconciliation, and
the international community must avoid making the
mistakes that led to previous failures in the history of
the Central African Republic. We must mobilize the
resources necessary to rebuild the national security
and defence forces on the basis of professionalism,
pluralism and discipline in order to regain authority
over the country’s territory in its entirety.
Thirdly, sustained peace requires a long-term
vision to rebuild the State institutions and lay the
foundation for economic recovery and development.
We therefore welcome the important measures taken
by the authorities, including the National Recovery and
Peacebuilding Plan, in which national priorities for the
next five years are identified. In this regard, we welcome
the support of partners for the Plan expressed at the
Brussels Conference and the African Union Solidarity
Conference that was held following the latest AU
Summit with a view to promoting the contributions of
African nations in peacebuilding in the Central African
Republic. In this regard, I stress the Peacebuilding
Commission’s importance as a platform that brings
together many international, national, regional
partners. The Commission has an important role to play
in coordinating efforts in support of national priorities
and has the necessary expertise and relationship with
the Security Council to ensure the Plan’s success and
realize the concept of sustained peace.

17-067649/20

S/PV.7901

The situation in the Central African Republic

Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
President Touadéra for briefing us this afternoon here
in the Security Council and for his tireless efforts to
advance peace and development in the Central African
Republic. We know the challenges he faces are many,
but we know also that he has already consolidated gains.
We stand ready to work with him to rebuild the Central
African Republic. I also thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Ladsous and Ambassador Hilale for their
briefings. We welcome the many commitments made
by the Central African Republic’s friends and partners
at the November donors conference. Together, we must
sustain our focus and deliver on those commitments
and pledges.
President Touadéra’s Government is the lynchpin
and the guide. We look forward to his leadership and
his vision as he works to extend State authority, build
institutions, fight impunity, promote reconciliation and
disarm armed groups, with support from his friends and
partners. The United States has committed to helping
him rebuild and professionalize the armed forces,
police and gendarmerie, consistent with his national
security policy and with the five-year Recovery
and Peacebuilding Plan. We believe that a genuine
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation process can be accomplished and sustained
only alongside genuine security sector reform.
With reference to the demobilization, reintegration
and repatriation process, we agree that the Government
of the Central African Republic must be able to exercise
authority over its entire territory. Armed actors must
understand that their future lies not in being militants
on the margins of society but in being productive
contributing citizens of the Central African Republic.
Their future, security and livelihoods are intertwined
with the stabilization and long-term recovery of the
Central African Republic.
This process is not easy. It does not happen quickly,
and it does not involve overlooking crimes by allowing
for blanket amnesty. But we also need to acknowledge
that members of armed groups are often unwilling to
disarm until they know that they will have a role and
a voice in their Government, including in the security
sector. We will continue to urge that security services
be fully vetted, ethnically representative and regionally
balanced, in order to achieve an equitable distribution.
There cannot be parts of the Central African Republic
that citizens are afraid to travel to or enclaves they are
afraid to leave. We envision a day in which diverse,
10/20

16/03/2017

professional, well-trained Central African Republic
security forces are composed of citizens of different
religions and backgrounds and can ably protect the
entirety of the country.
We commend the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) for its efforts to work hand in
hand with the Central African Republic Government to
rebuild its security services in a way that mentors and
truly builds the capacity of the police, gendarmerie and
military. MINUSCA’s early programmes that preceded
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process in some of the Central African Republic’s
most fragile areas and its innovative community
violence-reduction programmes have laid the foundation
for a stronger partnership between the Central African
Republic and the international community on more
robust strategic planning and reforms.
When we see violence like the recent confrontations
in Bambari, we are reminded that we still have much
work to do. We commend MINUSCA for its willingness
to take risks for its support for the Government, for its
protection of civilians and for the provision of security
in the Central African Republic. I would also like to
take a moment to note that this week marked one year
since the passage of resolution 2272 (2016) on sexual
exploitation and abuse by peacekeepers. MINUSCA
has taken steps in the right direction but we have not
yet wiped out the problem. We must remain dedicated
to preventing acts of sexual exploitation and abuse,
holding perpetrators to account and helping victims
receive the assistance that they need.
In closing, we look forward to working to make
MINUSCA an even more efficient and more effective
peacekeeping mission.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
welcome President Touadéra of the Central African
Republic to today’s meeting, and thank UnderSecretary-General Hervé Ladsous and Ambassador
Hilale for their briefings.
Thanks to the concerted efforts of the Government
and the people of the Central African Republic and
the relevant parties of the international community,
the country has concluded its political transition
and ushered in a new chapter in State-building. The
Central African Republic is now pressing ahead
with disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation efforts and security sector reform, and
17-06764

16/03/2017

The situation in the Central African Republic

working hard to restore national stability and pursue
reconciliation, with positive results. China welcomes
that development and commends the Government of
the Central African Republic for their efforts under the
stewardship of President Touadéra.
Meanwhile, we must be aware that the security
situation in the country allows no complacency. There
is a long way to go in rebuilding the State, and obstacles
to achieving lasting peace and stability remain. The
issues surrounding the Central African Republic can
be resolved only through self-led inclusive political
dialogue aimed at national reconciliation and a
permanent, appropriate and sustainable solution.
The dialogue led by President Touadéra has
provided a golden opportunity for the country to
achieve stability and development. All parties in the
country should act in the long-term interests of the
country and its people, settle their differences through
dialogue and consultation, and work together towards
enduring peace, stability and development in the
Central African Republic. To assist the Central African
Republic in realizing peace and development, the
international community should uphold the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
and support Africans in addressing their problems in
their own way. It should also help the African Union
(AU) and other regional and subregional organizations
play a leading role, in that regard. The United Nations,
together with the AU and other regional and subregional
organizations, should enhance their coordination with
the Government of the Central African Republic, and
must fully respect its needs and will. All mediation
efforts must go hand in hand with efforts towards
national reconciliation.
The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) has played an important role in
maintaining stability in the country. China supports
MINUSCA’s continuing mandate. During his visit to
five African countries earlier this year, Mr. Wang Yi,
the Chinese Minister for Foreign Affairs, conveyed
China’s goodwill and commitment to pursuing an
African policy of sincerity, practical results, affinity
and good faith; upholding the values of friendship,
justice and shared interests; and actively supporting the
cause of peace and development in Africa. Along with
the international community, China is ready to renew
its contribution to the pursuit of lasting peace, stability
and development in the Central African Republic.

S/PV.7901

Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank President Touadéra
for sharing his point of view regarding the situation in
his country. We also thank Under-Secretary-General
Ladsous and the Permanent Representative of Morocco
for their briefings, which were quite instructive.
The situation in the country remains precarious.
Reprisals between tribes continue, crime and banditry
are widespread, and sectarian and ethnic violence is
rife. Government bodies and security forces in many
parts of the country are failing or totally lacking. In
spite of some breakthroughs on the security front in the
capital, in the central and northern parts of the country
there are ongoing deadly battles between armed groups
engaging in turf wars. Last month’s events around
Bambari were a sad illustration of that reality.
It is evident that in a difficult military and political
situation in the Central African Republic, the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic is playing an
important stabilizing role. However, given the situation
on the ground, we note that Blue Helmets must often
act as firefighting brigades. We are concerned about
the deteriorating social, economic and humanitarian
situation in the Central African Republic, along with
the ongoing lack of financing to meet the humanitarian
needs of the country. We call on all sides to ensure
unhampered humanitarian access, and the Government
to create conditions conducive to the safe, voluntary
return of refugees and internally displaced persons to
their homes.
The Central African authorities have to work on
several fronts simultaneously in order to ensure the
adequate functioning of the judiciary. In that context,
the focus should be on rebuilding national capacity.
Peacekeepers taking emergency temporary measures
and the long-awaited creation of the special criminal
court are not cure-alls for the country’s problems in
combating impunity. Furthermore, as world history
shows, various types of courts with international
participation are extremely costly and, in general, not
very efficient.
We would also like to call attention to the demand
of armed groups with respect to the awarding of general
amnesty. In that regard, we must proceed with caution.
Let us not forget the Bangui Forum of 2015, which
culminated in an appeal for fighting against impunity.

17-0676411/20

S/PV.7901

The situation in the Central African Republic

It is clear that the country needs fundamental
reforms and modernization. The disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and resettlement or
repatriation process must be jumpstarted with the full
assistance of the international community and with
regional mediation. In that regard, we welcome the
initiative of the African Union to launch the process
of reconciliation between the Central African Republic
Government and the armed groups. The sponsors of
that initiative include the Economic Community of
Central African States, the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region, Angola, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Chad.
We also welcome the initiative of President Touadéra
to make national reconciliation more inclusive, as well
as his intent to work with all armed groups. This is a
window of opportunity that must not be lost. Those
groups must be integrated into the political life of the
country in order to put an end to the violence.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): Japan is very pleased to
welcome President Touadéra to the Security Council
today. His presence attests to the strong commitment
of his Government to the consolidation of peace and
the rebuilding of the nation. We are encouraged
by the determination of the people of the Central
African Republic, as evidenced by the Bangui Forum
and the elections, in their quest for peace, stability
and prosperity.
In response to the strong national ownership,
regional and international partners are also
increasingly committed and united in their support
for the Government of the Central African Republic. I
especially commend the devoted efforts of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
and its troop-contributing countries. I would like to
assure Under-Secretary-General Ladsous and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Central
African Republic, Mr. Onanga-Anyanga, of Japan’s
support for the Mission’s proactive and robust postures.
I have already had the pleasure of speaking in the
presence of President Touadéra this morning in the
Peacebuilding Commission, so I will be brief now.
The leaders of armed groups that have not yet laid
down their arms must understand that there is more
to be gained in the peace and reconstruction process
than in war. The extension of State authority is an
essential priority in delivering peace dividends to the
12/20

16/03/2017

population and avoiding its marginalization. Japan
will continue to take part in reconstruction efforts
through assistance for the most vulnerable, including
refugees and internally displaced persons. That is
why we have recently decided to provide $15.3 in new
project assistance for the Central African Republic and
vulnerable populations in neighbouring countries.
The Council is fully aware of the importance of
conflict prevention and peacebuilding. We cannot
afford to let the Central African Republic relapse into
instability. Japan is committed to its ongoing support
to the Government of the Central African Republic, led
by President Touadéra, as part of our joint efforts to
achieve sustainable peace.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We are very pleased
to have His Excellency President Touadéra here at
the Security Council this afternoon. We thank him
for his presence here and for his important remarks.
They were extremely useful and put matters in their
proper perspective. We also thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Ladsous and Ambassador Hilale, Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) Central African
Republic configuration, for their respective briefings.
Although the Central African Republic continues
to face enormous difficulties, we appreciate the
positive developments under the leadership of President
Touadéra. We fully support his Government’s National
Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan. The Central African
Republic certainly needs the sustained support of
the international community to ensure that its postconflict reconstruction and peacebuilding endeavours
are implemented successfully. We appreciate the role
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) is playing in that regard. We look forward
to its even greater effectiveness, for which it will need
much greater support.
The active engagement of the PBC through its
Central African Republic Configuration remains very
important in supporting the National Recovery and
Peacebuilding Plan. Ambassador Hilale’s statement
is very useful, and we have taken note of what he had
to say. The pledges made at the Brussels Conference
on the Central African Republic and the African
Union solidarity conference for the Central African
Republic are also very welcome, and we hope they will
be fulfilled.
17-06764

16/03/2017

The situation in the Central African Republic

We also commend the President’s efforts in
undertaking security sector reform, and welcome
the progress made in disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation. Furthermore, we
recognize his efforts to expand State authority in the
entire country and reach out to the armed groups for
dialogue. We have taken note of what he said a while
ago with respect to the challenge the country is facing
in this area. The resumption of renewed violence in
various parts of the country is therefore a source of
great concern. It is an indication that sustaining peace
in the Central African Republic remains a serious
and complex challenge. There is therefore a need for
sustained efforts towards an all-inclusive national
dialogue and reconciliation for the restoration of
sustainable peace, social cohesion and stability.
In that context, we welcome the African Union
initiative for peace and reconciliation in the Central
African Republic, whose aim is to facilitate an
agreement between the Government and armed
opposition groups. That should be achieved without
in any way allowing impunity or compromising on
accountability, in order to create the necessary political
conditions for peace, reconciliation, democracy and
stability in the country. Three days ago, we had an
opportunity to informally interact with the Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission to the Central African Republic on
that important African initiative. We are indeed very
pleased to hear today from President Touadéra about his
views on the initiative. We understand that the goal is
to support President Touadéra in his efforts to promote
reconciliation and inclusive governance, while building
on the conclusions of the Bangui Forum.
In conclusion, I would like to stress the importance
of support to the President in his efforts to bring on
board all those who are willing to contribute to building
the country and to lay the basis for a durable peace in
the Central African Republic. The President could not
have been clearer with respect to how complex and
challenging the tasks involved are in ensuring that the
country is stabilized and begins the reconstruction
process. We have no doubt that the African initiative
will make a great contribution in that regard. We are
hopeful that the Council will send a strong political
message in support of the African initiative, and that
the President will continue to be committed, as he said,
to constructive dialogue.

S/PV.7901

Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): It is
an honour to have His Excellency President Touadéra
present here at the Security Council. We would like
thank him most especially for his efforts to bring about
peace and stability in the Central African Republic.
We would also like to thank the Under-SecretaryGeneral Ladsous and our colleague Ambassador Hilale,
Chair of the Central African Republic configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission, for their briefings.
Uruguay would also like to commend the work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Central African Republic, Mr. Onanga-Anyanga.
Today is an excellent opportunity to reaffirm
the Council’s commitment and engagement with the
Central African Republic, as well as to support the
consolidation of the situation through all means so that
it does not fall back into conflict. We would also to
highlight the fact that this briefing meeting promotes
transparency in our work and encourages members of
the Council to express their views publicly.
Just a few days after celebrating the first year of the
presidency of Touadéra, the Central African Republic
is in a better situation, with a return to constitutional
order, a democratically elected Government, the
formation of a new Government and the establishment
of the National Assembly. A number of far-reaching
reforms are already under way, including reforms in the
security, defence and justice sectors, and programmes
are in place for national reconciliation, disarmament,
demobilization, rehabilitation and reintegration of
former fighters. We must therefore commend the
Government of the Central African Republic and
reiterate our support to it, while encouraging it the to
continue along that path.
However, the recent events that took place in the
Central African Republic show that the Government
still has some significant challenges ahead. In that
regard, Uruguay would express its concern with regard
to the most recent report (S/2017/94) of the SecretaryGeneral showing that in recent months there has been
an increase in violence, including sporadic incidents in
Bangui, attacks on peacekeeping personnel, along with
ever-increasing confrontations between armed groups
outside the capital. Uruguay condemns in the strongest
terms the use of violence by the armed groups. We
would encourage groups that have not yet done so to
join the dialogue that was launched by the Government
to resolve current problems in a peaceful way.

17-0676413/20

S/PV.7901

The situation in the Central African Republic

The deterioration in the humanitarian situation in
the country is another source of concern. According
to the recent report of the Secretary-General, and as
Mr. Ladsous mentioned here in the Chamber, half
of the population in the Central African Republic
continues to need humanitarian aid, with many
suffering from extreme food insecurity. Against that
backdrop, it is crucial that the international community
continue encouraging and supporting the efforts of the
Government to bring about peace and stability.
The United Nations has renewed its commitment
to the country, particularly through the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) and through
the activities of the Peacebuilding Commission. We
must highlight the vital role played by MINUSCA in
protecting civilians, promoting and protecting human
rights and international humanitarian law, as well as
the support that MINUSCA provides to the national
authorities for capacity-building, all of which put great
operational demands on the Mission.
The recent presidential decree of 5 November
created the institutional structure to apply, supervise
and evaluate the modalities to fulfil the Mutual
Engagement Framework and the National Recovery
and Peacebuilding Plan. That will contribute
greatly to channelling the efforts of international
partners and to preserving the high-level political
commitment undertaken by the country and the
international community. In that regard, we reiterate that
for all forms of cooperation extended to the Central to
be successful, they must be done through consultations
with the Government and complement the measures
that are being implemented by the national authorities
in the search for reconciliation in the country.
Mr. Cardi (Italy) (spoke in French): I thank His
Excellency President for Touadéra for his statement, as
well as the Permanent Mission of France and the British
presidency for organizing this meeting. I would also
like to thank Mr. Hervé Ladsous, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, for his briefing,
and the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, for his work
on the ground. We, of course, commend the efforts of
the United Nations peacekeeping forces of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
to prevent armed groups from endangering the unity of
the country and the security of its civilians.
14/20

16/03/2017

Like the other the members of the Security
Council, we are concerned about both the insecurity
and the humanitarian situation in the Central African
Republic, which remains one of the most serious in
the world. Although the security and humanitarian
situation continues to be fragile, the country is truly at
a decisive turning point in its history. Accordingly, at
the bilateral level, Italy has supported the Government
of the Central African Republic since the beginning
of its mandate. The President of the Republic, Sergio
Mattarella, demonstrated that support in person to
President Touadéra during his visit to Rome last year.
Our country has long stood by the people of the
Central African Republic. Last October, our Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mario Giro, visited Bangui
to launch bilateral projects and inaugurate the opening
of the cooperation office by the Italian Development
Cooperation, which coordinates numerous Italian
activities in the Central African Republic, where there
is a strong presence of agencies and non-governmental
organizations, many of which are Catholic.
In that regard, let me emphasize the role that
those organizations play in Central African society
at various levels. I would point in particular to the
Community of Sant’Egidio, which is an active player
in promoting dialogue and reconciliation among the
various components of Central African society, while
ensuring the strengthening of Government institutions
and full cooperation with the Government, the United
Nations, the African Union, the countries of the region,
the Catholic Church and the Muslim community.
More generally, it is crucial that the Government of
the Central African Republic enjoy the strong and
determined support of the international community.
With regard to the economy, we listened very
attentively to the briefing by Ambassador Hilale, Chair
of the Central African Republic configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, who spoke about the work
of the Commission to help the Government develop
its National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan. It is
important that the Council continues to support the
work of that body. Further, it is urgent that the goals
of the Brussels Conference quickly become a reality.
The European Union and its member States continue to
stand with the Central African Republic.
At the political level, the African mediation
initiative between the Government and armed groups
appears to have the potential to generate the conditions
17-06764

16/03/2017

The situation in the Central African Republic

necessary for an inclusive peace agreement. If that
important initiative is to be fully successful, it is
important to ensure its full coordination with both
the United Nations and the Government of the Central
African Republic. We especially recognize the need for
an active role of President Touadéra as a representative
democratically elected by his fellow citizens.
The objective of any mediation initiative must
be to strengthen the Government and the extend its
authority throughout the Central African Republic in
its territorial entirety so as to enable it to build up the
security and promote the development of the country for
the long-term. The question of reconciling the demand
for justice with the inclusiveness of the peace process
is central. In our view, the need to end the conflict in
the Central African Republic is a priority. The civilian
population is waiting for the relief that lasting peace
will bring, ever conscious that impunity for the most
serious violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law will not be tolerated.
To conclude, we support France’s proposal for the
Council to put forward a document clearly expressing
its support for the Government and the African
initiative that recalls the demand for cooperation with
other regional organizations and the United Nations.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I warmly welcome
President Touadéra to the Security Council and thank
him for his substantive and result-oriented statement. I
also thank Under-Secretary-General Hervé Ladsous and
the Permanent Representative of Morocco, Mr. Omar
Hilale, for their informative briefings.
Ukraine reiterates its full support for President
Touadéra and his Government’s efforts to lead the
country towards recovery, stability and development.
Without any doubt, the free, peaceful and democratic
holding of elections in 2016 began a new period in the
history of the Central African Republic. In that regard,
we welcomed the International Donors Conference on
the Central African Republic that took place in Brussels
in November 2016, resulting in pledges of significant
resources to be used to further stabilize the country
and rebuild its institutions. The Mutual Engagement
Framework signed by the President of the Central
African Republic and the Under-Secretary-General
at the Conference serves as an important mechanism
for political engagement between the country and the
international community.

S/PV.7901

We recognize the challenges that the Central
African Republic leadership faces on the path to peace
and reconciliation. Like other delegations, ours is deeply
concerned about the increased activities of armed groups
and their ambitions to control considerable parts of the
national territory. The continuing clashes among some
of those groups continues to pose a threat to civilians,
in particular in the central regions of the country.
The latest events around the city of Bambari
involving tensions between the Union pour la paix en
Centrafrique and the coalition led by the Front populaire
pour la renaissance de la Centrafrique demonstrated
that the security situation in the country remains
fragile. Taking that into account, Ukraine supports
peace and reconciliation efforts, including those within
the framework of the mediation sponsored by regional
States and organizations, provided that such efforts
are undertaken in agreement with the Government of
the Central African Republic. In that light, the African
initiative for the peace and reconciliation agreement
between the Government and all armed groups
could serve as a practical tool to support the national
leadership in persuading those groups to lay down their
weapons and join the disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation process that was initiated
by the President of the Central African Republic.
Ukraine reiterates its support for the adoption
and signing by Central African authorities of the
disarmament, demobilization, rehabilitation and
reintegration programme, the national security
policy and the development plan for the police and
gendarmerie. The proper implementation of those
strategic documents should advance significantly the
process of disarmament and reform of the security
sector in the Central African Republic.
It would be difficult to overestimate the vital role
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) in promoting peace and stability in the
country. To that end, cooperation between MINUSCA
and national authorities is essential. We are grateful to
Special Representative Parfait Onanga-Anyanga for his
tireless efforts.
Let me also stress the importance of proper
compliance with the Council-mandated sanctions
regime that was renewed by resolution 2339 (2017).
As Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2127 (2013) concerning the Central African

17-0676415/20

S/PV.7901

The situation in the Central African Republic

Republic, I would like to positively note the spirit of
cooperation between the Committee and the Central
African Republic on the issue of implementing the
sanctions regime. During my visit to the Central
African Republic in May 2016, I had the opportunity to
meet with the President and a number of his officials to
promote further awareness of the sanctions, measures
and the work of the Committee in general. In New
York, we continue to cooperate constructively with his
country’s Permanent Mission.
Moreover, as Chair of the Committee, I would like
to express certain concerns with regard to the reported
failure to implement certain elements of the sanctions
regime, in particular the travel ban and asset freeze. In
that regard, although we understand the need to apply a
flexible approach so as not to disrupt the reconciliation
efforts undertaken through various initiatives, I
call on all States, in particular neighbouring States
and the concerned organizations, to actively use
relevant exemption procedures in line with resolution
2339 (2017) and the 2127 Committee guidelines to
ensure compliance with the existing regime, which
was designed by the Council to make its important
contribution to promoting peace and stability in the
Central African Republic. As always, the Committee
stands ready to assist in that process. The Council can
count on us.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): First of all,
I would like to thank you, Sir, for convening today’s
briefing with the President of the Central African
Republic. The Senegalese delegation welcomes
Mr. Faustin Archange Touadéra, who, during his visit
to the United Nations here in New York, wanted to
take time out to inform us about developments in his
country, in particular the resolute action that he and his
Government are taking to restore lasting security and
peace to the country in an effort to put it squarely on
the path to development.
The Council recalls that it has already had the
honour to welcome the President of the Central African
Republic a few months ago, in June 2016, under
the French presidency of the Council, to address the
very important issue of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict (see S/PV.7711). I would like to thank
Ambassador Omar Hilale, Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission’s Central African Republic configuration.
We also thank Mr. Hervé Ladsous and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Parfait
Onanga-Anyanga.
16/20

16/03/2017

My delegation would like to pay a well deserved
tribute to the leadership of President Touadéra, in
particular for his efforts to engage the various armed
groups in the quest for a political solution to the crisis in
his country, through the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programme and its advisory and
monitoring committee, in which we hope all parties
concerned will participate in short order. We believe
that a return to peace and security requires commitment
and perfect synergy among all institutions in the Central
African Republic — including the National Assembly,
guided by the President himself — as they each fully
play their individual roles in the national reconciliation
and reconstruction processes.
In addition to this much-needed domestic
mobilization, active support must be maintained at the
subregional and regional levels through he involvement
of regional organizations in the stabilization process
in the Central African Republic. In that regard, the
Security Council is particularly interested in the
African initiative for a peace and reconciliation
agreement between the Government and armed groups.
It is an initiative put forward by the African Union,
the Economic Community of Central African States
and the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, with the support of other organizations, such
as the European Union and the Organization of the
Islamic Conference. It is because of that interest that the
Security Council held an interactive informal dialogue
early this week with the Special Representative of the
African Union in the Central African Republic, who
provided clear details of the initiative.
Like the majority of Council members, Senegal
expressed its support for the initiative, especially given
that it was presented as a way to shore up support
for the courageous and coherent efforts in the areas
of security, stabilization and national reconciliation.
As the delegation of Senegal understands it, there
must be synergy between regional initiatives and the
policies implemented by the Government of the Central
African Republic, which must all fulfil the hopes of
the Central African people that were expressed at the
Bangui Forum and be supported by the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA).
We are mindful that the Government of the country
is expected to rise to the occasion on all fronts because
the challenges are daunting and multifaceted. The
Government must address disarmament, demobilization
17-06764

16/03/2017

The situation in the Central African Republic

and reintegration, security sector reform and national
reconciliation, and provide emergency responses to the
urgent social and humanitarian needs of the population.
That is why we echo the President’s call to strengthen
international commitment in order to assist in reviving
the country’s economy and meeting the growing needs
of the Central African people, including the large
number of refugees and internally displaced persons.
In that regard, international partners must urgently
honour the commitments they made during the
Brussels Conference on the Central African Republic,
which are estimated at $2.2 billion. It is important to
note that without adequate financial resources, suitable
technical training and coherent logistics, efforts to
sustain peace in the Central African Republic could
be jeopardized. In the same vein, we believe that the
partnership between the Central African Republic and
MINUSCA is essential to the normalization process,
in particular with regard to restoring State authority.
For us, the efforts under way in Bambari show the
relevance of that partnership, especially as regards the
return of administrative and judicial authorities to that
strategic area.
We recall that Senegal is also involved in MINUSCA.
It has deployed a formed police unit, a protection and
security unit, an attack helicopter unit, as well as a
Commanding General to the military component, which
brings the total number of members of the Senegalese
armed forces within MINUSCA to 420. We believe that
the Mutual Engagement Framework that Mr. Ladsous
just described is particularly important in that regard.
I can assure the President that my country will remain
committed to the Government and brotherly people
of the Central African Republic in their tireless quest
for national reconciliation and reconstruction under
his leadership.
My delegation supports the recommendations put
forward on the basis of the MINUSCA review carried
out in October 2016, in particular those noting that the
holding of local elections and ongoing decentralization
will help to strengthen the peacekeeping and
peacebuilding processes.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): My delegation
welcomes His Excellency Mr. Faustin Archange
Touadéra, President of the Central African Republic,
to New York and thanks him for his very insightful
analysis of his country’s trajectory of development. We
also thank today’s briefers — Under-Secretary-General

S/PV.7901

Hervé Ladsous and the Permanent Representative of
Morocco, Mr. Omar Hilale — for their substantive
updates. Let me give my delegation’s observations
on the three main aspects — political, security and
humanitarian — of the situation.
Kazakhstan commends and supports the leadership
of President Touadéra in facilitating inclusive political
dialogue, which commenced on 12 October 2016, by
bringing together various actors to the negotiating
table. It is the only way to bring peace to the country.
We welcome the decision of the anti-balaka group to
join the dialogue. We praise the national disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation strategy,
as well as the national programme for reconciliation
and social cohesion adopted in November 2016, which
should all be strictly adhered to.
Recently launched by the African Union, the
Economic Community of Central African States, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
Angola, Congo and Chad, the initiative for peace and
reconciliation agreement between the Government
and all armed group in the Central African Republic
is another possible platform for negotiations. The
mediating role of the African Union in the process is
central and must be fully supported by the international
community. Those two political initiatives must
supplement and reinforce each other to optimally
accelerate the stabilization of the security situation on
the ground.
Secondly, ongoing clashes in many parts of the
country — especially the recent fight for Bambari
between the Union pour la paix en Centrafrique
and the Front populaire pour la renaissance de la
Centrafrique — are presently making the security
situation in the Central African Republic very fragile.
We welcome the military action by the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) to protect
the civilian population and take control of Bambari.
Kazakhstan strongly condemns attacks on United
Nations peacekeepers and convoys. Furthermore, such
armed groups run the risk of exposing themselves to
additional international sanctions, which must be
followed strictly. Regional structures and institutions
with influence are urged to do everything in their power
to end the armed groups’ violence. Kazakhstan hopes
that the functioning of the Special Criminal Court
and the appointment of the new prosecutor, with the

17-0676417/20

S/PV.7901

The situation in the Central African Republic

support of MINUSCA, will help to combat impunity.
This new legal framework should serve as impetus for
the remaining armed groups to join the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and rehabilitation process.
We support the high level of cooperation between
the Government of the Central African Republic and
MINUSCA, which the Council must sustain on all fronts.
We also encourage the Government to own greater
responsibility and accountability for rehabilitating
the country, with the support of the United Nations
system and the country team. That should be achieved
in collaboration with regional organizations, financial
institutions and all stakeholders, supported by the
international community.
Thirdly, we commend President Touadéra’s efforts
to bring about economic recovery in his country. The
humanitarian situation continues to be complex. Almost
half of the population — approximately 2 million
people — depends on humanitarian aid. The number
of internally displaced persons has reached almost
60,000 since October of last year. Kazakhstan therefore
shares the opinion stated here by President Touadéra
with regard of the need for greater strengthening of
the security/development nexus as the bedrock for
stabilization, reconciliation and the development of the
Central African Republic.
Hence it is very important that organizations and
Governments honour their commitment of more than
$2.2 billion in pledges made at the Brussels Conference
on 17 November 2016. Likewise, proper and vigilant
use of funds would greatly contribute to the five-year
National Plan for Recovery and Peacebuilding. The
recent African Union solidarity conference on postconflict reconstruction and development, as well we as
peacebuilding efforts in the Central African Republic
during the AU conference in Addis Ababa, are fine
examples to foster development and reconciliation. We
encourage the launching of similar initiatives to benefit
the country.
Let me conclude by reiterating our readiness to
join multilateral action to support President Touadéra
and the Central African Republic in moving forward
towards stability, peace and progress.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I want to start by thanking
Under-Secretary-General Ladsous and my colleague
Ambassador Hilale of Morocco, Chair of the Central
African Republic country-specific configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, for their briefings. I would
18/20

16/03/2017

also like to join others in welcoming President Touadéra
to the Security Council and by thanking him for his
appraisal of the current situation and the challenges
and opportunities facing the Central African Republic.
We strongly support the efforts of President Touadéra
towards a Central African Republic where all citizens
can live in peace.
The ongoing work on the formal disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and rehabilitation
(DDRR) framework is of particular importance. It is
critical to continue to advance the national dialogue
in ways the build on the results of the Bangui Forum.
The Government, the region and the international
community must speak with one voice on that issue,
thereby ensuring a coherent approach to armed groups
and avoiding damage to public trust.
The African initiative for a peace and reconciliation
agreement is very welcomed, and should be carefully
coordinated with national efforts and should support the
implementation of Security Council resolutions. The
effective participation of women in all reconciliation,
transitional justice and DDRR frameworks is key to
sustainable results.
Ending impunity is a prerequisite for true
reconciliation. At the Bangui Forum, the people of
President Touadéra’s country made an unequivocal plea
for justice, which must be delivered upon in the context
of nationally agreed processes, as he indicated. We
look forward to the human rights report by the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA).
Its findings should be followed up on, not least in view
of the operationalization of the special criminal court.
We encourage the Government, in its efforts to improve
accountability, to take full advantage of the support
provided by MINUSCA and of the court.
While security in Bangui has improved, people
across the Central African Republic continue to live
under the threat of violence. We are deeply concerned
about the recent events in Bambari, which risk leading
to a de facto east-west partition. To avoid that, it is
vital that the State re-establish its authority in the
city. The recent visit to the city by President Touadéra
is a very important signal. We heard today about the
dire humanitarian situation and new displacements. I
am glad to say that we remain a major humanitarian
donor. We urge others to respond to the appeal made
today by the President for further funds going to his
17-06764

16/03/2017

The situation in the Central African Republic

country. The protection of civilians remains a priority.
We are encouraged by the robust action by MINUSCA
in that regard in Bambari. Further measures and
flexible adaptation to the fast-evolving situation will
be necessary.
We welcome President Touadéra’s participation at
the Peacebuilding Commission earlier today, as well as
the configuration’s intention to further intensify efforts
to support the National Recovery and Peacebuilding
Plan. To re-establish and extend State authority over
the whole of the territory and to prevent a relapse
into widespread hostilities, peacebuilding efforts
are important, including the capacity of the public
administration throughout the country.
I want to stress that there must be zero tolerance
for sexual exploitation and abuse for all peacekeeping
and United Nations staff, uniformed as well as civilian.
We note with great concern that allegations of further
abuse by United Nations staff still persist in the
Central African Republic. Victims, both women and
men, boys and girls, need to be protected, assisted and
compensated, while perpetrators must be brought to
justice. The United Nations must never lack the power
to act to hold those responsible to account. We welcome
the leadership of the Secretary-General on the issue,
including his vision for a new strategy to address sexual
exploitation and abuse, with a clear focus on victims’
rights.
In conclusion, it is imperative that we continue
to support the efforts of President Touadéra and
his Government and that we remain focused on
supporting a peaceful Central African Republic at this
critical moment.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): First of all, my delegation would like
to welcome the presence of His Excellency Mr. Faustin
Archange Touadéra, President of the Central African
Republic. It is a genuine privilege to have him with
us. We believe that his being here is not just testimony
to his commitment to the United Nations, but it also
affords us a unique opportunity to support the efforts
of his Government and his people to find lasting peace
based on social justice.
Bolivia would also like to express its gratitude
for the briefing by Mr. Ladsous, as well as that by
His Excellency Ambassador Omar Hilale, Permanent
Representative of Morocco.

S/PV.7901

We acknowledge the progress and efforts made
and the challenges faced by the Central African
Republic to achieve peace. We express our support
for the democratically elected Government on the
path charted to find peace in line with its sovereignty
and independence.
Bolivia would like to highlight and commend the
work done by the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic and its efforts to stabilize the country by
precisely following its mandate, providing humanitarian
assistance, protecting civilians and carrying out
activities to ensure disarmament, peace and security.
We also express our concern about the worsening
violence in recent months, which is mainly affecting
civilians and leading to instability on the political,
social and humanitarian fronts. The country’s civilians
are the ones being affected by that violence, and it is
they who must bear the brunt, including humanitarian
consequences such as displacement and being forced to
become refugees.
Bolivia also absolutely rejects the use of force. As a
pacifist country, we urge the armed groups to lay down
their weapons and to set aside sectarian interests of all
types that may impede the dialogue from producing
results so that agreements can be finalized to put an
end to the conflict.
We take note of the African initiative that
encompasses the main outcomes of the Bangui
Forum, which set out compromise terms with regard
to peace, security, justice, reconciliation, governance
and economic reconstruction, in addition to the issues
of combating impunity and ensuring that no social or
political segment is excluded from the dialogue.
Bolivia also urges the international community to
continue to contribute actively to mobilize adequate
resources to help the Central African Republic establish
peace and social justice. We believe that the involvement
of regional organizations and the participation of the
African Union and neighbouring countries have been
and will continue to be critical in political initiatives
to achieve peace and muster support for a sustainable
reconciliation process, using African solutions for
African problems. We note the efforts of the President
of the Central African Republic to identify ways to
achieve rapprochement, peace and understanding
through inclusive dialogue and to lay the foundations
for the stability required by its people to enjoy peace

17-0676419/20

S/PV.7901

The situation in the Central African Republic

and stability and to agree, through a sovereignty and
independent Central African intitiative, on what is
most beneficial to the country in a context of of the law,
justice, reconciliation and peace.
The factors in achieving those objectives being
well defined — a democratically elected Government
and the cooperation and involvement of regional
organizations — the only way to resolve problems is
through a negotiated political solution and to clearly
establish Central African ownership of that solution,
with respect for its sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
I would like to begin by welcoming President
Touadéra to the Council and thanking him for his
briefing, as well as the other briefers for theirs.
It has been a significant 12 months for the Central
African Republic. The peaceful and credible elections
that saw President Touadéra elected were a welcome
moment of hope for a country that has endured crisis
for far too long. And the National Plan for Recovery
and Peacebuilding, agreed in November, sets out a
clear pathway forward. It will move the country on
and away from the cycle of conflict. In that effort, the
Central African Republic will have the international
community’s support, including $44 million from the
United Kingdom.

16/03/2017

attacks on civilians, as well as for their disarmament
and demobilization. They cannot be allowed to derail
progress in pursuit of their own short-term self interest.
Secondly, more effort needs to be made on the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of exSéléka faction and anti-Balaka groups. We welcome
the President’s consultative committee as the formal
framework for disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, with all armed groups represented, as we
heard today. Efforts to support mediation, in particular
the Angola-led African initiative, are all welcome. Any
initiative must support the President’s authority, be
in coordination with the United Nations, and respect
the will of the Central African Republic people to end
impunity, as demonstrated at the Bangui Forum.
Thirdly, for long-term stability, it is essential
that the Central African Republic’s own armed forces
can provide the security and stability that the people
deserve. That means reform of the armed forces, and
we stand ready to support the country in that effort.
Fourthly and finally, if the Central African
Republic is to move beyond the violence, there must be
accountability. Not only will that bring justice for those
who have suffered, but it will also send a clear message
to armed groups that they cannot kill and maim with
impunity. The Council has given its support for the
development of a special criminal court and mandated
MINUSCA to help make it happen. And now we need
to see implementation.

But the Central African Republic needs more
than just plans and pledges. What it really needs is
implementation delivery, both by the Government and
by us in the international community, because as the
past 12 months have sadly shown, progress is fragile.
The hope of March 2016 risks being replaced by the
violence, displacement, humanitarian emergency and
fear of the past. Having come so far, the risk of reversal,
the risk of deterioration and a return to the chaos of the
past are now a painful reality that we must confront. In
response, we see four steps.

In conclusion, the Central African Republic is at a
critical juncture. There is a possibility for sustainable
peace, but that possibility narrows as the security
situation deteriorates. Having endured conflict and
chaos for so long, and having stepped away from the
brink of genocide in 2014, the people of the Central
African Republic deserve a peaceful future, not a return
to a hateful past. We stand ready to support President
Touadéra so that the Central African Republic can
finally break the cycle of conflict.

First, the Government of the Central African
Republic, with the support of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), must
secure an agreement with armed groups to cease

There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.

20/20

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The meeting rose at 4.55 p.m.

17-06764
