S/2015/940

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
8 December 2015
Original: English

Thirty-seventh progress report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire
I. Introduction
1.
By its resolution 2226 (2015), the Security Council extended the mandate of
the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI) until 30 June 2016 and
requested me to provide a midterm report on the situation on the ground and
the implementation of the resolution, as well as recommendations for the
implementation by 31 March 2016 of the military drawdown referred to in
paragraph 65 of my report of 15 May 2014 (S/2014/342).

II. Political situation
2.
The reporting period was dominated by the preparations for and holding of the
25 October presidential election, which led to the re -election of President Alassane
Ouattara, who was sworn in for a second and final term on 3 November. The p olls
were conducted peacefully, although the political environment in the country
remained highly charged.
3.
In the period leading up to the election, political divisions became more
antagonistic, while at the same time political parties and actors forme d alliances in
an effort to mobilize support. On 15 May, 13 opposition parties and personalities,
including Liberté et démocratie pour la République (LIDER), the dissident faction
of the Front populaire ivoirien (FPI) and three dissident members of the Par ti
démocratique de Côte d’Ivoire (PDCI), established the Coalition nationale pour le
changement (CNC) political coalition. Among the demands of CNC were an
updated and credible voter’s list, a secure environment, a reformed Independent
Electoral Commission and respect for article 35 of the Constitution, which sets out
the eligibility criteria for presidential candidates, including the requirement that
both parents be Ivorian citizens by birth.
4.
Meanwhile, my Special Representative for Côte d’Ivoire continued her efforts
aimed at facilitating an environment conducive to a peaceful electoral process. On
22 May, political dialogue between the Government and 16 opposition parties,
including the former ruling party FPI, resumed in the context of the permanent
framework for dialogue launched in 2012. Discussions were focused on the
requirements for a peaceful and transparent presidential election, including the
financing of political parties, access to State media, the security of candidates and
15-21262 (E)

101215

*1521262*

S/2015/940

freedom of expression, as well as the unfreezing of bank accounts and the right of
return for persons affiliated with the previous regime living outside the country.
5.
On 22 May, FPI held its fourth congress in Abidjan, during which it decided to
participate in the presidential election and endorsed its leader, Pascal Affi N’Guessan,
as its candidate. However, the dissident faction led by Aboudramane Sangaré
continued to oppose Mr. Affi N’Guessan and also called on its supporters to refrain
from participating in the electoral process. This contributed to fractures within the
opposition coalition led by Mr. Affi N’Guessan, the Alliance des forces démocratiques
de Côte d’Ivoire, with four parties defecting to join CNC on 2 September. Meanwhile,
Mr. Affi N’Guessan pursued his efforts aimed at reuniting FPI in order to create a
strong opposition to President Ouattara in the elections, convening a consultative
forum for that purpose on 17 September. However, the dissident wing persisted in
its efforts to denounce Mr. Affi N’Guessan, calling on its supporters to boycott the
election.
6.
On 2 September, CNC and four political parties signed a joint declaration
stating that its signatories would build a coalition aimed at restoring freedom and
democracy. However, CNC was not able to put forward a single presidential
candidate, as proposed by the President of LIDER, Mamadou Koulibaly, and
experienced internal disagreements as a result of the decision of three of its
members to contest the presidency, including its President, Cha rles Konan Banny,
the former Prime Minister and head of the Dialogue, Truth and Reconciliation
Commission, who was replaced on 19 October by Jean-Enoc Bah as President of the
coalition.
7.
Meanwhile, the ruling coalition Rassemblement des houphouëtistes po ur la
démocratie et la paix (RHDP) remained united around its support for President
Ouattara as its sole candidate in the election, notwithstanding the decision of three
PDCI members to contest the presidency as independent candidates within CNC. On
1 August, the Parti ivoirien des travailleurs convened an extraordinary congress in
Abidjan, during which its former Secretary-General, Joseph Séka Séka, who was
elected as the party’s President, reaffirmed the party’s alliance with RHDP and its
support for President Ouattara’s candidacy. On 4 September, during an RHDP event
in Bouaké, Prime Minister Daniel Kablan Duncan invited PDCI dissidents to reunite
behind the party’s leadership.
The electoral process
8.
From 1 to 30 June, the Independent Electoral Commission conducted voter
registration, opening some 2,000 registration centres throughout the country, as well
as 53 centres in 19 foreign countries where voting would take place. Owing to
communication challenges, the Commission extended the registration p rocess for
12 days to provide more people with the opportunity to register. On 30 September,
the final list of 6.3 million voters was published, of whom 49 per cent were women,
reflecting an increase of 10 per cent compared with 2010. On the same day, the
Government adopted a decree establishing 10,335 voting stations and 19,841 polling
stations across the country, as well as in 19 foreign locations.
9.
On 9 June, the Coalition nationale de la jeunesse pour le changement (CNJC)
organized unauthorized demonstrations in five cities across Côte d’Ivoire demanding
changes in the electoral process and the release of detained opposition members,
which resulted in the killing of one individual and the wounding of others. The

2/21

15-21262

S/2015/940

Minister of the Interior and Security, Hamed Bakayoko, reaffirmed that the
Government would not allow protests that disrupted public order. On 10 June, the
Government and opposition parties, including CNC, condemned the demonstrations.
10. Meanwhile, on 18 August, the Independent Electoral Co mmission met with the
national media regulatory bodies, the National Press Council and the High Authority
for Audiovisual Communication, in order to address concerns raised by opposition
members and to ensure equitable access to State media during the elec toral period.
From 21 July to 30 September, the National Press Council carried out a campaign to
inform political parties and civil society groups about media regulations and
procedures.
11. Candidate nominations were held from 3 to 25 August. Thirty-three individuals
registered with the Independent Electoral Commission, 14 of whom paid the
approximately $40,000 registration fee. Meanwhile, the Government made some
efforts to meet the demands of the opposition, including with respect to providing
security for presidential candidates, as well as in the areas of financing political
parties and ensuring equitable access to State media. On 26 August, the High
Authority of Audiovisual Communication convened the National Press Council and
the State broadcasting service, Radiodiffusion Télévision Ivoirienne, to agree on
measures to guarantee equal access to State media for presidential candidates during
the campaign period. However, some opposition actors, in particular CNC,
continued to criticize the Government, requesting a direct dialogue with President
Ouattara. On 2 September, the President reaffirmed his commitment to political
dialogue, although he indicated that issues related to the electoral code and the
composition of the Independent Electoral Commission, among other electoral
parameters, would not be “renegotiated”. The Minister in the presidency in charge of
political dialogue, Jeannot Ahoussou-Kouadio, met opposition parties on 9 September
in the context of the permanent framework for dialogue to discus s the election.
However, members of CNC did not participate, as their coalition was not formally
registered and their candidacies had not yet been endorsed by the Constitutional
Council.
12. In a ruling made public on 9 September, the Constitutional Counc il determined
that 10 of the 33 registered candidates met the requirements for contesting the
election, and also rejected a complaint made by CNC member and former Minister
for Foreign Affairs Essy Amara challenging the President’s eligibility under articl e 35,
on the grounds that he did not meet the nationality requirements. The 10 official
candidates were President Ouattara; Messrs. Affi N’Guessan, Banny, Amara and
Koulibaly; Henriette Lagou Adjoua of the party Renouveau pour la paix et
la concorde; and independent candidates Jacqueline-Claire Kouangoua, Kacou
Gnangbo, Bertin Konan Kouadio and Siméon Konan Kouadio.
13. In reaction to the validation of President Ouattara’s eligibility by the
Constitutional Council, CNJC called for nationwide protests to be held on
10 September, which the Government banned. Despite the ban, unauthorized protests
were held, including in Bonoua, Gagnoa and Yopougon. Clashes between protesters
and security forces resulted in three deaths, several injuries and the burning of
property in Bayota, Logouata and Ouragahio. On 23 September, my Special
Representative led a delegation comprising government and United Nations
representatives to the areas to defuse tension and initiate dialogue, which she
followed up on 13 November.

15-21262

3/21

S/2015/940

14. On 26 September, the police dispersed demonstrators at a banned meeting
called by CNC in the Yopougon neighbourhood of Abidjan. In reaction to the 10 and
26 September protests, 51 individuals were arrested, most of whom were charged
with disturbing public order, including prominent members of CNC and CNJC, 9 of
whom were subsequently convicted; the remaining 42 are awaiting trial. Reports
were also received about the incommunicado detention of several individuals by the
National Surveillance Directorate, reportedly at the request of the Abidjan
prosecutor. On 12 October, the Independent Expert on the situation of human rights
in Côte d’Ivoire issued a statement calling on the authorities to respect freedom of
assembly in a non-discriminatory manner and to release anyone arrested for
demonstrating peacefully. In total, the Ivorian authorities banned or dispersed
19 political meetings and demonstrations organized by opposition political parties
and civil society, including trade unions and student associations.
15. On 1 October, the Government announced the allocation of $200,000, on an
exceptional basis, to the 10 presidential candidates to fund their electoral
campaigns, pending the adoption of legislation on the public funding of political
parties. However, independent candidate Siméon Kouadio refused the funds,
explaining that the measure had no legal basis.
16. On 7 October, Mr. Affi N’Guessan, Ms. Kouangoua, Ms. Adjoua and President
Ouattara signed a code of conduct, committing to refraining from hate speech and
adhering to electoral rules and procedures. On the same day, the other six candidates
participated in an authorized political rally convened by CNC in Yopougon, during
which they publicly expressed concern about the fairness and transparency of the
electoral and dialogue processes.
17. The official presidential election campaign period, which took plac e from 9 to
23 October, proceeded without incident. Campaign strategies varied among the
candidates, with some concentrating their efforts in their respective strongholds and
others making an effort to rally support throughout the country. Meanwhile, the
distribution of voter cards, initially scheduled to take place from 7 to 17 October,
was extended until 21 October by the Independent Electoral Commission owing to
the low collection rate; cards were subsequently made available at polling stations.
During the campaign period, Messrs. Koulibaly, Amara and Banny withdrew on
9, 13 and 23 October, respectively, claiming that the conditions required for a
credible, transparent and fair election were not in place. On 13 October, Mr. Koulibaly
called for a boycott of the election, which was supported by other leaders within
CNC. Meanwhile, on 22 October the National Press Council temporarily suspended
the publication of three opposition newspapers for having undermined social
cohesion by publishing a call for a boycott of the election.
18. Côte d’Ivoire held its presidential election on 25 October in a peaceful
atmosphere and without any major incidents. In general, the conduct of the election
proceeded smoothly, although delays in the arrival of electoral materials resulted in
the late opening of approximately 5 per cent of polling stations; there were also
challenges in using the biometric systems at roughly 30 per cent of polling stations.
On 28 October, the Independent Electoral Commission published provisional r esults
revealing that President Ouattara had obtained more than 83.6 per cent of the vote,
followed by Mr. Affi N’Guessan, who had received approximately 9.3 per cent, and
independent candidate Bertin Kouadio, who had received some 3.9 per cent. No
other candidate received a significant percentage of the votes cast. Voter turnout

4/21

15-21262

S/2015/940

stood at approximately 52 per cent, with some 3.3 million participants out of the
6.3 million registered voters. On the same day, Mr. Affi N’Guessan, Bertin Kouadio,
Siméon Kouadio and Ms. Kouangoua publicly conceded defeat and congratulated
President Ouattara on his re-election; the President welcomed those gestures as a
sign of democratic maturity. The Sangaré faction of FPI rejected the electoral
outcome, denouncing irregularities. The Constitutional Council announced the final
results, confirming the re-election of President Ouattara on 2 November, and the
following day he was sworn in for a second and final five -year term.
19. On 4 November, President Ouattara convened his Cabinet and announced that
he would not make any changes to his Government, which would continue to be
headed by Prime Minister Daniel Kablan Duncan. The President also announced
that legislative elections would take place after the holding of a constitutional
referendum aimed at changing the eligibility requirements for contesting the
presidency, and not before December 2016, as the Constitution does not provide for
the early dissolution of the legislature before the end of its five -year term.
Support for the electoral process
20. The United Nations provided support to the national authorities responsible for
the electoral process. My Special Representative made an effort to convene Ivorian
political stakeholders and partners with a view to ensuring that di sputes would be
resolved peacefully and in accordance with the law, while also encouraging the
Independent Electoral Commission to enhance its efforts to sensitize voters and
political stakeholders regarding electoral preparations. On 1 July, UNOCI facilit ated
a platform bringing together 26 traditional rulers, which was also supported by the
National Programme for Social Cohesion, the National Democratic Institute and the
Peacebuilding Fund.
21. The Ivorian authorities, with support from UNOCI, prepared an d implemented
a comprehensive election security plan that involved the deployment of 28,000
Ivorian police, gendarmerie and military personnel to secure the electoral process,
as well as the establishment of 12 command posts across the country and 1 main
post in Abidjan to coordinate security actions in collaboration with prefects and
electoral authorities. Activities to strengthen trust between the defence and security
forces were also conducted with support from the Peacebuilding Fund.
22. The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) mobilized $6.45 million
in electoral assistance, including from the Ivorian Government, Japan and the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), which financed the
promotion of women’s participation in the electio n, the training of experts, the
sensitization of the population and logistical support for the Independent Electoral
Commission. The Peacebuilding Fund also provided support for the participation of
youth and women’s groups.
23. UNOCI provided logistical support to the Independent Electoral Commission,
facilitating the delivery of electoral materials to the 108 departments across the country .
UNOCI and UNDP also assisted the Commission in the retrieval of electoral results.
24. The election was observed by several organizations, including the African
Union, ECOWAS, the Mano River Union, the Inter-Parliamentary Committee of the
West African Economic and Monetary Union and the International Organization of
la Francophonie. According to the Independent Electoral Commission, 115 international

15-21262

5/21

S/2015/940

and national electoral observation missions deployed some 5,000 observers
throughout the country. Ivorian civil society, with support from the Peacebuilding
Fund, UNDP and other partners, established three separate situation rooms,
including a women’s and youth situation room, to monitor the election and provide
early warning to prevent electoral violence. In addition, a contact group of eminent
persons led by the former Presidents of Mali and Mauritania, Dioncounda Traoré
and Ely Ould Mohamed Vall, respectively, also contributed to an environment
conducive to a peaceful election. Following the election, international and national
observers issued positive public statements, all of them noting that the election had
been generally free, fair and transparent.
National and international justice
25. Progress in bringing to justice alleged perpetrators of crimes committed during
the post-electoral crisis of 2010 remained slow, although some officers of the Forces
républicaines de Côte d’Ivoire (FRCI), including former members of the Forces
armées des forces nouvelles, were summoned by the Special Investigation and
Examination Cell in the context of its investigation of serious human rights violations
committed during the crisis. At least two FRCI commanders were subsequently
charged.
26. On 4 August, the military court in Abidjan sentenced Anselme Séka Yapo,
formerly in charge of the protection of former First Lady Simone Ehivet Gbagbo, to
20 years of imprisonment for murder, assault and battery. The court also convicted
Jean-Noël Abéhi, former commander of the armoured gendarmerie squadron in
Abidjan, to five years of imprisonment for desertion. Both have appealed the court’s
decision.
27. On 27 May, the International Criminal Court rejected the appeal presented by
Côte d’Ivoire, challenging the decision of December 2014 regarding the admissibility
of the case against Ms. Gbagbo before the Court. The Court stated, inter alia, that
the crimes investigated domestically, namely, economic crimes and crimes against
the State, were of a nature different from that of the charges before the Court, which
relate to alleged crimes against humanity, sexual violence, persecution and other
inhumane acts. The authorities have provided assurances that they are completing
the investigations into “blood crimes” committed during the crisis, with a view to
bringing to justice alleged perpetrators on both sides of the conflict.
28. On 25 October, the International Criminal Court denied a request from the
defence team of former President Laurent Gbagbo to hold his trial in Abidjan or
Arusha, citing security and logistics challenges. On 28 October, the Court
announced that the joint trial of the former President and Charles Blé Gou dé, the
former Minister of Youth and former Young Patriots leader, would be postponed
from 10 November 2015 to 28 January 2016 so that the physical ability of
Mr. Gbagbo to stand trial could be evaluated.
National reconciliation and social cohesion
29. The final report and recommendations of the Dialogue, Truth and Reconciliation
Commission presented to President Ouattara on 15 December 2014 had not been
released publicly as at 1 December. On 3 July, the National Commission for
Reconciliation and Compensation of Victims announced that between 15 May and
30 June it had registered 158,238 victims of the crisis that had begun in 1990, who

6/21

15-21262

S/2015/940

would be considered for reparations. On 4 August, the President launched the
Government’s reparations programme for victims of the conflict and/or their
beneficiaries. As at 1 December, more than 2,100 family members of persons killed
during the conflict had received $2,000 per family under the compensation scheme.
On 3 October, national stakeholders validated the nationa l strategy on reconciliation
and social cohesion developed by the National Programme for Social Cohesion,
with support from UNOCI. Governmental approval of the strategy is pending.
30. Intercommunal conflicts remained a challenge, particularly in the west,
primarily as a result of land issues, chieftaincy disputes, evictions from protected
forests and the exploitation of natural resources. UNOCI activities were focused on
encouraging reconciliation and strengthening social cohesion, as well as preventing
local conflicts from escalating before the presidential election. To that end, the
mission engaged more than 3,900 individuals through 14 intercommunal meetings
throughout the country. Another 12 activities sensitized 1,203 youths, including
118 women, with respect to the importance of peaceful elections. In addition, my
Special Representative led a campaign at six universities and institutions of higher
learning to promote a culture of peace, which reached more than 5,000 students,
870 of whom were certified as conflict mediators.
31. The Government continued efforts, with UNOCI support, to build the capacity
of local administrators and village councils to collect and analyse data regarding
local conflicts to prevent and mitigate threats to social cohesion. The mission
organized three workshops involving 52 administrative officials and 134 traditional
chiefs from the Abidjan, Grands-Ponts and Sud-Comoé regions. It also implemented
64 quick-impact projects to support local-level reconciliation and social cohesion.
Meanwhile, the Committee for the Restitution of Illegally Occupied Public or
Private Sites continued to make progress, with 740 properties vacated out of the
1,315 claims received as at 1 December.

III. Security situation
32. The security situation in Côte d’Ivoire remained generally stable but fragile.
While a decrease in security incidents at the border areas with Liberia was reported,
owing mainly to an enhanced presence of national security and defence forces, the
incidence of violent crimes such as armed robbery, banditry and home invasions in
Abidjan and other parts of the country remained high.
33. The electoral period concluded without any major incidents despite
unsubstantiated rumours of imminent attacks from Ghana and Liberia. There we re,
however, violent demonstrations following the publication of the candidate list, as
detailed in paragraphs 13 and 14 above. National police used force to disperse
19 unauthorized demonstrations.
34. Following attacks carried out on 10 and 28 June on the towns of Misseni and
Fakola, respectively, in Mali near the border with Côte d’Ivoire, responsibility for
which was claimed by Ansar Dine on 30 June, the Government announced a series
of security measures, including the redeployment of Ivorian security forces along
the border with Mali. UNOCI also deployed elements from its quick -reaction force
in June and July to support military operations along the border. The events raised
serious concern about the potential for terrorist groups to increase attacks i n the
border areas or, eventually, to operate from Côte d’Ivoire in order to launch attacks
in Mali.

15-21262

7/21

S/2015/940

35. On the night of 8 and 9 November, intercommunal clashes between members
of the Dida and Malinké communities in the village of Neko, near Gagnoa, resulted
in the death of one person, injuries to four and the displacement of civilians. The
local police responded, with the support of UNOCI military and police personnel, to
bring the situation under control.
36. On 18 and 19 November, clashes broke out between two student unions, the
Federation of Students and Scholars of Côte d’Ivoire and the General Associat ion of
Pupils and Students of Côte d’Ivoire, at University Félix Houphouët -Boigny in
Abidjan, resulting in the death of one student and injuries to several others. The
police intervened to restore order.
37. In the early morning of 2 December, 15 armed assailants launched successive
attacks against two FRCI camps in Olodio, near Tabou in the south -western part of
the country, exchanging gunfire with FRCI for an hour before fleeing towards the
villages of Podoué and Fété. Eleven FRCI soldiers were killed and 10 injured, 4 of
them seriously, during the attack. Four assailants were also killed and one was
injured. FRCI arrested eight assailants and reinforced its presence in the area. The
UNOCI force also enhanced its air and ground patrols in the area, in coor dination
with FRCI.
Protection of civilians
38. UNOCI revised its strategy for the protection of civilians to reflect high -risk
areas in the context of the electoral process, and issued guidance to strengthen
civilian protection. Training was conducted for 162 United Nations personnel and
120 members of the national security forces.

IV. Regional issues
39. Côte d’Ivoire’s borders with Guinea and Liberia remained closed as a
precautionary measure against Ebola virus disease. As a consequence, joint security
operations involving the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) and UNOCI,
as well as the Liberian and Ivorian security agencies, remained suspended, although
information-sharing between the two missions continued. In September,
representatives of UNOCI and UNMIL met in Liberia to discuss ways to support the
efforts of both Governments and civil society groups to strengthen and monitor
border security. Liberian security personnel, with support from UNMIL, enhanced
border security in the context of the Ivorian election.
40. Pursuant to resolution 2226 (2015), UNOCI continued to coordinate with the
Group of Experts on Côte d’Ivoire, including with respect to the monitoring of the
arms embargo, and also worked closely with Ivorian customs authorit ies.

V. Reform of security institutions
41. Progress was made in the implementation of the national security sector
reform strategy. At the national level, the secretariat of the National Security
Council reinforced its capacity. Gains were also made with respect to
decentralization and the local ownership of service delivery in the area of security.
In June, a pilot phase of the establishment of security committees charged with

8/21

15-21262

S/2015/940

implementing security sector reform at the local level was launched with s upport
from the Peacebuilding Fund. Committees were established in Bélier, Comoé,
Gbêkê, Hambol, Haut-Sassandra, Indénié-Duablin, Marahoué, Mé, Nawa, N’zi and
Poro following a national security assessment and mapping of security sector reform
stakeholders conducted by the National Security Council to support the
establishment of security committees and boost implementation at the local level.
42. The police and the gendarmerie continued to lack adequate equipment,
including non-lethal weapons and transportation, to effectively perform law
enforcement tasks and carry out other core responsibilities throughout the country.
UNOCI provided technical expertise and mentoring to improve the operational
capacity of law enforcement and security institutions, with particular emphasis on
crowd control and management. During the reporting period, 12 dialogue platforms,
with the participation of key security stakeholders, were held throughout the country
to improve confidence within and among the security forces and within the
population. In addition, UNOCI quick-impact projects supported the rehabilitation
of community infrastructure and agricultural initiatives in the villages of Drayo Dagnoa, Gnagbodougnoa, Siéguékou and Zahibohio, in the Goh region in western
Côte d’Ivoire, and the rehabilitation and installation of sanitary facilities for
military cadets.
43. In the lead-up to the presidential election, UNOCI provided training and
technical support to members of the Security and Defence Commission of the
National Assembly as well as civil society and security forces, with respect to
parliamentary oversight, the promotion of political dialogue, confidence -building
and national reconciliation. On 24 August, a joint mechanism was established by
FRCI and UNOCI to enhance information-sharing and prompt action regarding
human rights violations allegedly committed by FRCI soldiers.
44. During the 5 November meeting of the National Security Council, President
Ouattara announced his intention to put draft legislation on mil itary planning and
internal security before the National Assembly during its current session. This is an
important step forward with regard to strengthening parliamentary oversight of the
security sector and could potentially accelerate defence reform.
45. The United Nations Mine Action Service continued to enhance the capacity of
the national authorities to manage explosive threats, through the construction of
nine weapon and ammunition storage sites, the provision of training to 65 members
of the police, gendarmerie and FRCI on the management of unexploded improvised
explosive devices, and the sensitization of 7,167 persons, including 2,596 women,
regarding weapons collection.

VI. Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
46. On 30 June, the mandate of the National Authority for Disarmament,
Demobilization and Reintegration came to an end. To address residual tasks and
coordinate reinsertion activities, the Government established a dedicated cell in
charge of coordination, monitoring and reinsertion, which will operate under the
auspices of the National Security Council. On 4 November, the Government
announced that 69,506 former combatants, including 6,105 women, had been
disarmed and demobilized, 58,920 of whom had received reinsertion support , while
10,586 others were enrolled in or waiting to participate in reinsertion activities,

15-21262

9/21

S/2015/940

which would continue until June 2016. Between 1 May and 1 December, national
authorities conducted 88 disarmament and demobilization operations with support
from UNOCI and the Mine Action Service, during which 5,501 former combatants,
including 421 women, handed over 1,462 weapons, 382,400 rounds of small arms
ammunition and 2,015 items of explosive ordnance.
47. UNOCI assisted the Government’s reinsertion efforts b y providing vocational
training for up to 20,000 former combatants, providing 6,000 reinsertion kits,
processing the payment of transitional safety allowances to 31,212 former combatants
and coordinating HIV/AIDS and gender training for former combatants t aking part
in resocialization activities. The mission also implemented 88 community -based
reinsertion and social cohesion projects focused on the enhancement of community
safety and social cohesion.
48. Nine incidents were reported involving former combatants, who claimed that
their allowances had not been paid or complained about a lack of reintegration
opportunities, notably in Abidjan, Bouaké and Daloa. The Government, with
support from UNOCI, worked to address their concerns, including by increasing
sensitization on reinsertion opportunities.
49. The National Commission on Small Arms and Light Weapons, with the
support of UNOCI and the Mine Action Service, conducted 11 operations.

VII. Human rights
50. On 25 September, the National Human Rights Commission of Côte d’Ivoire,
which had been established in December 2012, presented to President Ouattara its
first annual report, covering 2014. Among the human rights concerns underscored in
the report were the eviction of civilians from some urban sites, j uvenile criminality
and restrictions on freedom of assembly. In October, the Commission, with support
from UNOCI, adopted its five-year strategic plan for the period 2016-2020, which is
aimed at ensuring the implementation of its protection and promotion f unctions. In
addition, the Commission continued to inaugurate regional human rights
commissions, which now number 15 in the country, and established a platform for
monitoring the human rights situation during the electoral period.
51. On 7 July, a new law on the repression of terrorism was promulgated, which
defines acts of terrorism in a very broad manner that could undermine the protection
of fundamental civil and political rights, as political or protest activities could fall
under the definition of terrorism according to the law. It also places restrictions on
certain due process guarantees for those suspected of having committed terrorism related offences.
52. Between 1 May and 1 December, UNOCI documented 101 human rights
violations, including the killing of 8 persons; the torture and other violations of the
physical integrity of 38 persons, including 1 woman, 2 boys and 1 girl; the illegal
and/or arbitrary arrest and detention of 199 persons, including 12 women, 3 boys
and 2 girls; 6 violations of the right to property; and 26 violations of freedom of
expression and freedom of peaceful assembly. Only three alleged perpetrators were
convicted in connection with those human rights violations. The persistently low
prosecution rate is due mainly to the fact that victims fear that the trial will not be
fair and transparent and could prompt reprisals.

10/21

15-21262

S/2015/940

Child protection
53. Between 1 May and 1 December, UNOCI documented the arbitrary and illegal
detention of 5 minors, including 2 girls, as well as a number of incidents of rape and
other forms of sexual violence against 81 girls, one of which allegedly had been
perpetrated by a State agent. UNOCI also recorded two cases of forced marriage and
one case of attempted forced marriage against three girls.
54. The Ivorian authorities, in coordination with the United Nations and other
partners, continued to work on finalizing a national judicial policy for the protection
of children and youth, which would encourage reinsertion rather than imprisonment
for juvenile offenders.
Sexual violence
55. During the reporting period, UNOCI documented 98 incidents of rape and
other forms of sexual abuse. Of the 130 perpetrators involved in those cases, 2 were
State agents, at least 61 were arrested and at least 20 were sentenced to prison terms
ranging from 1 to 10 years. Most victims continued to resort to traditional
mechanisms to settle cases, resulting in a low rate of prosecution of alleged
perpetrators. On 27 August, a tribunal in Séguéla sentenced eight women to t hree
years of imprisonment for female genital mutilation.
56. On 2 June, FRCI adopted a sexual violence code of conduct for Ivorian
soldiers, which was disseminated to all FRCI units. On 18 and 19 June in Agboville,
47 FRCI commanders signed a commitment to take action against sexual violence
and to ensure that all units under their command would respect international human
rights and humanitarian law.
57. The Ministry of Solidarity, Family, Women and Children, with support from
the United Nations, initiated a mapping of activities throughout the country to
prevent sexual and gender-based violence, in order to strengthen the implementation
of the national strategy for preventing such violence. Among the recommendations
of the Ministry resulting from the exercise was the inclusion of the national strategy
in the draft national development plan for the period 2016 -2020.
Gender
58. To enhance the participation of women in the electoral process, UNOCI
organized six workshops and awareness-raising sessions throughout the country,
bringing together stakeholders, including leaders of political parties, electoral
officials, women and youth representatives. In Daloa and Bouaké, women political
leaders and civil society representatives were encouraged to actively e ngage in the
electoral process, including by participating in the upcoming local and legislative
elections. On 18 May, President Ouattara launched a handbook on women’s skills,
which is intended to support the Government’s outreach and its efforts to appoi nt
and promote women to decision-making and leadership positions in the private and
public sectors.
HIV/AIDS
59. Between 1 May and 1 December, UNOCI conducted 74 HIV awareness and
prevention workshops, sensitizing 1,748 of its civilian and uniformed pe rsonnel,
including 41 women. An additional 6,947 individuals, including community members

15-21262

11/21

S/2015/940

and 5,201 former combatants, 323 of whom were women, were sensitized regarding
HIV/AIDS and sexual violence. Voluntary and confidential counselling and testing
services were provided to 1,070 local community members, including 1,024
ex-combatants, 82 of whom were women. The mission also trained 45 members of
civil society groups, including 12 women, on HIV/AIDS and gender -based violence.

VIII. Media
60. The early warning mechanism established by the Ivorian media regulatory
bodies with support from UNOCI was reactivated for the electoral period. UNOCI
also intensified efforts to strengthen professionalism, media ethics and responsible
journalism with a view to promoting an environment conducive to peaceful
elections. During the electoral period, ONUCI FM radio broadcast special programmes,
including a 15-minute-long “election news” segment, as well as sensitization spots
regarding the importance of a peaceful process. The mission also advocated a more
open media space. However, some media outlets continued to disseminate
incendiary information and hate speech.

IX. Economic situation
61. In 2015, economic growth in Côte d’Ivoire reached 8.4 per cent, benefitin g
from a reformed business environment, the implementation of a public investment
programme and an increase in household incomes. Inflation stood at 1.5 per cent. As
a result, the 2015 living standards measurement survey revealed that poverty had
decreased from 48.9 per cent in 2008 to 46.3 per cent in 2015.
62. On 1 October, the Government approved the national budget for the 2015/16
fiscal year, in the amount of $11.8 billion, reflecting an increase of some 12 per cent
compared with the previous fiscal year. The country’s fiscal position was improved
through increased revenue collection, tight expenditure controls and a decline in
energy subsidies. Côte d’Ivoire continued to enjoy a surplus trade balance, with
cocoa exports offsetting falling oil exports. There was a deep service deficit owing
to the importation of services for mining and infrastructure projects.
63. On 29 September, the International Monetary Fund concluded the final review
of its Côte d’Ivoire economic and financial programme supported by the extended
credit facility, and noted strong macroeconomic performance in the first half of
2015. Consequently, the country qualified to receive $700 million in credits and
loans from the International Development Association and $1.77 billion in loan s
from the International Finance Corporation, as well as $800 million in guarantees
from the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency for the period 2016 -2019.
64. The Government closed 158 illegal mining sites in May and June, and also
worked with local communities to mitigate the resumption of illegal mining in their
areas of responsibility.

X. Humanitarian situation
65. As at 1 December, 37,951 Ivorian refugees registered by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) remained in Liberia,

12/21

15-21262

S/2015/940

while 21,315 were in other countries in West Africa, including Ghana, Guinea, Mali
and Togo. On 5 November, the Ivorian authorities informed UNHCR that facilitated
voluntary repatriations from Guinea and Liberia, suspended at the request of the
Ivorian Government since July 2014 as a preventive measure in the light of the
Ebola outbreak, could resume. Practical modalities for the resumption of repatriation
operations will be developed in consultation with the three Governments. More than
11,000 refugees living in Liberia have expressed interest in returning to Côte d’Ivoire .
66. In June, the Government, supported by the United Nations, completed a
national disaster risk reduction capacity assessment to enhance national capacity,
including preparedness for emergency response. Additionally, a five -year
interministerial action plan for disaster risk reduction was d eveloped from June to
November, in compliance with the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction
2015-2030.

XI. Deployment of the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire
Military component
67. As at 1 December, the strength of the UNOCI military component stood at
5,412 personnel out of an authorized strength of 5,437, including fiv e infantry
battalions, two task force units, a quick-reaction unit and enablers, as well as
88 staff officers and 185 military observers. Women represent 1.7 per ce nt of the
force. More than half of the UNOCI force is deployed in the west.
68. To be more proactive and responsive during the electoral period, the force had
been reconfigured to a more mobile posture, with enhanced situational awareness
and early warning capabilities. The force conducted several operations in support of
FRCI, including at the borders with Liberia and Mali, as well as coordinated
operations with FRCI in high-risk areas in the lead-up to the election. The 650-strong
quick-reaction force was fully operational for multiple, simultaneous deployments,
with one motorized company deployed to Korhogo from 22 to 30 October as part of
the force’s security reinforcement during the presidential election, to support
Government security forces, while the remaining battalion was based in
Yamoussoukro to rapidly respond to incidents across Côte d’Ivoire as needed.
69. In my report of 15 May 2014 (S/2014/342), I indicated that it would be
possible to reduce the UNOCI force to a residual strength after the 2015 presidential
election, which has concluded peacefully. It is therefore recommended that the
drawdown of the military component proceed, leaving a residual presence of 4,000
military personnel by 31 March 2016. The force would continue to prioritize its
deployment in the west and other high-risk areas.
70. Further to my letter dated 17 November to the President of the Security Council
(S/2015/894) and the response dated 19 November (S/2015/895), a 250-strong
detachment of the UNOCI quick-reaction force was temporarily deployed to Bangui,
Central African Republic, on 26 November for a temporary period not to exceed
eight weeks, for the purpose of temporarily reinforcing the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
during the referendum and the first round of elections, as well as during the visit of
Pope Francis. During the temporary deployment to Bangui, the unit will not be

15-21262

13/21

S/2015/940

available to reinforce UNMIL in keeping with Security Council resolution 2162 (2014 )
and subsequent resolutions.
Police component
71. As at 1 December, the strength of the UNOCI police component stood at 1,480
personnel, out of an authorized strength of 1,500, including 486 police officers and
six formed police units, deployed in Abidjan (two units), Bouaké, Daloa, Guiglo and
Korhogo. Women represented 12 per cent of the component.
72. Throughout the reporting period, UNOCI police supported and advised
national law enforcement and security forces, including through the conduct of joint
patrols and mentoring, training and co-location activities at police stations and
gendarmerie brigades throughout the country. In preparation for the electoral period,
UNOCI police supported national law enforcement and security forces by conducting
two seminars on crowd control for local authorities, training 5,372 police officers
and gendarmes on their electoral security role, and conducting joint exercises with
police and gendarmerie intervention units to enhance their operational capacities.
Conduct and discipline
73. UNOCI continued to strengthen its efforts to eliminate sexual exploitation and
abuse by its uniformed and civilian personnel, with a particular emphasis on the
prevention of misconduct through a proactive communications strategy and a
network for the prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse. My Special
Representative emphasized my zero-tolerance policy to all UNOCI military and
police contingent commanders. Pursuant to my report on special measures for
protection from sexual exploitation and abuse ( A/69/779) and related guidance, the
mission established a task force that provides my Special Representative with
advice on the prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse. In addition, and also in
accordance with my report, UNOCI adopted a new community-based complaint
reception mechanism aimed at engaging local leaders and non -governmental
organizations in proactive efforts to facilitate the reporting of complaints in a
confidential manner. Between 1 May and 1 December, nine category 1 allegations
were reported and referred for investigation, including three allegations of sexual
exploitation and abuse.

XII. Safety and security of United Nations personnel
74. Between 1 May and 1 December, 17 criminal incidents were perpetrated against
United Nations personnel, including 3 armed robberies, 1 assault and 4 residential
break-ins. During the electoral period, mitigating measures were put in place in
accordance with the security risk assessment to protect United Nations personnel.

XIII. Future of the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire
75. In March 2016, at the conclusion of the drawdown proposed in paragraph 69
above, UNOCI will reach a residual strength of 4,000 troops, down from its peak
authorized strength of 9,792 troops in 2011, at the height of the post-electoral crisis
of 2010. In accordance with resolution 2226 (2015), I intend to deploy a strategic

14/21

15-21262

S/2015/940

team that will consult with the Government of Côte d’Ivoire, the United Nations
country team and other partners concerned, including E COWAS, in order to develop
by 31 March 2016 options and timelines for the eventual withdrawal of UNOCI.
Such recommendations would be informed by a thorough assessment of the political
and security situation in the country, including the capacity of the Iv orian security
forces to maintain stability independently of UNOCI.

XIV. Observations
76. With the successful holding of the presidential election on 25 October, Côte
d’Ivoire has reached a critical milestone in consolidating its long -term peace and
stability. I wish to commend the people of Côte d’Ivoire, who have demonstrated,
through their peaceful participation in the democratic process, that they have indeed
turned the page on a tumultuous chapter in Ivorian history, ushering in a new era.
77. The important role played by the Independent Electoral Commission in
planning and conducting an election that national and international observers found
to be generally free, fair and transparent is to be commended. I also wish to express
appreciation for the support provided by international and regional partners, as well
as Ivorian civil society, whose efforts helped to enhance perceptions regarding the
legitimacy of the electoral process. Maintaining a peaceful environment during an
electoral process, which is inherently contentious, is a shared responsibility. I therefore
welcome the commitment of all Ivorian political stakeholders to maintaining
dialogue throughout the electoral period, thereby facilitating the peaceful
environment that prevailed. I commend the efforts by the Government to
accommodate the demands of the political opposition, as wel l as the conciliatory
gestures made under the leadership of President Ouattara, including with respect to
dialogue, equitable access to the State media, campaign financing and security for
the presidential candidates. Furthermore, while it is regrettable t hat some of those
who contested the presidency engaged in discourse counterproductive to an
inclusive electoral process, including calls for a boycott, all political actors are to be
commended for pursuing grievances and disputes through appropriate channe ls.
78. Notwithstanding the successful conclusion of the election, protests and other
calls questioning the eligibility of President Ouattara to contest the election on
nationality grounds demonstrate that Côte d’Ivoire must still tackle the divisive
issue of who is an Ivorian, which has contributed to conflict in the recent past.
While most of the media conducted themselves professionally throughout the
electoral period, I am concerned about inflammatory rhetoric published in some
newspapers. So long as references to “ivoirité” remain part of the public discourse,
national reconciliation and social cohesion cannot be fully achieved.
79. In the five years since the post-electoral crisis of 2010, Côte d’Ivoire has made
considerable progress. Going forward, sustaining those gains will require continued
efforts to reconcile a still-divided population, heal the wounds of the past and create
a social environment in which all Ivorian citizens, irrespective of their ethnic or
other backgrounds, are equal participants in the political, social and economic life of
the country. Such a transformation would require that the people and the Government
redouble their efforts with respect to national reconciliation. I commend President
Ouattara’s commitment to compensate victims of the crisis; however, reparations
cannot be the sole response to heal the wounds of the past. I urge the Government to

15-21262

15/21

S/2015/940

publicly release the report of the Dialogue, Truth and Reconciliation Commission
and engage in broad and inclusive consultations on how to take forward all its
recommendations in a comprehensive reconciliation process.
80. Reconciliation is also undermined by perceptions of impunity for human rights
violations. In that regard, I remain concerned about slow progress in bringing to
justice alleged perpetrators of crimes committed during the post -electoral crisis,
irrespective of their political affiliation. While I welcome efforts made by the
Special Investigation and Examination Cell, I would also call for more determined
action to take forward investigations and prosecutions of all those alleged to have
committed crimes.
81. I welcome the issuance of the first report of the National Human Rights
Commission, and encourage the Government to take measures to empower the
Commission to serve as an independent body in full conformity with the Paris
Principles. I am, however, deeply troubled by continued reports of sexual violence,
often against young girls. While I welcome the creation of a special structure for the
protection of children within the judicial system as a positive development, I am
concerned that prosecution rates for perpetrators of human rights violations and
abuses remain far too low, underscoring the need for the Government to take steps
to strengthen the independence and effectiveness of the judicial system. I also call
on the Ivorian authorities to pursue efforts to overcome perceptions of victor’s
justice by addressing disparities of treatment by the judiciary that are not conducive
to genuine reconciliation.
82. The stability prevailing in Côte d’Ivoire is welcome, although continued high
rates of criminality remain a source of concern and instability. I commend the
important role played by the Ivorian security forces during the electoral period. An
effective security sector must be able to secure a sensitive political event while also
protecting the population and their right to free political expression. Overall, the
Ivorian security institutions demonstrated their ability to effectively strike that
balance, despite operational shortcomings and shortfalls in equipment facing the
police and the gendarmerie. It is highly regrettable that violent demonstrations
following the publication of the candidate list led to the loss of life and the
destruction of property. I encourage additional efforts aimed at enhancing the
non-lethal response capabilities of those responsible for maintaining public order
and protecting the population.
83. Encouraging progress has been made in reforming the security sector,
including with respect to measures taken to eventually reduce the gender gap in the
national security and defence forces. National ownership of this priority issue is
essential, as are measures to rebuild confidence between the security forces and the
population. Going forward, it could be important to maintain this momentum by
promulgating the legislation adopted by the National Assembly on 9 March, to
enhance the professionalism and accountability of the defence forces.
84. I congratulate the Government on concluding its disa rmament, demobilization
and reintegration programme as scheduled, by 30 June. However, the durable
reintegration of tens of thousands of former combatants will require close attention
to mitigate the risk of remobilization and a potential return to violenc e. The
Government and its partners must also be prepared to provide assistance to the
residual caseload of former combatants currently in the reinsertion process, and to

16/21

15-21262

S/2015/940

consider options for accommodating the expectations of Ivorian former combatants
living outside the country who may return to Côte d’Ivoire.
85. I take note that an investigation has resulted in the arrest of one individual
alleged to have been involved in the killing of seven United Nations peacekeepers in
Para, near the border with Liberia, in June 2012. I would also expect further
progress with respect to the identification of the perpetrators of the 2012 attack on a
camp for internally displaced persons in western Côte d’Ivoire. I wish to remind the
Governments concerned of their responsibility to bring to justice all of those who
are responsible for these international crimes.
86. During the reporting period, there was a welcome decline in the number of
reported incidents in the western part of the country and along the border with
Liberia, which demonstrates the positive impact of a reinforced security presence
and intensified patrols, as well as the ability of the national authorities to mitigate
threats and protect the population. However, as the deadly attack of 2 December
against the FRCI camps in Olodio demonstrates, it is crucial to remain vigilant with
respect to addressing latent pockets of insecurity in the area.
87. Now that the Ebola outbreak has been brought under control in the countries
most affected, it is important that Côte d’Ivoire reopen its borders, allowing for the
voluntary return of Ivorian citizens living as refugees in Guinea and Liberia. I also
urge the Governments of Côte d’Ivoire and Liberia to resume their bilateral security
cooperation, including within the framework of the quadripartite mechanism
involving UNOCI and UNMIL.
88. Impressive progress has been made on the macroeconomic front under
President Ouattara’s leadership. Côte d’Ivoire now has the second -largest economy
in West Africa. However, it is important to ensure that growth is inclusive,
benefiting the entire population, including those traditionally marginalized, such as
women and youth. Moreover, to ensure the durable consolidation of peace and
stability, many other important tasks identified above, including political dialogue,
improvements in the security sector, the reintegration of former combatants and
efforts to address impunity, particularly for human rights violations, must be equally
prioritized. I would also emphasize that intercommuna l conflicts, particularly in the
west, continue to undermine social cohesion and stability, and I call on national
authorities to maintain a focus on that area, especially to address land -related
conflicts, which are a root cause of localized violence.
89. The successful conduct of the presidential election is the most powerful
demonstration of the progress made in Côte d’Ivoire, and I am optimistic about the
country’s future. However, there remain challenges that must be addressed in order
to consolidate the hard-won gains. I anticipate the need for UNOCI to continue to
accompany Côte d’Ivoire through the legislative elections and the solidification of
the political dispensation in the country thereafter, including through the good
offices and political support of my Special Representative. Moreover, there are also
emerging threats confronting Côte d’Ivoire, including violent extremism and
terrorism, which have taken root in too many countries in the region, devastating
civilians, destroying communities and undermining State authority. It is therefore
important that the United Nations continue to support the region, including through
the continuation of the quick-reaction force established within UNOCI pursuant to
resolution 2162 (2014) as a tool for peace and stability in the region, to ensure that
the gains made by peacekeeping over more than a decade in West Africa are

15-21262

17/21

S/2015/940

sustained. Nevertheless, the successful conclusion of the electoral period and the
prevailing stability would warrant the reduction of UNOCI to a residual strength, as
detailed in paragraph 69 above. In my special report in March 2016, I will provide
recommendations on the future of UNOCI, pursuant to resolution 2226 (2015).
90. I wish to express my deep appreciation to my Special Representati ve for Côte
d’Ivoire, Aïchatou Mindaoudou, for her excellent leadership throughout the electoral
period, and my gratitude for the role of the United Nations family in contributing to
the successful conduct of the presidential election. I also extend my sin cere
gratitude to all United Nations civilian and uniformed personnel, troop - and policecontributing countries, the African Union, ECOWAS, the Mano River Union and
other regional organizations, multilateral and bilateral partners, United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes, non-governmental organizations and all other
partners for their invaluable support for peace in Côte d’Ivoire.

18/21

15-21262

S/2015/940

Annex I
United Nations Mission in Côte d’Ivoire: military and
police strength
(As at 1 December 2015)
Military component
Military
observers

Staff
officers

Troops

Total

Formed
police units

Police
officers

Argentina

–

–

–

–

–

3

Bangladesh

13

9

1 411

1 433

180

–

Benin

9

6

369

384

–

60

Bolivia (Plurinational State of)

3

–

–

3

–

–

Brazil

4

3

–

7

–

–

Burkina Faso

–

–

–

–

–

67

Burundi

–

–

–

–

–

45

Cameroon

1

–

–

1

–

14

Central African Republic

–

–

–

–

–

1

Chad

6

–

–

6

–

23

China

6

–

–

6

–

–

Democratic Republic of the Congo

–

–

–

–

–

13

Djibouti

–

–

–

–

–

14

Ecuador

2

–

–

2

–

–

Egypt

–

1

174

175

–

–

El Salvador

3

–

–

3

–

–

Ethiopia

2

–

–

2

–

–

France

–

6

–

6

–

7

Gambia

3

–

–

3

–

–

Ghana

6

7

97

110

–

5

Guatemala

5

–

–

5

–

–

Guinea

2

–

–

2

–

–

India

9

–

–

9

–

–

Ireland

2

–

–

2

–

–

Jordan

8

10

–

18

485

13

Kazakhstan

2

–

–

2

–

–

Madagascar

–

–

–

–

–

2

Malawi

3

2

–

5

–

–

Mali

–

1

–

1

–

–

Mauritania

–

–

–

–

140

–

Morocco

–

4

714

718

–

–

Namibia

2

–

–

2

–

–

Nepal

3

1

–

4

–

–

Country

15-21262

Police component

19/21

S/2015/940

Military component

20/21

Police component

Country

Military
observers

Staff
officers

Troops

Total

Formed
police units

Police
officers

Niger

4

3

865

872

–

43

Nigeria

4

–

–

4

–

3

Pakistan

12

14

277

303

189

–

Paraguay

1

1

–

2

–

–

Peru

1

–

–

1

–

–

Philippines

3

–

–

3

–

–

Poland

2

–

–

2

–

–

Republic of Korea

2

–

–

2

–

–

Republic of Moldova

3

–

–

3

–

–

Romania

6

–

–

6

–

–

Russian Federation

10

–

–

10

–

–

Rwanda

–

–

–

–

–

41

Senegal

4

6

733

743

–

17

Serbia

3

–

–

3

–

–

Spain

–

1

–

1

–

–

Switzerland

–

–

–

–

–

1

Togo

7

6

465

478

–

30

Tunisia

7

3

–

10

–

40

Turkey

–

–

–

–

–

5

Uganda

4

2

–

6

–

–

Ukraine

–

3

31

34

–

10

United Republic of Tanzania

2

2

–

4

–

–

Uruguay

2

–

–

2

–

–

Vanuatu

–

–

–

–

–

14

Yemen

9

–

–

9

–

15

Zambia

2

–

–

2

–

–

Zimbabwe

3

–

–

3

–

–

Total

14

91

3 136

5 412

994

486

15-21262

S/2015/940

Annex II

15-21262

21/21
