11.

ordination with the Secretary-General of the Organization
of African Unity in the implementation and monitoring of
the United Nations Programme of Action for African
Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990;
6. Reaffirms that ali Member States and regional and
international organizations, in particular those of the
United Nations system, should continue to give their maximum support to Africa's Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990 adopted by the Assembly of
Heads of State and Government of the Organization of
African Unity at its twenty-first ordinary session, held at
Addis Ababa from 18 to 20 July 1985;26
7. Requests ali Member States, United Nations bodies,
the specialized agencies and ali other competent organizations within the United Nations system, as well as nongovernmental organizations, to actívate and increase their
programme of assistance to African subregional organizations for drought and desertification control such as the
Permanent Inter-State Committee on Drought Control in
the Sahel and the Intergovernmental Authority for
Drought and Development;
8. Reiterates its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his efforts, on behalf of the international community,
to organize and mobilize special programmes of economic
assistance for those African States facing grave economic
difficulties, the front-line States and other independent
States of southern Africa to help them to withstand the effects of the acts of aggression and destabilization committed by the apartheid régime of South Africa;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to keep
the Organization of African Unity informed periodically
of the response of the international community to those
special programmes of economic assistance and to continue to co-ordinate them with ali similar programmes initiated by that organization;
IO. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Development Programme, the Office of the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator, the World Food Programme, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations, the World Health Organization, the
United Nations Children's Fund, the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the United Nations
Institute for Training and Research for the assistance so
far rendered to African States in dealing with the emergency situation as well as with the critica) economic problems that exist on the African continent;
11. Reiterates the determination of the United Nations, in co-operation with the Organization of African
Unity, to intensify its efforts to eliminate colonialism, racial discrimination and apartheid in southern Africa;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary measures to strengthen co-operation at the political,
economic, cultural and administrative levels between the
United Nations and the Organization of African Unity in
accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly, particularly with regard to the provision of assistance to the victims of colonialism and apartheid in
southern Africa;
13. Urges the international community to contribute
generously to the Assistance Fund for the Struggle against
Colonialism and Apartheid established by the Organization of African Unity and to the Action for Resisting Invasion, Colonialism and Apartheid Fund, established by the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries;2 7

26 A/40/666, annex I, declaration AHG/Ded. l (XXI), annex.
27 A/42/422, annex III.

21

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

14. Calls upon the competent organs ofthe United Nations and the specialized agencies to continue to ensure the
just and equitable representation of Africa at ali levels at
their respective headquarters and in their regional and
field operations;
15. Urges ali Member States and regional and international organizations, in particular those of the United Nations system, as well as non-governmental organizations
to provide material and economic assistance to African
countries of asylum to enable them to withstand the heavy
burden imposed on their limited resources and weak infrastructures by the presence in their countries of large numbers of refugees;
16. Calls upan the United Nations organs -in particular the Security Council, the Economic and Social
Council, the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, the Special Committee against Apartheid and the
United Nations Council for Namibia -to continue to associate closely the Organization of African Unity with ali
their activities concerning Africa;
17. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Secretary-General ofthe Organization of African
Unity, to reactivate the machinery for co-operation between the United Nations and the Organization of African
Unity through the convening of periodic meetings between the representatives of the two organizations;
18. Also requests the Secretary-General to invite the
representative of the Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity to participate in the meetings ofthe
Steering Committee created to follow up the implementation of the United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that adequate facilities continue to be made available to facilitate
continued liaison and consultations on matters of common interest as well as for the provision of technical assistance to the General Secretariat of the Organization of
African Unity, as required;
20. Further requests the Secretary-General to report to
the General Assembly at its forty-third session on the implementation of the present resolution and on the development of co-operation between the Organization of African
Unity and the organizations concerned within the United
Nations system.
51 st plenary meeting
28 October 1987

42/10.

Observer status for the African Development
Bank in the General Assembly

The General Assembly,
Noting the desire of the African Development Bank for
co-operation betweeen the United Nations and the Bank,

1. Decides to invite the African Development Bank to
participate in the sessions and the work of the General Assembly in the capacity of observer;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary action to implement the present resolution.
51 st plenary meeting
28 October 1987
