S/PV.8732

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8732nd meeting

Tuesday, 25 February 2020, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Belgium)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Wu Haitao
Ms. Morrison González
Mr. Auväärt
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Licharz
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Abarry
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. Gonsalves
Ms. Tayob
Mr. Ladeb
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Hunter
Mr. Dang

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 27 January 2020 from the Panel of Experts on Yemen addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/2020/70)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-05035 (E)
*2005035*

S/PV.8732

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 27 January 2020 from the Panel of
Experts on Yemen addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2020/70)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Yemen to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2020/146, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2020/70, which contains the text of
a letter dated 27 January 2020 from the Panel of
Experts on Yemen addressed to the President of the
Security Council.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Belgium, Dominican Republic, Estonia, France,
Germany, Indonesia, Niger, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, South Africa, Tunisia, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Viet Nam
Against:
None
Abstaining:
China, Russian Federation
The President (spoke in French): The draft
resolution received 13 votes in favour, none against and
2 abstentions. The draft resolution has been adopted as
resolution 2511 (2020).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
2/6

25/02/2020

Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I am very pleased
that resolution 2511 (2020) has been adopted, but
disappointed that two members of the Council wanted
to abstain when we have previously been able to
have united agreement on Yemen. I am particularly
disappointed that this took place after extensive
negotiations this morning, reopening the blue draft.
However, I want to pay tribute to you, Sir, and to our
French colleagues for their help in getting us to a text
that we had thought everybody could accept.
I would like to put down a marker about a wider
issue. There is a risk that the veto will become simply
a negotiating tactic. If countries are going to engage
in negotiations with us in detail and then not support
the text, that in my mind is sharp practice. There is a
risk to the Security Council in that sort of behaviour.
There is a risk that it will not be able to step up to
its responsibilities. I say again, for the record, texts
cannot always be consensual unless we are prepared
to accept the blandest, lowest-common-denominator
text possible. If we do that then, again, we are not
discharging our responsibility.
Other colleagues around the table have
compromised. We compromise on our ideal text when
we engage in these negotiations in the interests of
having the Security Council speak authoritatively. I
therefore hope that this does not herald a shift in the
way the Security Council does business. Again, for the
record, even though two members did not vote for the
resolution, it has been adopted and it therefore comes
into force.
Mr. Hunter (United States of America): I too want
to thank the United Kingdom for preparing this timely
and important resolution in such an inclusive and a
transparent manner.
The United States voted today in favour of resolution
2511 (2020), extending the Council’s sanctions against
the Houthis and others responsible for the conflict in
Yemen. These sanctions support the United Nations
efforts to find a political solution to this war and they
help us hold spoilers accountable. All Member States
have an obligation to implement these sanctions in full.
However, the reality is that one Member State
continues to blatantly defy its obligations under the
sanctions regime. In its recent annual report, the
Panel of Experts on Yemen concludes that the Houthis
continue to receive weapons that have “characteristics
similar to arms manufactured in the Islamic Republic
20-05035

25/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East

of Iran” (S/2020/70, p.2). That is not a new finding.
For years, Yemen Panel, together with the United
Nations team monitoring resolution 2231 (2015), has
reported on the Houthis launching ballistic missiles
and unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) that are Iranian
designed. The Houthis did not just conjure up the ability
to launch advanced weapons hundreds of kilometres
into Saudi Arabia and other neighbouring States. Iran
has smuggled these weapons to the Houthis and in the
process violated the Council’s targeted arms embargo
on the Houthis as well as the Council’s arms embargo
on Iran.
Moreover, Iran’s violations continue. Last week,
we discussed how the United States Navy interdicted
an additional 358 Iranian-made missiles and other
weapons components likely on their way to the Houthis.
The shipment was yet another example of attempts to
smuggle a new Iranian surface-to-air missile system
that the Panel of Experts reports on for the first time in
its final report in January. Not only does Iran continue
supplying weapons to the Houthis, but it is also
increasing the sophistication of these weapons. Iranian
weapons are deeply undermining the process for peace
and we must call them out for it.
This resolution also requests that the Panel of
Experts prepare information on commercially available
goods that find their way into ballistic missiles, UAVs,
explosive boats and other weapons. We hope that
this information will help Member States and private
companies exercise greater vigilance over the transfer of
these items to Yemen. We also call on all Member States
to help the Panel in collecting this information, which
could ultimately bolster sanctions implementation.
The resolution also rightly calls out abuses by
the Houthis against the Yemeni people. The Panel of
Experts has reported on a horrific campaign of sexual
violence against women orchestrated by the Houthis.
Today’s resolution condemns these crimes. The
Council also once again demands that the Houthis stop
interfering with the work of the United Nations and
other aid organizations, whose work is vital to keeping
Yemenis alive. By mixing their own interests with
humanitarian aid, the Houthis are putting the lives of
the Yemeni people at risk.
For the first time, the Council has mentioned the
FSO SAFER oil tanker in one of its resolution. This
addition reflects the international community’s deep
concern about the chance that the tanker could rupture,

S/PV. 8732

causing an environmental catastrophe in the Red Sea.
The United Nations has teams ready to inspect the
tanker and help repair it, but the Houthis have not
provided access to the vessel. Today’s resolution makes
clear that the United Nations needs access and needs
it now.
Finally, the United States stands by the United
Nations efforts to provide assistance in Yemen. We
encourage relevant entities to utilize the sanctions
exemption in the provision as appropriate to ensure
that their important work is carried out in compliance
with the Security Council’s efforts to promote an end
to this conflict. The United States therefore once again
reiterates our strong support for the efforts of Special
Envoy Martin Griffiths in helping to reach a political
solution to the conflict. We call on the parties to
exercise restraint and work to de-escalate tensions so
we can maintain prospects for peace.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I welcome the adoption of resolution 2511 (2020).
After a final push, we were able to reach a compromise
solution that allowed the Council to remain united. It
is therefore all the more regrettable that this unity was
abandoned at the time of the vote, since the resolution
just adopted contains no problematic elements and we
discussed it exhaustively in order to iron out areas of
disagreement. I wish to recall that Security Council
resolutions are produced by compromise. Each one of
us must make concessions and no one can expect to get
everything they hope for when entering a negotiation.
This is the very foundation of the practice of diplomacy
and multilateralism, which we support and defend.
What kind of signal are we sending today to the people
of Yemen, when they should be at the very heart of the
Council’s actions?
I thank the United Kingdom for its efforts to ensure
the resolution was adopted. I call on all members of the
Council to negotiate in good faith and to act responsibly
in order to maintain the unity of the Council, which
should be the rule and not the exception.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): The delegation of
Indonesia is pleased that the Security Council has
adopted resolution 2511 (2020). We would like to
thank the penholder, the United Kingdom, for its work
and diligence, and other Council members for their
flexibility and commitment.
Through the adoption of this resolution, we
recognize the situation on the ground and the need to do

20-050353/6

S/PV.8732

The situation in the Middle East

25/02/2020

something about it. We have shown our dissatisfaction
at the mistrust between the parties, which is blocking
progress towards dialogue. By this resolution we have
demonstrated that the escalation of violence in Yemen,
the indefensible deaths of and hunger experienced
by children and women, the complicated challenges
confronting humanitarian operations and the sexual
violence in armed conflict are all unacceptable.

opportunity to participate on equal footing in efforts to
achieve a balanced text. Tell us, why does division have
to be sown in the Security Council at a time when the
situation in Yemen requires our concerted and collective
efforts to help facilitate a settlement that would help to
bring the conflict back onto a political track and ensure
a comprehensive ceasefire and the delivery of aid to the
Yemeni people?

The Council is charged with responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. This
means that the challenge of saving lives falls to us, as
does the monitoring of any violation of international
humanitarian law during conflict. My delegation is
fully convinced that under the current circumstances,
sanctions are necessary to support the peace process
and the efforts of the Special Envoy to advance the
political process. For Indonesia, the sanctions are
justified by the violence and the military operations.
Furthermore, those who hinder the peace process
or violate international humanitarian law must be
held accountable.

It is fortunate that, at least today, such division
was able to be averted. If a crisis were to occur, that
would only complicate the efforts of both the Special
Envoy, Mr. Martin Griffiths, and the United Nations.
The Russian Federation fully support Mr. Griffiths’
efforts. We once again emphasize the need for the
international community to work jointly to achieve
overall stabilization in the region. We should not focus
on isolation and pressure or seek to pin the blame on
parties but, rather, meaningfully seek ways to resolve
the crisis.

Finally, Indonesia is pleased that members of the
Council, in the best interests of the people of Yemen,
were able to adopt the resolution. This was never for
any of us; this was for the people of Yemen. They need
to know that the Security Council is on their side and
to trust that we are trying our best to put an end to
their suffering.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation was not in a position
to support resolution 2511 (2020), penned by the United
Kingdom, which renews the sanctions regime and the
mandate of the Panel of Experts on Yemen, because not
all of our concerns were taken into account. During the
consultations, we clearly and explicitly presented our
principled and duly justified position. We made clear
our objections to a host of the provisions contained in
the British draft. A number of our remarks were taken
into account only today, when yet another contrived
crisis was already in the works in the Security Council.
This all could have been agreed to calmly, without
any drama or haste.
I emphasize also that there was no unity in sight
during the discussions of the report of the Panel of
Experts of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014). However, any
contentious issues were incorporated into the initial
draft resolution, and many delegations did not have an
4/6

The goal of the resolution was to extend the sanctions
regime and the mandate of the Panel of Experts, not
compete with the putting forward of approaches that go
beyond the objectives of the resolution. Unfortunately,
what has transpired today yet again attests to the
non-constructive working methods of the sponsors
of the draft, which should have been geared towards
the adoption of a consensus-based document and have
allowed all voices, not just ours, to have been heard.
Again, we would stress that the penholdership
mechanism requires meaningful reconsideration. The
fact that our concerns are not heeded during work on
the draft resolutions of the Security Council and are
often simply disregarded ultimately puts the sponsors,
and not us, in a difficult position. If there is a wish
not to listen to us during consultations or to hear our
concerns, that will impact our position on the vote, as
was the case today.
We certainly do not wish to achieve everything just
for our own sake, contrary to what some may claim.
What we want is for the resolution to have a balanced
text. However, the take-it-or- leave-it approach does not
allow for compromise; we cannot agree to that kind of
an approach.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The situation on the ground in Yemen has worsened
recently. The achievement of a political settlement faces
challenges and the humanitarian situation remains
dire. Given that extending the Security Council’s
20-05035

25/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East

targeted sanctions against Yemen and the renewal of
the mandate of the Panel of Experts on Yemen are
conducive to advancing the political settlement of the
Yemeni issue, China is, in principle, in favour of this
and hopes that the Council will adopt a related technical
rollover resolution.
Over the past few days, China took an active part
of the consultations on resolution 2511 (2020) and
proposed many amendments to the text, in the hopes
that it would reflect the broadest possible consensus
of the members of the Council, avoid introducing
complex factors and maintain the unity of the Council.
Regrettably, the resolution just voted on failed to
address China’s concerns. As such, China could not but
abstain in the voting, for the following reasons.
First, the draft requires the Panel of Experts to
study and develop a list of commercially available
components used to assemble unmanned aerial vehicles.
This mandate is excessively broad. The latest text has
placed some limitations on the mandate but clearly
states that this request should not have an adverse
impact on legitimate commercial activities. The Panel
of Experts should strictly abide by its mandate and
ensure that its work is aimed at effectively limiting
the activities of the sanctioned entities and individuals
and avoiding any abuses. All parties should, first of
all, engage in adequate discussions at the level of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2140 (2014).
Secondly, the draft made some unnecessary
amendments to the designation criteria. China agrees
with the concern expressed over the recruitment of
child soldiers and conflict-related sexual violence in
the light of the actual situation. But the recruitment
of child soldiers and sexual violence in conflict are
already included in the existing resolution under the
criteria of violations of international human rights
law and international humanitarian law. The separate
listing of these two acts has not been fully discussed by
the Sanctions Committee and is not in accordance with
the practice of the Committee. China has concerns as to
the rushed amendment of the designation criteria at the
level of the Security Council.
Lastly, China would like to emphasize that most of
the members of the Council, including China, would
like to see an early launch of the political process in
Yemen. We would not like to see Yemen entangled in the
complex situation of the region. The sanctions measures

S/PV. 8732

and the work of the Sanctions Committee should serve
the overall objective of reaching a political settlement,
be more constructive and prevent any further escalation
of tensions.
Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): If we had
been forced to make the decision this morning, we
would certainly have missed the opportunity to show
the people of Yemen that we stood by them at this
difficult time in their history. The abstention of two
important members of the Council could have — and
should have — been avoided because the ideal would
have been to have a consensus adoption of resolution
2511 (2020).
I would like to commend the wisdom of the
President in opening with consultations, the result of
which is reflected in the vote on resolution 2511 (2020).
Whatever one may say, the postponement of a few short
hours has enabled the Council to transcend itself and
focus on what matters most — moving forward together
to find solutions for those in need. The violence and
serious human rights violations in Yemen must stop
without further delay.
May Belgium, a country of consensus, continue
to use its presidency to inspire our work and our
reflections in future.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Belgium.
Belgium welcomes the adoption of resolution
2511 (2020), renewing the sanctions regime in Yemen.
This sanctions regime is one of the tools available
to the Security Council to contribute to a solution to
the conflict in Yemen and to restore peace, security
and stability. We welcome the efforts of the United
Kingdom and all the actors around this table to find a
compromise on the text. It is important that the Council
be united on the issue of Yemen. We had also hoped for
a unanimous adoption.
Although Belgium agrees with the reference to
the recruitment or use of children in armed conflict
as a punishable violation of international law, we
had hoped that the Council would be able to agree
on an independent standard for sanctioning such
recruitment or use. The Council has already done
so in other United Nations sanctions regimes, in
addition to the general designation criteria set forth
under international humanitarian and human rights

20-050355/6

S/PV.8732

The situation in the Middle East

law. Indeed, the Secretary-General’s annual report
on children and armed conflict (S/2019/509) contains
much verified information on why the situation of
children in the Yemeni conflict is dire and requires our
continued attention.
Finally, with regard to the humanitarian exemption
on a case-by-case basis in paragraph 3 of the resolution,
we support the objective of protecting humanitarian
assistance from the unintended consequences of
sanctions regimes. However, Belgium favours a general
humanitarian exemption tailored to each sanctions
regime. The wording of the text in resolution 2511
(2020) therefore does not constitute for us a precedent
for other sanctions regimes.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like at the outset to thank the United Kingdom, the
penholder on Yemen, and all members of the Security
Council for the efforts they made to adopt resolution
2511 (2020), which we welcome, on the renewal of the
sanctions regime in Yemen.
The conclusions reached by the Panel of Experts
on Yemen reflect the important role that the Council
should play in putting an end to the humanitarian
tragedy and the disastrous effects of the war that the
armed Houthi militias have been waging against the
people of Yemen, with Iran’s support, for more than
five years now. Indeed, the violations committed by
the Houthi militias are not new. They contravene the
endeavours and efforts made by the Security Council
and the United Nations to achieve peace. The militias
even try to flout their obligations under the Stockholm
Agreement. They continue to welcome Iranian experts
and receive military support and weapons from Iran,
which constitute flagrant violations by those militias
and the Iranian regime of Security Council resolutions
on the arms embargo. We would have liked resolution

6/6

25/02/2020

2511 (2020) to include clear wording and a firm position
of the Council on these violations.
The Yemeni Government condemns all Houthi
practices and violations that contravene international
humanitarian law and international human rights law,
including aggressions against Yemeni women such
as arrest, arbitrary detention, looting, sexual assault,
beating, torture and rape in secret Houthi prisons. The
Yemeni Government calls for those responsible for the
violations to be held accountable and for the militias
to be condemned and held to account for abducting
children from schools and sending them to the front
lines of combat without the consent or even knowledge
of their parents. We thank the Panel of Experts for the
facts cited in its report (see S/2020/70) on this issue.
We have often — indeed, time and again — drawn
the Council’s attention to the practices of the armed
Houthi militias against humanitarian organizations
and personnel, including theft, looting, the blocking of
humanitarian assistance, giving benefits to people who
are not entitled to them and the exploitation of human
suffering in order to achieve political gains. Addressing
those practices requires a firm response so as to put
an end to them and punish the perpetrators. We stress
the importance of the Panel of Experts being able to
reach areas under the control of the Houthi militias so
as to carry out its mandate, as provided for under the
resolution just adopted.
The Yemeni Government holds the Houthi militias
responsible for the serious threat of an oil spill from the
FSO SAFER oil tanker. We emphasize that access must
be given to the United Nations technical team to assess
the situation of the oil tanker as quickly as possible.
We call on the Council to take a firm stance in order
to prevent an environmental catastrophe from taking
place. I reaffirm once again the importance of letting
the United Nations technical team reach the oil tanker
before a potential environmental disaster occurs.
The meeting rose at 3.40 p.m.

20-05035
