I

General All1embl7 -

2. Suggests to the Governments of India, Pakistan
and the Union of South Africa that they should seek
a solution of the question by direct negotiations;
3. Suggests, moreover, that the parties concerned
should designate a Government, agency or person to
facilitate contacts between them and assist them in
settling the dispute ;
4. Decides that, if within the next six months following the date of the present resolution the parties
have not reached agreement on the suggestions made
in the foregoing paragraphs, the Secretary-General
shall designate a person for the purposes specified
above;

5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assemblv at its ·next regular session on the
results obtained. ·

497th plenary meeting,
4 November 1954.

817 (IX). AdmiHion of new Member• to the
United Nations
The General Assembly,
Noting the growing general feeling in favour of the
universality of the United Nations, membership in
which is open to all peace-loving States which accept
the obligations contained in the Charter and, in the
judgment of the Organization, are able and willing to
carry out those obligations,
Having considered the n;port' of the Committee of
Good Offices established by General Assembly resolution 718 (VIII) of 23 October 1953,
Noting that, notwithstanding the best endeavours of
the Committee of Good Offices, the problem remains
unresolved,
Further noting the views recorded by the Committee of Good Offices that possibilities of reaching an
understanding remain and that "different views may
eventually be harmonized within the spirit of the
Charter",
1. Expresses appreciation of the work and efforts of
the Committee of Good Offices ;

2. Decides to send back to the Security Council the
pending applications for membership, together with a
full record of the discussions at the present session
of the General Assembly, for further consideration and
positive recommendations ;
3. Suggests that the Security Council consider the
desirability of invoking the provisions of paragraph 2
of Article 28 of the Charter to help resolve the
problem;
4. Requests the Committee of Good Offices to continue its efforts;
5. Requests the Security Council and the Committee
of Good Offices to report to the General Assembly
during the present session if possible and in any event
during the tenth session.

501st plenary meeting,
23 November 1954.

Ninth Se11ion

818 (IX). Report of the Director of the United
Nations Relief and Work• Agency for
Palestine Refugee• in the Near East
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 194 (III) of 11 December 1948, 302 (IV) of 8 December 1949, 393 (V)
of 2 December 1950, 513 (VI) of 26 Janvary 1952,
614 (VII) of 6 November 1952 and 720 (VIII) of
27 November 1953,
Noting the annual report5 of the Director of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency (or Palestine Refugees in the Near East, and the special report•
of the Director and the Advisory Commission of
UNRWA,
Noting that repatriation or compensation of the
refugees, as pPOvided for in paragraph 11 of resolution 194 (III), has not been effected and that the
situation of the refugees continues to be a matter of
grave concern,
1. Decides, without prejudice to the rights of the
refugees to repatriation or compensation, to extend
the mandate of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East for
five years ending 30 June 1960;
2. Requests the Agency to continue its consultation
with the United Nations Conciliation Commission for
Palestine in the best interest of their respective tasks,
with particular reference to paragraph 11 of resolution 194 (III) ;
3. Requests the Governments of the area to continue
to co-operate with the Director of the Agency in seeking and carrying out projects capable of supporting
substantial numbers of refugees;
4. Decides to maintain the rehabilitation fund of
$200 million, subject to reductions for expenditures
already made ;
5. Approves a reliefi budget of $25,100,000 and a
rehabilitation budget of $36,200,000 for the fiscal year
ending 30 June 1955;
6. Requests the Director, in consultation with the
Advisory Commission of UNRWA, to study and report upon the problem of assistance which should be
given to other claimants for relief, particularly children
and needy inhabitants of villages along the demarcation lines;
7. Authorizes the Director to prepare, in consultation with the Advisory Commission, the budgets for
relief and rehabilitation in advance of each fiscal year,
which budgets he shall transmit to the Negotiating
Committee for Extra-Budgetary Funds, without prejudice to review each year by the General Assembly ;
8. Requests the Negotiating Committee for ExtraBudgetary Funds, after receipt of surh budgets from
the Director of UNRWA, to seek such funds as may
be required by the Agency;
9. Appeals to the Governments of Member and nonmember States to make voluntary contributions to the
extent necessary to carry through to fulfilment the
Agency's programmes, and thanks the numerous religious, charitable and humanitarian organizations for
5

' Ibid., agenda item 21, document A/2720.

6

Ibid., Supplement No. 17.
Ibid., Annexes, agenda item 18, document A/2717/Add.1.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Ad Hoe Political Committee

their valuable and continuing work in assisting the
refugees;
10. Requests the Director to continue to submit the
reports referred to in paragraph 21 of resolution
302 (IV), as well as the annual budgets.
503rd plenary meeting,
4 December 1954.

819 (IX). Strengthening of peace through the
removal of barriers to free exchange of information and ideas
The General Assembly,
Considering that the cessation of hostilities in Korea
and the restoration of peace in Inda-China have contributed to a relaxation of tension in international
relations and that more favourable conditions have
consequently been created for the settlement of unsolved international problems and the strengthening of
peace,
Recalling its resolutions 110 (II) of 3 November
1947 and 381 (V) of 17 November 1950 concerning
the condemnation of propaganda against peace, and
resolution 290 (IV) of 1 December 1949 on the essentials of peace which calls upon Member States to act
in accordance with the principles set forth in the
Charter of the United Nations and, in particular, calls
upon every nation to remove the barriers which deny
to peoples the free exchange of information and ideas
essential to international understanding and peace,
Recognizing that the maintenance of such barriers
constitutes a major obstacle to the strengthening of
peace and genuine international co-operation and fosters the continuation of false and hostile propaganda
against other States and peoples,
l. Calls upon all Governments to give effect faithfully to resolution 290 (IV) of 1 December 1949 on
essentials of peace as a guide to the achievement of
a genuine peace with freedom and justice;
2. Reaffirms resolutions 381 (V) of 17 November
1950 and 110 (II) of 3 November 1947 condemning
all forms of propaganda, in whatsoever country conducted, which is either designed or likely to provoke
or encourage any threat to the peace, breach of the
peace or act of aggression.
510th plenary meeting,
11 December 1954.
820 (IX). The question of race conflict in South
Africa resulting from the policies of apartheid of the Government of the Union of
South Africa
The General Assembly,
Having considered the second report 7 of the United
Nations Commission on the Racial Situation in the
Union of South Africa,
Recalling General Assembly resolution 103 (I),
which states that it is in the higher interests of humanity to put an end to racial persecution ancl discrimination, and resolutions 395 (V) and 511 (VT),
Further recalling that the Commission, in its first
report,8 had concluded that the racial polices of the
7

8

Ibid., Supplement No. 16.
Ibid., Eighth Session, Supplm1c11t No. /,S.

9

Government of the Union of South Africa are contrary
to the United Nations Charter and to the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights,
Noting with apprehension the adoption of new laws
and regulations by the Union Government which in
the Commission's view are also incompatible with the
obligations of that Government under the Charter,
Noting further the profound conviction of the Commission that the policy of apartheid constitutes a grave
threat to the peaceful relations between ethnic groups
in the world,
l. Commends the United Nations Commission on
the Racial Situation in the Union of South Africa for
its constructive work;
2. N ates with regret that the Government of the
Union of Squth Africa again refused to co-operate
with the Commission;
3. N ates the Commission's suggestions for facilitating a peaceful settlement of the problem contained in
paragraphs 368 to 384 of its report ;9
4. ./nvites the Government of the Union of South
Africa to reconsider its position in th,- light of the
high principles expressed in the United Nations Charter, taking into account the pledge of all Member States
to respect human rights and fundamental freedoms
without distinction as to race ; and further taking into
account the valuable t"Xpt>1·ience of other multi-racial
societies as set forth in chapter Vll of the Commission's report;
5. Further im·ites the Government of the Union of
South Africa to take into consideration the suggestions
of the Commission for a peaceful settlement of the
racial problem, namely, those detailed in paragraphs
370 to 383 of its report ;
6. Requests the Commission to keep under review
the problem of race conflict in the Union of South
Africa;
7. Requests the Commission to report to the General Assembly at its tenth session;
8. Decides that, should any of the members of the
Commission be unable to continue their t11('111hership,
the member or members concerned shall, if the General Assembly is not sitting, be replaced by a person
or persons appointed by the present Presidrnt of the
General Assembly in consultation with the SecrttaryGeneral.
511 th ple1wry meeting,
14 December 1954.

821 (IX). Complaint of violation of the freedom
of navigation in the area of the China
seas
The General AssemMy,
Recalling its resolution 899 (IX) of 14 December
1954 which, inter alia, requested the International Law
Commis,ion to complete its final rtport concerning the
regime of the high seas, the regime of territorial
waters and rL"latcd problems in time for the General
,~ssembly to consider these matters at its eleventh scss10n,
" I/iid., Ninth Srssiorz, S11f'l'lc111rrzl No. 16.
