A /70/PV.4

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventieth session

4th plenary meeting

Friday, 25 September 2015, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lykketoft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Denmark)

The meeting was called to order at 10.50 a.m.
High-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly
Agenda items 15 and 116
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
United Nations Summit for the adoption of the
post-2015 development agenda
Draft resolution (A/70/L.1)
Co-Chair Rasmussen: This high-level plenary
meeting of the General Assembly is being held in
accordance with resolutions 65/1 of 22 September 2010,
68/6 of 9 October 2013 and 69/244 of 29 December
2014, and decision 69/557 of 5 March 2015.
It is my honour, together with His Excellency
Mr. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, President of the Republic
of Uganda, to welcome all members to this historic
Summit for the adoption of the new 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (A/70/L.1). The presence of
so many leaders is a testament to the importance and
transformative potential of this new Agenda.
When world leaders came together here in New
York, 15 years ago, they came with one pivotal mission:
to reduce poverty in the world. But equally important,
they came with concrete and ambitious goals and they
came with a fixed deadline.

Today, 15 years later, we are gathered again, here
in New York, to assess what has happened over the past
15 years. The short answer is a lot. One billion people
have been lifted out of extreme poverty. More girls
than ever before go to school. More than 90 per cent of
the global population now has access to an improved
source of drinking water. The mortality rate of children
under five has declined by more than half. These are
not just numbers. Behind each of these figures we know
that the lives of millions of children have improved, so
we have indeed come a long way.
The Millennium Development Goals showed us
that setting targets works and that working together is
the right way forward, but the work is not done yet.
Today we begin a new journey, a journey that builds on
the success of the Millennium Development Goals, but
also goes much further. We are gathered today to adopt
the Sustainable Development Goals. Today each of us
commits our nation not only to new far-sighted visions,
but also to new concrete and realistic goals and a fixed
deadline.
Our leadership and direction are needed. We must
make sure that we live up to our firm and collective
commitments, and I can assure the Assembly that
Denmark is ready to do its part. We will continue our
efforts to eradicate poverty, create decent jobs and
increase sustainable economic growth. Since 1978,
we have, as a country, met the international target
of providing 0.7 per cent of gross national income to
official development assistance to create better lives for
all. I strongly urge many more countries to meet this
goal.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-29149 (E)

*1529149*

A/70/PV.4

Denmark strongly supports global public-private
partnerships that catalyse investments in developing
countries and middle-income countries. We strive
to combat diseases, such as cancer and diabetes, by
promoting healthy lifestyles, strengthening our healthcare systems and fostering scientific research. We
promote the technology in energy, climate change and
the environment that makes a green transition possible,
including beyond our own country.
Denmark will work for the full and equal
participation of women, for their empowerment and for
their human rights and, indeed, for the human rights of
all. I assure members that Denmark will continue these
efforts with determination. I encourage everyone to do
the same so that 15 years from now, when world leaders
will once again meet in New York, we will have met the
goals we adopt here today.
The new Agenda has laid out our vision of where
we believe the world should be in 2030. History will
judge us and hold us accountable for achieving the
results that we owe our children and their children.
The Danish presidency of the seventieth session of the
General Assembly will take the lead in implementing
the Development Agenda to make sure we turn our
words into action. With these words, I wish all members
a successful Summit.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Yoweri
Kaguta Museveni, President of the Republic of Uganda
and Co-Chair of the high-level plenary meeting.
Co-Chair Museveni: I am pleased to co-chair this
important Summit as we gather as a community of
nations to adopt a new development agenda that will
guide our development efforts for the next 15 years.
This historic Summit is the culmination of months
of tireless efforts and an unprecedented commitment
by Member States and stakeholders to formulate a
universal, inclusive and transformative development
agenda.
I would like to pay tribute to His Excellency
Mr. Sam Kutesa, our Minister for Foreign Affairs, for
his leadership and accomplishments as President of
the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session, and I
thank the General Assembly for supporting Uganda in
fulfilling that responsibility. I also wish to congratulate
and convey my appreciation to the President of the
General Assembly at its seventieth session, His
Excellency Mr. Mogens Lykketoft, and the Secretary-

2/26

25/09/2015

General, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for their
leadership.
Today heralds the dawn of a new era in our collective
efforts aimed at eradicating poverty, improving the
livelihoods of people everywhere, transforming
economies and protecting our planet. Together we
are sending a powerful message to people in every
village, every city and every nation worldwide that
we are committed to taking bold steps to change their
lives for the better. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development that we will adopt today is ambitious in its
scope and breadth. In the 17 Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs), the social, economic and environmental
dimensions of sustainable development are addressed in
an integrated way. The Agenda also carries forward the
unfinished business of the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs).
Over the past 15 years, we have attained significant
achievements through implementing the MDGs.
Globally, more than 1 billion people have been lifted
from extreme poverty, and improvements have been
made in access to education, health, water and sanitation,
advancing gender equality and the empowerment of
women. In Uganda, we have been able to reduce the
percentage of people living in extreme poverty from
56 per cent in the year 2000 to 19 per cent today. We have
also attained universal primary education, promoted
gender equality and the empowerment of women, and
continued to reduce child and maternal mortality.
From our experience it has been clear that
to sustainably achieve the MDGs we must have
socioeconomic transformation. It is therefore refreshing
that in the successor framework, the SDGs, key
drivers of economic growth, including infrastructure
development — especially energy, transport and
information and communication technology — have
been duly identified and prioritized. Also included are
industrialization and value addition, human resource
development through education and health, improving
market access, and greater participation by the private
sector.
While the SDGs will be universally applicable, we
also recognize national circumstances, different levels
of development and the needs of countries in special
situations, particularly the least developed countries,
landlocked developing countries, small island
developing States and African countries.

15-29149

25/09/2015

Taking urgent action to combat climate change and
its severe impacts is also prioritized in the new Agenda.
We should redouble our efforts to reach an ambitious,
legally binding agreement on climate change in Paris
in November, one that promotes the achievement of
sustainable development while protecting the planet.
The new Agenda also rightly underscores the
important linkages between development, peace and
security, and human rights. We have to intensify efforts
to combat transnational crime, terrorism and the rise of
radicalization and violent extremism around the world.
We should reject pseudo-ideologies that manipulate
identity by promoting the sectarianism of religion and
communities and eclipse the legitimate interests of the
people afforded by investment and trade. Where identity
issues are legitimate they should be expeditiously
handled.
We should all be proud of what has been
accomplished so far as we usher in the new
Development Agenda. However, the critical next step
will be to ensure its successful implementation on the
ground. In this context, integrating the SDGs in our
respective national and regional development plans,
mobilizing adequate financial resources, technology
development and transfer and capacity-building will be
critical. We have to ensure full implementation of the
comprehensive framework for financing sustainable
development, which we adopted in the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda, to support achievement of the Goals
and targets of the 2030 Agenda.
One of the major challenges many developing
countries continue to face is gaining access to affordable
long-term financing for critical infrastructure projects.
In this regard, it will be vital to promptly establish and
operationalize the proposed new forum to bridge the
infrastructure gap and complement existing initiatives
and multilateral mechanisms to facilitate access to
long-term financing at concessional and affordable
rates.
The efforts of developing countries to improve
domestic resource mobilization, boost economic growth
and address major challenges such as unemployment
should be supported by development partners and
international financial institutions and regional
development banks. We also need to do more to promote
micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises, support
entrepreneurship, especially for women and youth, and

A/70/PV.4

enhance the contribution of the private sector and other
stakeholders in sustainable development.
Through privatization, the least developed
countries themselves can also contribute to their own
infrastructure development. In order to build effective,
inclusive and accountable institutions at all levels, we
have to ensure that the voices of the developing countries
and regions are heard and that they are treated as equal
partners in multilateral decision-making.
At the international level, we need urgent reform
of the United Nations — particularly of the Security
Council — and of our multilateral institutions in order
to reflect the current geopolitical realities. We need a
renewed global partnership for development in which
all the commitments made — including on overseas
development, aid, trade and investments — are
fulfilled. While the draft 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (A/70/L.1) represents the collective
aspirations of all peoples, its success will hinge on
its ability to reduce inequalities and improve the lives
of the most vulnerable among us, including women,
children, the elderly and persons with disabilities.
After months of intensive negotiations and
steadfast commitment, we have before us an Agenda
that represents our best opportunity to transform our
world. We have heard the voices of people spanning
the globe — from eager children asking for access
to equality education to young women seeking better
maternal health care; from rural villages whose
farmlands have been ravaged by droughts to the coastal
fishermen on small islands States who fear that their
entire existence will soon be subsumed by the rising
sea levels. We continue to witness the influx of refugees
and migrants into Europe from Africa and the Middle
East, which is partially caused by conflict and a lack
of economic opportunities. Those voices may speak
many languages and dialects, but, in the end, their
message is the same: Please help us to live happier,
more prosperous lives, while also protecting the planet
for our children and grandchildren.
After the adoption of the Agenda, it is incumbent
upon us all to take the development aspirations laid
out in that document and turn them into reality on the
ground for the benefit of our people, our communities
and our nations. The Agenda will create global
prosperity — different from the past arrangements,
which provided prosperity for some but at the cost

15-291493/26

A/70/PV.4

of parasitism, misery and underdevelopment for the
others.
Co-Chair Rasmussen: I now give the floor to the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: We have reached a
defining moment in human history. The people of
the world have asked us to shine a light on a future
of promise and opportunity. Member States have
responded with the draft 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (A/70/L.1). The Agenda is a promise
by leaders to all people everywhere. It is a universal,
integrated and transformative vision for a better world.
It is an Agenda for people, to end poverty in all its
forms, an Agenda for the planet and our common home,
an Agenda for shared prosperity, peace and partnership.
It conveys the urgency of climate action. It is rooted in
gender equality and respect for the rights of all. Above
all, it pledges to leave no one behind.
The true test of commitment to the 2030 Agenda will
be its implementation. We need action from everyone,
everywhere. The 17 Sustainable Development Goals
are our guide. They represent a to-do list for people and
the planet, and a blueprint for success. To achieve those
new global Goals, we will need high-level political
commitment on the part of Member States. We will
need a renewed global partnership.
The Millennium Development Goals showed
what is possible when we work together. The Addis
Ababa Action Agenda has given us a solid financing
framework. Let us build on those foundations. To
do better, we must do differently. The 2030 Agenda
compels us to look beyond national boundaries and
short-term interests and act in solidarity for the longterm. We can no longer afford to think and work in
silos. Institutions will have to become fit for a grand,
new purpose. The United Nations system is strongly
committed to supporting Member States in that great
new endeavour.
(spoke in French)
We must enter this new era on the right foot. I ask all
Governments to adopt a solid and universal agreement
on climate in Paris this December. I am happy to
note that several countries are already incorporating
the draft 2030 Agenda in their national development
strategies, but nobody can succeed alone. All interested
parties must be mobilized, as was the case when the
Agenda was drawn up. We must work together with
parliaments and local authorities, with cities as well as
4/26

25/09/2015

with rural areas. We must enlist businesses and their
leaders. We must bring civil society into our policies,
giving it the possibility of demanding accountability
from us. We must listen to scientists and academics.
We will also need to implicate ourselves in the data
revolution. Above all, we must get down to work — and
do so immediately.
(spoke in English)
Seventy years ago, the United Nations rose from
the ashes of war. Governments agreed on a visionary
Charter dedicated to “We the peoples”. The draft Agenda
that the Assembly is adopting today advances the goals
of the Charter of the United Nations. It embodies the
aspirations of people everywhere for lives of peace,
security and dignity on a healthy planet. Let us today
pledge to light the path to this transformative vision. I
count on your strong leadership and commitment.
Co-Chair Museveni: I thank the SecretaryGeneral for his statement.
In accordance with resolution 69/244 of
29 December 2014, I now give the floor to Mr. Salil
Shetty, Secretary-General of Amnesty International.
Mr. Shetty (Amnesty International): I speak today
both on behalf of the global Amnesty International
movement, with over 7 million members and
activists, and also for many independent civil-society
organizations around the world.
At the outset, I congratulate Member States for
the remarkable progress that the world has seen in
the form of the Millennium Development Goals,
but increasingly we hear the question: Is our world
spinning out of its axis? It can feel that way. Hundreds
of millions of people still live in poverty. Too many
people, particularly women and girls, routinely
suffer violence and multiple human rights violations.
Inequality, injustice, environmental destruction and
corruption are a toxic combination. There is declining
trust in Governments and big corporations, and young
people across the world are rising in protest.
Horrific conflicts are destroying communities and
countries and have fuelled the largest global refugee
crisis since the Second World War. The appalling story
of the three-year-old Syrian child, Alan Kurdi, whose
dead body on the beach shocked the world, sums it up.
We cannot hide the reality of the world we live in. And
then there is the world we want — a world represented
by the Sustainable Development Goals to be adopted.

15-29149

25/09/2015

We cannot blame people for being sceptical, when
they see yet another summit declaration. There is a
huge gap between the world we live in and the world we
want, but the new Goals represent people’s aspirations
and rights, and they must and can be realized. I therefore
suggest four practical tests to apply when realizing the
Goals, so as to prove the sceptics wrong:
First, there is the ownership test. The key to
success is for poor and marginalized people to be
primary decision-makers at every stage. The Goals
must be adequately resourced and integrated into
national and local plans and budgets, and they must be
implemented in line with each State’s existing human
rights obligations.
Secondly, there is the accountability test. People
should know exactly what Governments have promised
and what they have delivered — that is, the right to
information. Moreover, if Governments do not deliver,
people should be able to hold them to account through
independent mechanisms. It is not enough anymore for
Governments to say that they are legitimate because
they were elected or they have a mandate. They have
to be accountable to the people directly on an ongoing
basis.
Thirdly, there is the non-discrimination test. Let
us be clear. Leaving no one behind means challenging
power structures and enforcing the rule of law.
Inequality is largely the direct result of discrimination
and exclusion based on gender, race, descent, religion or
other status. Inequality is the consequence of the failure
to protect the rights of the marginalized, indigenous
peoples, minorities, migrants, persons with disabilities,
children and the elderly.
Fourthly, there is the coherence test. We are
all aware of countries that performed well on the
Millennium Development Goals but where outrage
against persistent human rights violations has led to
revolutions. Why is that the case? It is because people’s
lives are not divided into development, environment,
peace and human rights; only bureaucracies are.
Coherence and consistency are therefore essential.
We cannot claim to support sustainable development
while we remain reluctant to reduce the consumption
of the rich or to transfer technology. We cannot preach
about human rights while using mass surveillance.
We cannot lecture about peace while being among the
world’s largest manufacturers of arms. We cannot allow
our corporations to use financial and tax loopholes

A/70/PV.4

while railing against corruption. We cannot adopt
the Sustainable Development Goals in the name of
development and, at the same time, attack and arrest
peaceful protesters and dissenters. We cannot launch
those Goals and, in parallel, deny refugees access to a
safe and legal route and a life with dignity.
The Sustainable Development Goals present a
compass for decent jobs, for justice and for humankind.
As members of civil society, we will stand with
the poor and the marginalized at all costs, and we
will hold Governments and businesses to account.
Yesterday — what was last night in New York but
yesterday in many parts of the world — thousands of
people marched for the Goals to light the way. They
called for authentic leadership from Member States,
leadership with integrity and leadership from the heart.
I know that Member States can live up to their hopes.
Co-Chair Rasmussen: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/70/L.1, entitled
“Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”.
In that connection, I would like to draw the
Assembly’s attention to the note by the Secretariat,
contained in document A/70/391, regarding the
programme budgetary implications of the draft
resolution. Accordingly, the Fifth Committee will
examine, during the main part of the session, the
revised estimate arising from the draft resolution.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
draft resolution A/70/L.1?
Draft resolution A/70/L.1 was adopted (resolution
70/1).
Co-Chair Museveni: I would like to remind
members that, in accordance with resolution 69/244 of
29 December 2014, the list of speakers was created on
the basis that statements would have a time limit of up
to five minutes per statement. In light of that given time
frame, I would like to appeal to speakers to deliver their
statements at a reasonable pace, so that interpretation
into the six official United Nations languages may be
provided properly.
To order to assist speakers in managing their time, a
light system has been installed at the speaker’s rostrum.
May I appeal to all speakers for their cooperation in
observing the time limits in making their statements,
so that all those inscribed on the list of speakers for a
given meeting can be heard at that meeting.

15-291495/26

A/70/PV.4

Finally, in order to avoid disruption for the next
speaker, I would like to seek the cooperation of
representatives to remain in their seats after a statement
has been delivered.
Co-Chair Rasmussen: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the President of the Republic of
Croatia.
Ms. Kolinda Grabar-Kitarović, President of the
Republic of Croatia, was escorted to the rostrum.
President Grabar-Kitarović: I feel privileged and
proud to be the first among many speakers who will
in the next three days mark the end of our momentous
preparatory work on the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs) . Our meeting — one of the biggest ever
in the history of international relations — also serves
as a historic beginning and a milestone for humankind.
The 17 Sustainable Development Goals before
us are not just another chapter in the United Nations
bureaucratic procedures. They are not just another tome
in the endless archives of the Organization. They form
the blueprint for our development for the next 15 years
and beyond, a framework and tool for our better future.
“Transforming our world” — that is not a phrase: it is
an obligation for all of us.
I want to express Croatia’s gratitude to SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon and to the President of the
General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session, Sam
Kutesa, for their exceptional efforts and leadership in
the preparatory process of the post-2015 development
agenda. The credit for that remarkable achievement
goes to many hard-working people, but, above all, it
goes to the 193 States Members of the United Nations,
which worked together tirelessly and reached an
unprecedented consensus on the goals and means for
our future development.
Some will say that we have too many goals and
targets. I must disagree with that. Resolution 70/1
states that this is a “far-reaching and people-centred”
Agenda. That means that no one is left behind, not the
landlocked countries, nor the small island States, so
perilously exposed to the hazards of climate change,
nor those who are in dire need of water, nor those who
have too much of it, nor the oceans, nor the mountain
tops; nor those around the Equator, nor those on the
snow-covered parts of the planet. We are all in this
together: developed and underdeveloped, providers and
recipients of assistance, North and South, and big and
small.
6/26

25/09/2015

The year 2015 is the turning point in our development
history, when we recognize the achievements of the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and we chart
the road for the next 15 years. We have to be honest
about the MDGs — a lot has been done, but not all
of the Goals have yet been reached. That should be
a warning and a lesson for the future. Our ambitions
must be matched by our determination and ability to
deliver. Today more than ever, we need real leadership.
We need people who do not just talk about change
but make change happen. It is not enough to just keep
speaking out against visible and obvious problems. It
is not enough to be aware or to create a vision of the
future. Instead, what we need is people who will get
the job done.
We are constantly exposed to well-known
problems — problems with which we have been coping
for many years and with limited success — and to
new challenges that, not so long ago, few were able to
foresee. Croatia, for example, has suddenly become
engulfed by the migrant crisis, which was generated far
from our borders. While we are not the final destination
point, that tide of migrants is nevertheless having
a profound impact on my country and the region of
South-East Europe. I will speak in detail about that next
week, during the general debate, but today I use it as a
telling example of how interlinked and interdependent
the world has become.
Our world is not just our own. We must pass it down
to our children, and, right now, what are we leaving
them? Therefore we have to approach all 17 Goals
quickly and coherently, with determination and passion.
There is more to lose than could ever be regained.
In Addis Ababa we reached a groundbreaking
agreement on how to generate financing for sustainable
development. That was the first step, and by the end
of this week we shall take another one, but our work is
far from done. The next milestone that awaits us is the
Conference of the Parties in Paris. Only then, with the
successful outcome of that climate summit, will we be
able to say that in 2015 we truly set the framework for
the SDGs.
There was no better way to start this day than to
listen to the inspirational speech by His Holiness Pope
Francis earlier this morning, and there is no better way
to crown our Summit than to forge our commitment to
implement all of the Sustainable Development Goals by
2030. Members may rest assured that Croatia will do
its part.
15-29149

25/09/2015

Let me end by stressing Sustainable Development
Goal 5, on gender equality. An illustration of the
fulfilment of that pivotal goal is the simple fact that the
first speaker in this historic debate of ours is a woman.
I promise Malala that every child will have the right to
education.
I want to keep this global conversation going,
but it is not enough just to meet here once a year and
maintain our commitments to United Nations initiatives
and national development strategies. We must take
ownership of problems that are man-made and therefore
require us to fix them. Without leadership, there is
no way to ensure that anything will take root and be
sustained. Anything less than that is just not enough.
Co-Chair Museveni: I thank the President of the
Republic of Croatia for her statement.
Ms. Kolinda Grabar-Kitarović, President of the
Republic of Croatia, was escorted from the rostrum.
Co-Chair Museveni: The Assembly will now hear
an address by the President of the Republic of Finland.
Mr. Sauli Niinistö, President of the Republic of
Finland, was escorted to the rostrum.
President Niinistö: It is a great honour for me
to address this opening plenary Summit that just
adopted resolution 70/1, containing the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development. I would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his tireless work in supporting
the achievement of previous goals and setting new
ones. I would also like to thank President Museveni and
Prime Minister Rasmussen for chairing this historic
event.
For 15 years, the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs) have inspired us in our pursuit of development.
Significant progress has been made towards achieving
all of the Goals. Global efforts have helped to lift more
than 1 billion people out of extreme poverty. To put that
in perspective, it means 200 times the population of my
own country, Finland, or 27 times that of Uganda.
Over 1 billion people have better possibilities today
than just 15 years ago. Today, more girls can attend
school than ever before. Progress has also been made
in the fight against hunger and inequality. That work is
ongoing. It is also important that the MDGs have kickstarted progress where it has been lacking — especially
in Africa, which has seen unprecedented economic
growth and poverty reduction.

A/70/PV.4

Such progress has not been easy or without setbacks.
Not all of the Goals have been achieved. While progress
has been made towards achieving all of the MDGs, more
has been achieved in some cases than in others. Gender
inequality and violence against women are proving
to be intractable challenges. Broad progress towards
gender equality has wavered. That is a challenge that
we must take seriously. Investing in gender equality is a
direct path towards poverty reduction, inclusive growth
and prosperity. An ambitious agenda for achieving
gender equality and women’s rights must be matched
by ambitious resources. We simply cannot solve the
world’s problems while keeping half of the population
out of leadership positions and subordinated to the
other half. To achieve that goal, we need to change the
way that we act and think.
Another critical factor aside from gender equality
that we cannot overlook or overcome is environmental
sustainability. Addressing climate change and
the provision of health, food and water requires
coordinated global monitoring and the modelling of
several factors — social, economic and environmental.
That also requires an ambitious climate deal in Paris in
December 2015. The decisions made at the Conference
of the Parties to United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change will be the world’s best last chance
of reaching an agreement on cutting carbon emissions.
The changing climate is affecting the livelihoods of
hundreds of millions of people. The migrations we are
seeing in Europe this autumn are only a sad prelude
to what will happen in the future if we fail to achieve
environmental sustainability.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
is a global deal, in which each and every one of
us is a participant and is therefore responsible for
ensuring its success. There is no room for disputes or
failure — succeed we must. The alternative is simply
too costly in terms of excessive human suffering and
misery. We can choose whether our legacy is one of
hope or despair. It is still up to us to decide.
Co-Chair Museveni: I thank the President of the
Republic of Finland for his statement.
Mr. Sauli Niinistö, President of the Republic of
Finland, was escorted from the rostrum.
Co-Chair Rasmussen: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the President of Turkmenistan.
Mr. Gurbanguly Berdimuhamedov, President of
Turkmenistan, was escorted to the rostrum.

15-291497/26

A/70/PV.4

President Berdimuhamedov (spoke in Turkmen;
English text provided by the delegation): This Summit
on sustainable development is taking place in the year
of the seventieth anniversary of the establishment of the
United Nations, which gives it a special significance.
Fifteen years have passed since world leaders, for the
first time, determined the international agenda in the
sphere of development and created an international
mechanism of interaction aimed at solving the most
pressing issues of the modern time.
Today, we can state with confidence that the
achievement in implementing the Millennium
Development Goals will serve as a solid basis for our
joint actions in the coming 15 years. In addition to that,
we must achieve the Goals that are still incomplete. In
that context, the world community of nations needs a
new global strategy, one based on present-day realities
and oriented towards long-term prospects. The post2015 development agenda, presented for adoption at this
Summit, is indeed a strategy of that kind. Turkmenistan
fully supports resolution 70/1 and endorses its adoption.
It is our firm belief that the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development — set out in 17 global Goals
and 169 targets — reflects the main approaches to the
solution of the development challenges that are facing
humankind today. Its main feature is the expressed
determination of the international community to achieve
sustainable development in a balanced and complex
manner in all of its three components: economic, social
and environmental.
In view of the aforementioned factors, I am
convinced that the precise and concerted work of
the international community in implementing the
economic component of sustainable development will
facilitate, in many ways, the achievement of the Goals
of the new Agenda, such as universal access to cheap,
reliable and modern energy supplies, stable economic
growth and full employment, the creation of flexible
infrastructure and the promotion of innovation. All of
this will eventually enable us to provide sustainable
models of production and consumption and reduce
inequalities within and among countries.
There is no doubt that the achievement of the
Goals is linked to the further improvement of the
existing partnership mechanism. In that connection,
I believe that it would be advisable to consider, at
one of the forthcoming meetings of the Economic
and Social Council, the establishment of a new

8/26

25/09/2015

global coordination mechanism for implementing the
Sustainable Development Goals. Turkmenistan stands
ready to submit appropriate specific proposals. I also
believe that it would be appropriate, in the context of
the implementation of the new Development Goals,
to invigorate the work of United Nations regional
commissions in that regard.
One of the main features of the post-2015 agenda
is its strong social orientation. It is not accidental that
social issues stand at the forefront of the Sustainable
Development Goals. Their practical implementation is
linked to the enhancement of the effectiveness of the
targeted and substantive work of Member States, as
well as of the international structures that are directly
responsible for the achievement of global objectives.
It will therefore be necessary to harmonize the joint
actions of countries with the work of such entities as
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP),
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations and the World Food Programme in order to
achieve the Goals of eliminating poverty and combating
hunger, ensuring food security and improving nutrition.
In that connection, we propose that at the seventieth
session the General Assembly consider the possibility
of convening a high-level forum on the issue of food.
We express our readiness to work with all interested
parties to that end.
The problems relating to ensuring a healthy way of
life occupy a very important place among social issues.
In that regard, building closer partnerships among
Member States and the World Health Organization
and other international organizations will become the
foundation for the successful implementation of the
Sustainable Development Goals.
The new international agenda should include the
issue of comprehensive, just and quality education
among its top priorities. It is our profound conviction
that the United Nations should actively promote
the implementation process by fostering a broad
international dialogue and introducing new national,
regional and global programmes in the field of education.
Turkmenistan is prepared to actively and constructively
cooperate with appropriate United Nations bodies in
the field of education. We consider UNDP, UNESCO
and UNICEF to be our major partners.
Gender equality is the key element in the global
development strategy. We have set a lofty goal for
ourselves, that is, to achieve full gender equality and

15-29149

25/09/2015

A/70/PV.4

to empower all women and girls. The fulfilment of that
goal is our common duty and shared responsibility. In
that connection, we welcome the initiative of SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon to hold a summit of world leaders
on gender equality in New York on 27 September.

Turkmenistan’s permanent neutrality. In availing myself
of this opportunity, I would like to express, on behalf of
the people of Turkmenistan, my profound gratitude to
all Member States for the firm and unwavering support
of my country’s neutral status.

By adopting the Sustainable Development Goals as
a programme for our joint efforts for the forthcoming
15 years, we are aware that the social and economic
development of the States and peoples of the planet
cannot be achieved without solving the problems of
climate change and the environment. In that context,
we welcome the efforts of the United Nations and its
Secretary-General to identify effective measures for
reducing global environmental risks. The United Nations
summits and international conferences convened over
the past few years have made a substantial contribution
to the solution of problems relating to the protection of
the world’s environment.

An international forum dedicated to the issues of
neutrality, peace and development will be held in the
capital of Turkmenistan, in the city of Ashgabat, on
12 December. Allow me to renew, from this high podium,
an invitation to the Heads of State or Government of
Member States to visit our country during that period
and to take part in the celebrations of Turkmenistan’s
permanent neutrality.

In early December, we will have to adopt important
decisions that will have momentous significance for
the entire world at the Conference of the Parties to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, to be held in Paris. Turkmenistan stands ready
to support the signing of an international agreement on
climate issues and will actively advance that idea during
the time left before the Conference. Furthermore,
I would like to recall that our country officially
presented its concept with respect to the strengthening
of international environmental cooperation and has
submitted a number of specific proposals at various
conferences.
The initiative regarding the establishment, in
cooperation with the United Nations, of a regional
climate-change centre for Central Asian States is
among those initiatives. Being committed to the
implementation of that idea, Turkmenistan is ready to
undertake, together with UNDP, steps in 2016 towards
the establishment of such a centre in Ashgabat.
The year 2015 is a special year in Turkmenistan and
in the life of its people. This year we mark the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 50/80 A on the
international recognition of Turkmenistan’s permanent
neutrality. The recent past has vividly demonstrated the
effectiveness of the foreign policy of neutrality pursued
by our country and its correspondence to the longterm interests of the international community. That
is confirmed by the fact that, on 3 June, the General
Assemble adopted resolution 69/285 dedicated to

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize in
particular that Turkmenistan will continue to develop
close international cooperation in the name of upholding
the lofty ideals of peace and justice and fulfilling the
goals and purposes of the United Nations Organization.
Co-Chair Rasmussen: I thank the President of
Turkmenistan for his statement.
Allow me once again to remind members, as
colleagues and representatives, that in accordance
with resolution 69/244 of 29 December 2014, the list of
speakers was created on the basis that statements will
have a time limit of up to five minutes.
Mr. Gurbanguly Berdimuhamedov, President of
Turkmenistan, was escorted from the rostrum.
Co-Chair Museveni: I want to reinforce the
statement that the Co-Chair has just made about the
five-minutes rule so that all the people on the list
are able to speak. We do not have sanctions. These
reminders are our means of implementation.
The Assembly will now hear an address by the
President of the Republic of Colombia.
Mr. Juan Manuel Santos Calderón, President of the
Republic of Colombia, was escorted to the rostrum.
President Santos Calderón (spoke in Spanish): I
feel deeply honoured to participate, on behalf of the
Colombian people, in this Summit, where we have
convened to affirm, with unequivocal conviction and
firmness, our commitment to the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1) and the 17
Sustainable Development Goals contained therein.
A few years ago, concerned with the continuity of
the Millennium Development Goals, Colombia proposed

15-291499/26

A/70/PV.4

some goals that would integrate in a balanced manner
the three dimensions of sustainable development: the
economic, the social and the environmental dimensions.
I am happy to report that that proposal was adopted
at the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development and became the highest-profile outcome
of the Conference.
Subsequently, we were part of the Open Working
Group of the General Assembly on Sustainable
Development Goals. Our Minister for Foreign Affairs
was a member of the High-level Panel on the Post2015 Development Agenda. Today, Colombia is part
of the Inter-Agency and Expert Group on Sustainable
Development Goal Indicators. My country commends
and welcomes those Goals because we know that they
are the necessary conditions for building peace, and
in turn, peace in Colombia will reap unimaginable
dividends, precisely in the economic, social and
environmental areas. It will be a virtuous circle.
In the next 15 years, all of the countries of the world,
united, must overcome our three greatest challenges:
eradicating poverty in all its dimensions, combatting
inequality and injustice, and tackling climate change.
The Millennium Development Goals guided us
towards a more egalitarian present, and in my country
we have made significant progress, which is reflected
in a better quality of life for the most vulnerable
Colombians. Today, for the first time in Colombia,
there are more people who are part of the middle class
than there are people living in poverty. Poverty, on the
basis of income, has declined over the past five years by
about 12 percentage points, which represents a decrease
of 4.4 million in the number of Colombians living in
poverty. That has made us one of the Latin American
countries in which poverty has been reduced to the
greatest extent in recent years. Something similar has
occurred with regard to extreme poverty, where more
than 2.5 million people have been able to overcome that
condition. Another very important achievement is the
headway we are making in reducing inequality.
There remains, of course, a great deal to be done. For
that reason, the challenge before us today is to increase
those achievements and make them irreversible. In our
country, we have established the goal of eradicating
extreme poverty over the course of a decade, i.e. by the
year 2025, in addition to achieving levels of excellence
in education and ensuring that all our children can
receive an education.

10/26

25/09/2015

All of those actions will take place in the context
of an overarching strategy of green growth. Our
commitment to the fight against climate change stems
from two realities: first, we are the second most
biodiverse country in the world in terms of square
kilometres, but, at the same time, we are extremely
vulnerable to the effects of climate change, which has
hit us particularly hard.
Our development plan for the next four
years — and we were perhaps the first country to
take such a step — was designed with the view to
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals as a first
step towards the irreversible eradication of poverty,
and towards a development that improves the human
condition and preserves the environment. I say it is a
first step because what we want is for the new Agenda
to be carried out and built upon by my Government and
be adopted by future Governments as well.
We have already established in Colombia an
inter-agency committee, with the participation of
regional representatives, civil society, the private sector,
academia, the media and international organizations,
to coordinate the implementation of the Sustainable
Development Goals and to design the working methods
and the methods for evaluation, measuring and, above
all, follow-up, because if we want to make appropriate
decisions, we need to have reliable indicators that show
us where we are, how we can move forward and where
we are falling behind. Colombia has also agreed to
be part of the high-level group for the support of the
Sustainable Development Goals.
We are well aware that tomorrow is not a thing
of the future, but that it is built today with efforts
undertaken now. That is why it gives us hope that the
United Nations, in its seventieth year, has adopted
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, with
which we not only identify, but to which we are fully
committed. We must all contribute; we must all act and
profoundly transform our countries. Colombia today
affirms its response to this call for a better and more
human future.
Co-Chair Museveni: I thank the President of the
Republic of Colombia for his statement.
Mr. Juan Manuel Santos Calderón, President of
the Republic of Colombia, was escorted from the
rostrum.

15-29149

25/09/2015

Co-Chair Rasmussen: The Assembly will now
hear an address by the President of the Arab Republic
of Egypt.
Mr. Abdel Fattah Al Sisi, President of the Arab
Republic of Egypt, was escorted to the rostrum.
President Al Sisi (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
allow me to convey to the Assembly, on behalf of the
great people of Egypt, their greetings, respect and
appreciation. The people of Egypt rose to confront and
transform extremist ideologies that struck people like
Malala Yousafzai and others, and they will transform
them.
I would like to thank the President of the General
Assembly for convening this important Summit and
express my appreciation for the invaluable efforts
we have all exerted throughout the last three years to
formulate a new post-2015 multilateral development
agenda. We are happy to see the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development for the next 15 years has
been adopted (resolution 70/1). In this forward-looking
Agenda, we set unprecedented objectives to eradicate
poverty, eliminate hunger, achieve sustainable
development and provide adequate health care and
education for all.
In the past few years, we have witnessed intensive
international efforts to create an enabling environment
for sustainable development for all. The momentum
of this endeavour has reached its peak over the past
few months, starting with the third International
Conference on Financing for Development, which was
held in Addis Ababa in July, and continuing until the
final formulation of the post-2015 development agenda
before us.
In this regard, I would like to reiterate the
importance of including all sectors of society in the
development process to which we aspire. We need fair
and balanced development that is beneficial to all, and
above all to women. Experience has shown again and
again that women in all walks of life play a pivotal
role in the political, economic and social spheres. In
addition, women have a deep sense of responsibility
and are the first to answer the call of their homeland.
Egypt effectively participated in all phases of
drafting and formulating the Development Agenda.
We have had a clear vision throughout, which we have
strongly defended. We believe that any international
effort to achieve sustainable development must take into

A/70/PV.4

consideration the policy space for developing countries
and their sovereign right to adopt appropriate national
economic and social programmes with development
priorities that are in line with the specificities and
needs of each region.
Attaining our right to development and providing
decent standards of living were among the utmost
priorities of the Egyptian people when they rose to
reshape their future. In that vein, in March we launched
the 2030 sustainable development strategy, which aims
to achieve comprehensive and inclusive economic
development, improve the investment environment
and promote human capital. In addition, the strategy
endeavours to attain social justice and provide decent
jobs for all Egyptians.
The launch of our national strategy to support
and develop the Egyptian economy coincided with the
Egypt Economic Development Conference, held in
March. The Conference witnessed wide international
participation from Governments and the global business
community. The great success of the Conference was
further evidence that the international community
considers the stability of Egypt the cornerstone for
stability in the Middle East as a whole.
Realizing the pivotal role of Egypt, last month
we inaugurated the new Suez Canal. This crowned
the efforts of the great people of Egypt, who were
able in just one year not only to dig an international
navigational channel, but also to launch a gigantic
development project that constitutes a major component
of a new national development plan, which will enable
Egypt to become a regional and international hub for
trade and investment.
While we are hopeful today as we meet to adopt an
ambitious Agenda that puts the development objectives
of the global community on a sustainable path, we
are concerned, as the tools available to implement the
Agenda are not commensurate with the expected level of
ambition and the magnitude of the existing challenges.
The imbalance in capacities and differences in levels
of development demand differentiated responsibilities
and commitments for the different members of
the international community. There is a historical
responsibility borne by those who have the capacities
towards those who do not.
In addition, the international community must deal
effectively with other global challenges that hinder
sustainable development, especially terrorism, which

15-2914911/26

A/70/PV.4

has become an international phenomenon that is not
confined to the borders of our Arab region but extends
to many countries in the world. The Egyptian people,
in their quest for reconstruction and development, are
facing the most dangerous extremist terrorist ideology.
They confront, with strength and determination, those
who seek to undermine development and disrupt the
aspirations of our people of a better life and a brighter
future.
In conclusion, let me reaffirm that development
has always been a historical right of all countries.
Pursuing this right today has become an absolute must
for achieving coexistence. This requires providing
the necessary support to developing countries in their
journey towards sustainable development and a life of
dignity for their people.
Co-Chair Rasmussen: I thank the President of the
Arab Republic of Egypt for his statement.
Mr. Abdel Fattah Al Sisi, President of the Arab
Republic of Egypt, was escorted from the rostrum.
Co-Chair Museveni: The Assembly will now hear
a statement by the Prime Minister, Minister for Finance,
National Security, Grenadines and Legal Affairs of
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines.
Mr. Ralph Gonsalves, Prime Minister, Minister for
Finance, National Security, Grenadines and Legal
Affairs of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, was
escorted to the rostrum.
Mr. Gonsalves (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
We have gathered together at this special assemblage of
world leaders to adopt a comprehensive, far-reaching
and people-centred set of universal and transformative
goals and targets, known collectively as the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs), to take humankind further
along the journey of a global development quest,
fashioned 15 years ago as the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs). We have before us today 17 SDGs,
identified separately but bound tightly in an integrated
whole, to realize the mighty ambition to make lives
far better, and sustainably so, for all of us who occupy
Mother Earth, especially those who have had to endure
the pain and anguish of indigence, poverty, vulnerability
and marginalization.
We have arrived at the SDGs after much stocktaking and reflection in our conversation on the post2015 development agenda. Solid and, in many cases,
spectacular progress has been made on targets embedded

12/26

25/09/2015

in the MDGs. Still, as always, much more remains to be
done, and time is not on the side of the almost 1 billion
persons globally who currently live in extreme poverty.
It is a damning indictment of our world civilization that
one in five persons in its developing regions lives on
less than $1.25 per day.
Fundamentally, faith and reason have brought
us together to adopt the SDGs and to build upon
the achievements of the MDGs to end poverty,
promote prosperity and well-being for all, protect the
environment and address climate change. But faith is
not an abstraction and reason is not a fanciful construct.
All the major world religions correctly advise that faith
is made perfect with works and made complete with
deeds, and reason must always be grounded in the real
conditions of life and living. Always, too, we must
apply our hearts to wisdom.
Making Mother Earth a better place for all of us
to live means that our deeds must match our words.
I acknowledge that the world is a complicated place
awash with contradictions and that humankind is not
perfect. Surely, it is still unacceptable for our global
economy to be designed and elaborated in practical ways
to condemn nearly a billion persons to a life of abject
poverty. Clearly, the current model of a perverse and
environmentally destructive global capitalism needs to
undergo fundamental restructuring for the SDGs to be
accomplished. Nor will they will be achieved if there
is failure in SDG 17, which mandates a revitalization
of the global partnership for sustainable development.
My country, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
like all small island developing States, has a special
vulnerability to the deleterious effects of climate
change. The poor throughout the world suffer most
from the maddening acceleration of global warming.
For us in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, this matter
represents an existential issue of our survival, yet we
contribute nought to this looming danger.
Over the past 17 years, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines has made immense progress in the
attainment of the MDGs touching and concerning the
eradication of extreme poverty, achieving universal
primary and secondary education, promoting gender
equality, reducing child mortality, improving maternal
health, combating HIV/AIDS and other infectious
diseases, and ensuring environmental sustainability.
We commit to consolidating and building upon these
accomplishments and pursuing in a focused way the

15-29149

25/09/2015

Sustainable Development Goals over the next 15 years
with the help of our global partners.
It is true that the challenging global times in which
we live make the achievement of the SDGs a difficult
exercise, but our world civilization must rise to this
awesome challenge. Failure will result in an apocalypse
too horrendous to contemplate. We are at the crossroads
of a historic and unprecedented opportunity to do far
better for all humankind, but especially for the poor.
Let us resolve to do so. Let not our hands be idle; let
not our faith waver; and let not our combined reason
desert us. Let us simply shape a better future, together,
with love.
Co-Chair Museveni: I thank the Prime Minister,
Minister for Finance, National Security, Grenadines
and Legal Affairs of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
for his statement.
Mr. Ralph Gonsalves, Prime Minister, Minister for
Finance, National Security, Grenadines and Legal
Affairs of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, was
escorted from the rostrum.
Co-Chair Rasmussen: The Assembly will now
hear a statement by the Prime Minister and Minister of
Reform of the Republic of Cabo Verde.
Mr. José Maria Pereira Neves, Prime Minister and
Minister of Reform of the Republic of Cabo Verde,
was escorted to the rostrum.
Mr. Pereira Neves (Cabo Verde) (spoke in
Portuguese; English text provided by the delegation):
First of all, I would like to extend my warmest greetings
to all the Heads of State and Government, the SecretaryGeneral and all the delegations present at this historic
global Summit for the debate and for the consensus that
has been reached so far and for the crucially important
resolution 70/1, which has been adopted for the future
of humankind. Indeed, we are deciding on how to
transform our world by 2030 because we wish to live
in a much better world that guarantees sustainable
development, prosperity and opportunity for all.
In 2000, in our common home that is the United
Nations, we made the commitment to achieve the
Millennium Development Goals by 2015. Today, 15
years later, we can proudly say that it was worth the
effort and that the world is a much better place, although
not all Goals have been achieved and not all have
honoured their obligations. We are once again being
called upon to make new commitments, now oriented

A/70/PV.4

towards sustainable development, to be fulfilled by
2030. Each one of our countries is responsible for its
own development, but as Pope Francis said, we will
have to adopt the ethics of global citizenship and share
responsibilities.
At the time of its independence in 1975, Cabo
Verde was considered inviable as a country. The
conditions under which it began its history as a
sovereign nation were extraordinarily difficult. A small
island developing State comprising a series of islands
and without any traditional natural resources, Cabo
Verde was characterized by drought, desertification,
the scarcity of water, famines and emigration. Now, 40
years later, thanks to the determination of Cabo Verdean
women and men in the islands and in the diaspora, good
governance and hard work, we are a middle-income
country and on track to achieving all the Millennium
Development Goals and their related targets.
We have come a long way. However, we are aware
of the great challenges we have to face, particularly
poverty, which still affects nearly a fourth of the
population, and the high unemployment rate, especially
among youth and women with little professional skills.
We must also deal with climate change and its effects. In
2003, with the strong participation of local authorities,
civil society, enterprises and non-governmental
organizations, we shared a development agenda aimed
at building a modern, competitive, prosperous, fair
and inclusive nation with opportunities for all and at
transforming Cabo Verde into an international service
centre and a logistics platform on the West African
coast.
In 2014, we evaluated our implementation of
that agenda, redefined its methods and timetable and
committed to building a developed Cabo Verde by
2030. Our main ambition is to raise the current $3,800
per capita gross domestic product to at least $12,000,
and to achieve a high human development index based
on strong investments in education, health, social
security, housing, land planning and management,
infrastructure and water mobilization. In order to meet
those objectives, we must speed up the pace of our
economic growth and build a green and blue economy
that is dynamic, sustainable, innovative and able to
create jobs and promote progress and social well-being,
a fair and inclusive economy that can eradicate poverty,
fight inequality and create opportunities for all.
Small island developing States face huge obstacles to
their sustainable development: difficulties in accessing

15-2914913/26

A/70/PV.4

financing, high costs for transportation, energy and
infrastructure and social, economic and environmental
vulnerabilities. Along with lower-middle-income,
African, least-developed and landlocked developing
countries, they therefore deserve special attention from
the international community if they are to meet all their
commitments directed at achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals by 2030.
Cabo Verde therefore fully supports today’s
resolution 70/1, “Transforming our world: the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development”. We will do our
homework and work to build partnerships and bridges
that will enable us, in a win-win scenario, to help
humankind, build a developed and prosperous country
and contribute to making the world a better place.
Co-Chair Rasmussen: I thank the Prime Minister
and Minister of Reform of the Republic of Cabo Verde
for his statement.
Mr. José Maria Pereira Neves, Prime Minister and
Minister of Reform of the Republic of Cabo Verde,
was escorted from the rostrum.
Co-Chair Museveni: The Assembly will now hear
a statement by the Prime Minister and Minister of
Finance of the Commonwealth of the Bahamas.
Mr. Perry Gladstone Christie, Prime Minister and
Minister of Finance of the Commonwealth of the
Bahamas, was escorted to the rostrum.
Mr. Christie (Bahamas): We are meeting at a
historic moment, as we leaders adopt resolution 70/1
on the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. It
is the hope of the people of the Commonwealth of the
Bahamas that we are agreeing to a new agenda that is
people-centred, planet-sensitive and inclusive in its
approach to development, grounded in the common
values and principles that we as the United Nations
espouse.
I am pleased to be here today to revisit the themes
I addressed last year — the environment, crime and
security and the education and training of our young
people. What is more interesting is that this is a time to
be here when His Holiness Pope Francis — whom I had
the honour and privilege to meet just before Christmas
in 2013 — has come to speak to us. In his encyclical
Laudato Si’, issued on 24 May, His Holiness reminds us
that the Earth is our common home, a gift from God. He
says that the Earth cries out to us because of the harm

14/26

25/09/2015

we have inflicted on it through our irresponsible use of
the goods with which God has endowed it.
What more can we say? It is clear that as we adopt
the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), we must
keep in mind our responsibility to protect the Earth,
its resources and its people. We can be proud of the
successes of the Millennium Development Goals that
we set for ourselves way back in 2000. It goes without
saying that there is much more to be done to eradicate
poverty, eliminate substandard housing and infant
mortality, improve gender equality and the rights of
the disabled, and end racism, crime, violence and war.
Those themes are at the top of the Bahamian agenda.
The Government of the Bahamas is committed to
the full and effective implementation of the Sustainable
Development Goals and to building a stronger and more
sustainable Bahamas. We are fully aware that we are
primarily responsible for our national development,
a responsibility that we have never shied away from.
Recent events have shown that small countries
must have the resilience, elasticity of response and
institutional infrastructure needed to withstand the
economic shocks that may come from unexpected
directions. Our international economic partners, as well
as private investors and financial institutions, all have
a role in making sure that this resilience is sustained,
particularly as we look towards managing the biggest
issue of all — climate change.
I have come here today to renew our commitment
to protecting our oceans and their species, migrating
by 2030 to renewable sources of energy and making a
sustained effort to educate the public on our need to
do so. We will need the assistance of the international
community.
The Bahamas, along with the rest of the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM), has long held that per
capita gross domestic product should not be the sole
determinant of the economic support given to our
region, and that our vulnerability to economic and other
exogenous shocks must also be taken into account.
Indeed, the collapse of a single large investor can
throw an entire country out of whack. Similarly, one
hurricane can wipe out the gross domestic product of an
entire country three times over. That was sadly evident
in the tragic loss of life and widespread damage caused
by the devastating passage of Tropical Storm Erika over
our sister CARICOM island nation of Dominica at the
end of August.

15-29149

25/09/2015

Those kinds of shocks have produced the high
levels of indebtedness that we in CARICOM face today.
They have certainly challenged our ability to achieve
internationally agreed development goals. It therefore
becomes increasingly important for our renewed global
partnership to meaningfully address those issues
in order to buttress our attempts to implement the
new Development Agenda, including the SDGs. The
Bahamas is pleased that the new Agenda speaks to the
sustainable development challenges that we all face.
It represents a firm political commitment to leaving
no one behind and ensuring a sustainable future for
present and future generations.
As we agree here on the SDGs and targets, we also
agree to align them with national priorities and anchor
them in our national plans for sustainable development.
As we implement the new Agenda, we must continue to
acknowledge that small island developing States (SIDS)
remain a special case for sustainable development, in
view of their unique and particular vulnerabilities,
including to the adverse effects of climate change.
It is important that the new Development Agenda
will lead up to a climate treaty to be signed in Paris
later this year. It is the position of SIDS that to put
the world on a pathway at or below an increase of 1.5°
Celsius, the Paris agreement must establish a global
legally binding framework with commitments that are
strong enough to reverse the current upward emission
trends by 2020 and to ensure that fossil-fuel carbon
dioxide emissions from the energy and industrial
sectors are reduced to zero by 2050. The survival of
SIDS must be the benchmark for the 2015 agreement,
and developed countries must honour their financial
commitments under the Copenhagen Accord of the
2009 Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change and provide
adequate means of implementation, including through
capitalization of the Green Climate Fund.
The stage has already been set, and we have
delivered a robust agenda. But our work has only
just begun, and exactly how the next scenes will play
out remains to be seen. What we can be certain of,
however, is that our world of more than 7 billion people
is watching and waiting in the hope that we will rise to
the challenge of truly transforming it.
Nowhere is that challenge more important than in
educating, training and preparing our young people for
the future. In the area of education, my Government has

A/70/PV.4

committed to serving the needs of every demographic
of our population, able and disabled, young and old.
We recognize education’s continued role in supporting
efforts to achieve economic growth and eradicate
poverty, as well as being a tool for socialization.
As I conclude, I would like to say that I am
particularly concerned about the young people of the
world. We have an obligation to them to address the
joblessness and sense of hopelessness that pervade
our planet. I want to bequeath to them a sustainable
world, free of violence, war and crime, and a fair
chance to access the economic benefits of the world.
I say again that if we fail to address that, we do so at
our peril. I leave the Assembly, then, with the wish that
we recommit to being the shepherds and protectors of
Mother Earth.
Co-Chair Museveni: I wish to thank the Prime
Minister and Minister of Finance of the Commonwealth
of the Bahamas for his statement.
Mr. Perry Gladstone Christie, Prime Minister and
Minister of Finance of the Commonwealth of the
Bahamas, was escorted from the rostrum.
Co-Chair Rasmussen: The Assembly will now
hear a statement by the Chancellor of the Federal
Republic of Germany.
Ms. Angela Merkel, Chancellor of the Federal
Republic of Germany, was escorted to the rostrum.
Ms. Merkel (Germany) (spoke in German; English
interpretation provided by the delegation): In a few
days’ time, we in Germany will celebrate 25 years of
German unity. In Europe we will celebrate the end of
the Cold War. What was a divided Europe has grown
together in peace and freedom. For decades, many
dreamed of that, but few believed it could ever happen.
Today, however, we know that nothing is obliged to
remain the same, and that change — change for the
better — is possible. We also know that every great
plan has its seed in our minds.
At this event today, we are united by our goal of
eradicating poverty by 2030, another that not so long
ago was too often dismissed as a pipedream. But
now, 15 years after the adoption of the Millennium
Development Goals, we can see that it can in fact be
achieved. We have already come halfway. Poverty has
been halved, giving us every reason to believe that we
will achieve the next stage too. We want to change our
world, and we can. We want to give it a more humane

15-2914915/26

A/70/PV.4

face, and we can. That is the goal of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1). To that
end, we are adopting new goals that cover the entire
spectrum of global sustainable development and
that apply to all, industrial and developing countries
alike. If we are to achieve them, we need a new global
partnership.
In order to establish such a partnership, we first
need effective structures at every level – national,
regional and global. That is why Germany plans to
further develop its national sustainability strategy
in the light of the 2030 Agenda. As early as 2016,
Germany will be one of the first States to report on its
implementation of its national strategy at the high-level
political forum on sustainable development. Germany
also supports regional organizations and partnerships
that can enable us to combine our efforts. Furthermore,
we are committed to strong global structures that can
help us deal with challenges that would overwhelm
individual States.
The Ebola epidemic in West Africa was one such
challenge. It was also a painful warning that made it
abundantly clear that effective cooperation among
all stakeholders, with a reformed World Health
Organization at the centre, is absolutely crucial.
Together with Ghana and Norway, we have asked the
Secretary-General to establish a high-level panel aimed
at identifying the right lessons to be learned from the
epidemic and ensuring that the world will be able to
respond faster and more effectively in future. Seventy
years since it was founded, the United Nations, with its
unique legitimacy, is still essential when it comes to
resolving the issues facing humankind. But it, too, must
adapt to new challenges. Germany will play an active
part in the necessary reform process.
Secondly, a global partnership needs the necessary
financial resources, while resilient structures will
enable us to make more efficient use of those resources.
The Conference on Financing for Development held
in Addis Ababa in July showed how we can mobilize
those resources. Germany stands by its commitment
to devoting 0.7 per cent of its annual gross domestic
product to development assistance, and our budget for
development assistance will increase substantially over
the next few years. But while State support is important,
it can be only one aspect of that assistance. Private
investment is also crucial to our States’ development,
and mobilizing it must be a policy focus for us.

16/26

25/09/2015

In Paris at the end of this year, at the Conference of
the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change, we want to adopt an ambitious
climate agreement that will oblige all States to do more
to protect the environment. The agreement would fix
the framework for a path of sustainable development
that can ensure that global warming remains below
2° Celsius. To achieve that, we need a shared vision
of how to end carbon emissions at a global level by
the end of this century. And to do that we also need
the right kind of investment. It is important that the
industrialized countries — and Germany, as one of
them, will do its part — stick to the pledge they made in
Copenhagen and, beginning in 2020, make $100 billion
a year available to developing countries to help them
protect the environment. That will help to create the
belief that all countries in the world can develop in a
climate-friendly way and that vulnerable countries in
particular will get the help they need to adapt to climate
change.
Peace will always be the key prerequisite for
successful development. Yet millions of people — more
than at any time since the Second World War — are
being forced to flee war, terror and violence. Their
suffering is exacerbated by their lack of prospects for
the future and by the destruction of their environment.
Anyone who has witnessed the suffering of those who
have left their homes to seek protection and a future
elsewhere, and who is aware of the challenge facing the
countries that are taking them in, knows that in the end
there can be only one solution, which is that we must
tackle the causes of their flight and expulsion.
The 2030 Agenda provides the right framework
for that. It balances the economic, environmental and
social aspects of development. Each and every one of
us should — indeed must — work to implement it so
that people the world over can live lives of dignity.
That must be our shared ambition. By agreeing on the
Agenda, we are laying the groundwork for efforts to
tackle the issues. Our priority now is to work for that
end at every level, national, regional and global, and
that is what Germany will do.
Co-Chair Rasmussen: I thank the Chancellor of
the Federal Republic of Germany for her statement.
Ms. Angela Merkel, Chancellor of the Federal
Republic of Germany, was escorted from the
rostrum.

15-29149

25/09/2015

Co-Chair Rasmussen: The Assembly will now
hear a statement by the Prime Minister of the Republic
of India.
Mr. Narendra Modi, Prime Minister of the Republic
of India, was escorted to the rostrum.
Mr. Modi (India) (spoke in Hindi; English text
provided by the delegation): That towering figure of
our times, Mahatma Gandhi, once said that we must
also care about the future world that we ourselves
will never see. And indeed, whenever the world has
risen collectively to meet its obligations to the future,
humankind has made progress in the right direction and
gained in strength.
Seventy years ago, when a catastrophic world
war ended, the Organization represented the birth of
a new hope. Today, we have gathered here once again
to chart a new course for humankind. I would like to
commend the Secretary-General for organizing today’s
very important Summit. The vision behind the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1)
is lofty, and its Goals are equally comprehensive. It
gives priority to problems that have persisted over the
past decades and reflects our evolving understanding of
social, economic and environmental issues.
It is gratifying that we all share a vision of a world
without poverty. Its elimination is our number-one Goal.
Some 1.3 billion people in the world today are forced
to live a life of wretched poverty. But the question we
face is neither merely about how to meet the needs of
the poor, nor is it simply a question of their dignity or
of respect for them, or of our moral responsibility. If
our shared vision is of a just, peaceful and sustainable
world, that can never be possible as long as poverty
still exists. Eliminating it is therefore the greatest
obligation we have. A great Indian thinker, Pandit Deen
Dayal Upadhyay, placed the welfare of the poorest at
the centre of his thoughts, and that is also what we see
in the 2030 Agenda. It is a happy coincidence that in
India we are beginning the celebration of Deen Dayal’s
hundredth anniversary today.
We welcome the prominence the Agenda gives
to environmental goals, especially those relating to
climate change and sustainable consumption, and we
particularly welcome the focus on the future of island
States and the specific Goal on ocean ecosystems. I have
always been a proponent of the blue revolution, which
encompasses the protection and development of small
island States, as well as of the lawful and appropriate

A/70/PV.4

use of marine resources and open skies. Those three
aspects are all connected.
It is a matter of great satisfaction for us in India
that much of the country’s development agenda is
mirrored in the Sustainable Development Goals of the
United Nations. Ever since we gained independence
we have nurtured the dream of eradicating poverty as
well. We have chosen the path of empowering the poor,
with education and the development of skills as our
priorities. We are working on providing the poor with
that education and those skills. We have made it our
mission to achieve financial inclusion within a specific
time frame. We have opened 180 million new bank
accounts, which I believe is the greatest conceivable
way to empower the poor, since it enables benefits to
be directly transferred to them. We are also making
progress with an ambitious project for giving insurance
benefits to the poor. Very few people in India have the
benefit of pensions, and we are working on providing
them to the poor. Today even the very poorest have a
new hope of being able to fight and overcome poverty.
Our citizens are now confident that they will be able to
realize their dreams.
All over the world, when we speak of economic
development, we usually limit ourselves to discussing
two sectors: the public and the private. What we have
done is to focus on a new sector, which we define as
the personal, represented by individual enterprise, so
that we have the private, public and personal sectors.
For us, that individual enterprise sector includes small
enterprises, micro-finance, innovation and start-ups.
Our priorities are housing, power, water, education,
health care and sanitation for all. All are essential to
a life of dignity. In order to achieve them, we have
created concrete initiatives and a specific time frame.
The empowerment of women is an integral part of all
our development programmes. We have a programme
with the slogan “Save the girl child, educate the girl
child” that we have taken to every household in the
country.
We are trying to make our farms more productive
and better connected to markets, and our farmers less
vulnerable to the vagaries of nature. We are working to
revive manufacturing and improve the service sector, and
we are investing in infrastructure on an unprecedented
scale. We are making our cities smart and sustainable
and turning them into engines of progress. We are
committed to a sustainable path to prosperity, and that

15-2914917/26

A/70/PV.4

commitment stems from our traditions and culture. At
the same time, it also demonstrates our commitment to
the future. I represent a culture that regards the Earth as
our mother, for there is a saying in our ancient texts that
the Earth is our mother and we are her children.
Our national plans are ambitious and purposeful.
Over the next seven years, we plan to build new
capacity totalling 175 gigawatts of renewable energy.
We are focusing on energy efficiency and carrying
out afforestation on a large scale. We have imposed a
carbon tax and are reforming our transportation and
cleaning up our cities and rivers with a waste-to-wealth
movement. I believe that ensuring the sustainable
development of the one sixth of humankind that our
population represents will have great consequences for
the sustainable development of our beautiful planet. It is
clear that such a world would be one of fewer challenges
and more comprehensive hopes and aspirations, and I
think that we can be confident that we would succeed.
We will share our success and resources with others.
In the Indian tradition, we see the world as a family,
and as our texts say, the wise regard the entire planet as
one family. Today, India is fulfilling its responsibilities
as a development partner in Asia and Africa, and with
small island States from the Pacific to the Atlantic.
All nations have a national responsibility for
sustainable development. At the same time, they also
need space in which to make their own policies. We are
here at the United Nations today because we all believe
that international partnerships should be at the centre
of our efforts, whether directed towards development
or the challenges of climate change. The bedrock of
our collective enterprise is the principle of common but
differentiated responsibilities.
When we speak of climate change, there is a hint,
unspoken or not, of safeguarding what we already have.
But when we speak of climate justice, the responsibility
of saving the poor from the vagaries of climate will help
us to develop a positive attitude. It is important to focus
on solutions to the challenges of climate change that can
help us reach our goals. We should forge a global public
partnership to harness technology, innovation and
finance in order to make clean and renewable energy
available to all. We must also work to effect changes in
our lifestyles that can make us less energy-dependent
and our consumption more sustainable. It is also vital
that we launch a global education programme that can
prepare future generations for the task of protecting
and conserving nature.
18/26

25/09/2015

I hope that the developed countries will meet their
financial commitments in the area of development
and climate change without in any way lumping them
together. I also hope that the Technology Facilitation
Mechanism can help make technology and innovation
into effective instruments for the global public good,
not just for private profit.
We have seen that distance does not insulate anyone
from challenges, which can rise out of the shadows of
conflict and deprivation in distant lands. The entire
world is connected. We are all dependent on one
another, so we must focus on the good of humankind
in our international partnerships. We must also reform
the United Nations, including the Security Council.
That is essential if we are to ensure that our institutions
have greater credibility and legitimacy. With a more
broad-based representation, we can be more effective
in achieving our goals.
We must work towards shaping a world where every
individual can look forward to a future of security,
opportunity and dignity. We have the responsibility of
leaving behind a better environment for the generations
to come. I believe there can be no greater cause or
challenge than that. At the United Nations, we are
called to rise to that challenge, employing all of our
wisdom, experience, generosity, compassion, skill and
technology. I am confident that we can.
In conclusion, let me express my good wishes and
hopes for everyone’s well-being with these lines from
our ancient texts: “May all be happy, may all be healthy,
may all know well-being, and may there be no sorrow
of any kind”.
Co-Chair Museveni: I thank the Prime Minister
of India for his statement. As he represents 1.2 billion
people and exceeded the time limit by 13 minutes, that
equals one minute for every 100 million people.
Mr. Narendra Modi, Prime Minister of the Republic
of India, was escorted from the rostrum.
Co-Chair Rasmussen: The Assembly will now
hear a statement by the Prime Minister of Ireland.
Mr. Enda Kenny, Prime Minister of Ireland, was
escorted to the rostrum.
Mr. Kenny (Ireland): I am honoured to address this
historic Summit. Transforming our world is not only
ambitious but essential. The actions of each nation are
absolutely critical to how we will live together on this
planet that we call home.
15-29149

25/09/2015

On our small Atlantic island, the Irish people
carry the generational memory of occupation, hunger,
conflict and mass emigration. As a result of our history,
we have a deep commitment to addressing suffering
and hardship wherever they are found. Our past has
taught us that no one country can stand alone in an
interconnected world. Global challenges need global
responses.
The suffering of men, women and children — people
just like the people of all of our countries — caught
up in conflict and hardship through no fault of their
own, requires a response that draws on our common
humanity and our common compassion. As we meet
today, we are facing humanitarian challenges on a scale
not seen since the Second World War.
In Europe we find ourselves responding to a
refugee crisis that has its origins not just in conflict
but in abject poverty and underdevelopment. Ireland
will therefore work closely with our European Union
partners to save life and to give the chance of new life
to people trapped in conflict and trapped in poverty.
But we have to have equal focus on tackling the
causes that motivate people to flee their homes in the
first place and to risk their lives for an uncertain future.
That is why the agreement adopted at this Summit
(resolution 70/1) is so vital to guarantee not just hope
but sustainable lives and futures.
From the beginning, Ireland has been very clear
on what is needed: first, an agreement galvanizing
action; secondly, action to end extreme poverty, hunger
and undernutrition and make better, faster progress on
gender equality and the empowerment of women and
young girls; and, thirdly, action to promote the critical
role of good governance and the rule of law.
This what we commit to in our country: our
development aid programme will continue to be
central to our foreign policy; we will continue to work
to achieve the United Nations 0.7 per cent target for
development assistance; we will continue to focus our
aid on the poorest countries, especially in Africa, as
we have been doing for many years; and we will work
relentlessly with our partners for the elimination of
extreme hunger and malnutrition by 2030.
Let me therefore salute the vision and tireless
efforts of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon in leading
us to this point.

A/70/PV.4

Our country, Ireland, was honoured to play its
part in co-facilitating intergovernmental negotiations
with Kenya. I would like here to thank Ambassador
Donoghue and Macharia Kamau for the extraordinary
work that they did in getting 193 countries to agree to
this Summit proposal.
Today’s agreement, however, is the work of all
the States Members of the United Nations. In the Irish
language, we have a saying: “We live in the shelter of
each other” — a shelter that our human family in the
Middle East is now looking for urgently.
Our shared future and our shared humanity are
evident not only in what we do but in the mutual
recognition that we are “kind” together. At this Summit,
here in New York, we have shared our vision for life
and its living with our own “kind” in our own “home”.
This morning, the world listened to Pope Francis.
What did he say? He said that human beings take
precedence over everything else. So now, united nations
of the world, let us act in the interests of those people.
Co-Chair Museveni: I thank the Prime Minister
of Ireland for his statement. He finished right on time;
I congratulate him.
Mr. Enda Kenny, Prime Minister of Ireland, was
escorted from the rostrum.
Co-Chair Museveni: I now call on the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Jamaica.
Mr. Nicholson (Jamaica): I am pleased to represent
the Government and the people of Jamaica at this
Summit to adopt the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (resolution 70/1).
The year 2015 has been pivotal and decisive for the
international community. We celebrate the seventieth
anniversary of the United Nations, recalling its origins
as an institution that rose from the ashes of war to
embody the hopes and aspirations of peoples around the
world for peace and development.
From the Third World Conference on Disaster
Risk Reduction, held in Sendai in March, to the
Third International Conference on Financing for
Development, held in Addis Ababa in July, to this
Summit, the States Members of the United Nations have
been working together to develop solutions to some of
the most vexing and complex challenges confronting
our nations.

15-2914919/26

A/70/PV.4

We remain hopeful that this high level of
commitment to tackling multidimensional challenges
through global action will continue through the end of
the year, to our next meeting in Paris at the Climate
Change Conference.
The 2030 Agenda was designed to be transformative
and to ensure that people are placed at the centre of the
development process and that our stewardship of the
planet is characterized by our respect for its resources.
Indeed, the Agenda has the potential, if properly funded
and implemented, to change the lives of our peoples, to
protect the planet and to engender prosperity in ways
we are yet to realize.
Jamaica stands fully behind the 2030 Agenda. We
believe that it is a worthy successor to the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs). For while the MDGs
provided a useful tool for focusing development efforts,
this Agenda will help ensure that these efforts are
sustainable.
It is no coincidence that it is an Agenda for people,
planet, prosperity, peace and partnerships. These
are the ingredients that will make for a world free of
extreme poverty, where prosperity can be achieved and
sustained.
At the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development held in Rio de Janeiro in 2012, we made
a clear commitment to shift the paradigm towards
sustainable development and away from the fragmented
approach that until then had dominated the treatment of
development issues. The 2030 Agenda makes good on
that commitment.
However, while we laud the breadth of the new
agenda, we must also acknowledge that this is the very
quality that will make it difficult for it to be effectively
implemented. Significant external support will be
required in many cases. In this regard, we are pleased
with the commitment to a more robust and revitalized
global partnership for sustainable development. We must
work, therefore, to ensure that the global partnership
does not fall behind. This is one lesson we have learnt
from the MDGs: that deviation from our commitment
to partnership can lead to underachievement.
We are conscious of the fact that implementation of
the Agenda requires financing from a range of sources,
inclusive of domestic, international, public and private
sources, as well as capacity-building support and the
transfer of appropriate technology. We are therefore

20/26

25/09/2015

pleased that the Technology Facilitation Mechanism
is being launched at this Summit. Access to scientific
research, technology and innovation is central to our
efforts to ensure successful implementation.
As a small island developing State (SIDS) and
a middle-income country, Jamaica is familiar with
the range of challenges that attend both categories.
We know that SIDS in particular will face numerous
challenges in their implementation efforts. We welcome
the support for SIDS that has been built into the Agenda,
particularly in relation to the means of implementation.
We look forward to working with other members of the
international community to ensure that SIDS are able to
make effective use of this support. We are particularly
attentive to the need for capacity-building in the areas
of data collection and statistical analysis, given that in
the absence of these capabilities it would be difficult,
if not impossible, to measure our progress. We would
not wish to be left behind in the wake of the advances
facilitated by the ongoing data revolution. After all, the
basic premise of the Agenda is to leave no one behind.
This is but the beginning of our journey
towards achieving the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. We must forge ahead in the knowledge
that the Agenda is emblematic of the range of challenges
that are currently before us. We must therefore remain
committed to this Agenda and work together to tackle
the challenges and embrace the opportunities. Jamaica
is firmly of the view that it is only through joint action
at the international level and adherence to the principles
of multilateralism that we will be able to achieve our
development aspirations.
Let us not be daunted by the estimated
multi-trillion-dollar price tag. We must each do our
part, in keeping with our respective capabilities,
to ensure that succeeding generations are truly the
beneficiaries of the future that we want. We owe no less
to the current and future inhabitants of our planet. I
have no doubt that we are equal to the task ahead.
Co-Chair Museveni: The Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Jamaica exceeded the time limit by two
minutes. That is not so disastrous.
I now call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Côte d’Ivoire.
Mr. Diby (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): Let me
at the outset convey to you, Co-Chair Rasmussen and
Co-Chair Museveni, the warm congratulations of His

15-29149

25/09/2015

Excellency Alassane Ouattara, President of the Republic
of Côte d’Ivoire, on your well-deserved appointment
to chair this special United Nations Summit for the
adoption of the post-2015 development agenda. The
President would have very much liked to participate in
this special Summit, but national obligations prevented
him from attending.
I would also like to pay tribute to Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon, whose determination to work for a better
world for all has resulted in the elaboration of the new
Development Agenda that we are discussing here.
I pay tribute also to the President of the General
Assembly at its sixty-ninth session, the eminent
personalities and the various groups of experts whose
commendable efforts provided us with the outstanding
resolution on the Agenda for Sustainable Development
that we have just adopted (resolution 70/1).
The Millennium Development Goals Report 2015
shows that tremendous progress has been made, which
is very welcome. However, as many challenges remain
that have yet to be taken up, this new, more ambitious
and more transformative Development Agenda takes on
even greater importance and relevance.
In Côte d’Ivoire, during the 2012-2015 period,
significant progress was made in the implementation of
the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) in several
areas.
In the health sector, infant mortality fell sharply
since 2002, from 181 to 125 per 1,000 in 2015. The
maternal mortality rate dropped from 597 per 100,000
live births in 1998 to 544 in 2015. In the fight against
HIV/AIDS, indicators of progress are satisfactory
overall, with the prevalence rate decreasing to 1.8 per
cent in 2013/2014.

A/70/PV.4

development plan covering the period 2016-2020
already incorporates the SDGs, as will future plans.
In addition, Côte d’Ivoire has created an
institutional and legal framework for the protection
of the environment and the promotion of sustainable
development. The upcoming meeting of the Conference
of the Parties to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change, in Paris, will enable us
to agree on clear, firm and binding commitments.
One of the major challenges currently facing the
Ivorian Government is to work together with elected
officials, civil society and the private sector for
national ownership of the SDGs. My delegation would
therefore invite the United Nations system and all of
our development partners to support Côte d’Ivoire in
this endeavour.
Co-Chair Museveni: I congratulate the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Côte d’Ivoire for finishing
exactly on time, which is excellent.
I now call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Trinidad and Tobago.
Mr. Dookeran (Trinidad and Tobago): On behalf
of the Government of the Republic of Trinidad and
Tobago, I have the honour to address the Assembly on
this occasion for the adoption of the global 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1). I wish to
applaud the efforts of all those who worked tirelessly to
ensure that while this Agenda is truly global in scope,
it preserves legitimacy and relevance at the regional
and local levels. It is aspirational yet achievable and,
though grounded in the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs), is more comprehensive and integrated
and therefore more coherent in its application.

This year the Government adopted a mandatory
education policy. Beginning this school year, education
is now compulsory and free of charge for all children
aged 6 to 16. With these achievements, the challenge
for our country now is to continue the efforts already
undertaken in order to develop the social sectors and
to increase infrastructure investment so as to promote
rapid growth.

A few weeks ago, Trinidad and Tobago celebrated
the fifty-third anniversary of its independence as a
sovereign State and, exactly one week ago today, its
fifty-third year as a proud Member of the United Nations.
On the occasion of our independence, the first Prime
Minister of Trinidad and Tobago, Mr. Eric Williams, in
his national address spoke of the aspirations of a small
fledgling nation on the global stage in the following
terms:

Côte d’Ivoire fully supports the new Agenda
for Sustainable Development, which is based on 17
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The 11 major
themes underpinning the SDGs figure prominently
in the priorities of Côte d’Ivoire. Indeed, the national

“You hope soon to be a member of the world
family of nations, playing your part, however
insignificant, in world affairs. You are on your own
in a big world in which you are one of many nations,
some small, some medium-sized, some large. You

15-2914921/26

A/70/PV.4

are nobody’s boss, and nobody is your boss. What
use will you make of your independence?”
Fifty-three years on, as I stand here today to
herald the endorsement by Trinidad and Tobago of a
new global Sustainable Development Agenda, I reflect
with satisfaction, and indeed with a great sense of
national pride, upon our several contributions to global
affairs. I am much gratified that our Founding Father
would conclude that our independence has not been
squandered. This ground-breaking Agenda, anchored
in the principle that “no one shall be left behind”, is one
that should represent a triumph for all States, including
the small and the marginalized. Indeed, it marks a new
phase in the focus of multilateralism and represents
the evolution of the United Nations as a dynamic body
capable of responding to emerging needs and challenges
and reflecting the diversity of its membership.
It is therefore fitting that, as the international
community commemorates 70 years of the existence
of the United Nations, we should also launch a new
collective vision for the peoples of the world for the next
15 years. Trinidad and Tobago endorses this new global
Development Agenda. This Agenda consolidates the
progress made by the family of nations in the context
of the MDGs and compels us all to do more to lift
humanity out of extreme poverty and marginalization
on a sustainable basis through enhanced international
cooperation in the economic, social, environmental and
cultural spheres, while promoting universal respect for
human rights.
Trinidad and Tobago’s implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development will be guided
by its own national sustainable development strategy,
which seeks to implement the Sustainable Development
Goals through 12 strategic priority areas over the
period 2015 to 2025. Our intention is to place strong
emphasis on the social and economic empowerment
of our people through incentivizing sustainable
growth and diversification, achieving macroeconomic
stability, job growth, respecting the International
Labour Organization principle of decent work and the
protection of the environment.
It is our intention to achieve these aims through
a progressive programme of institutional reform;
the establishment of a permanent mechanism for
improved dialogue among the social partners, namely,
Government, labour and the private sector and other
elements of civil society; and focused interventions

22/26

25/09/2015

for improvement in data collection and analysis. We
recognize that the fulfilment of the Goals and targets
of this Agenda will require the availability of accurate,
timely, high-quality and disaggregated data. We are
therefore pleased to note that the strengthening of data
and statistical systems is one of the areas for which
small island developing States will be prioritized for
assistance through partnerships and international
cooperation.
Despite its middle-income status, Trinidad and
Tobago, as a small island developing State, is still
grappling with many developmental challenges that
are exacerbated by its size, lack of economies of scale,
openness and a disproportionate dependence on a
limited number of resources. These challenges result in
a high degree of vulnerability to exogenous economic
and environmental shocks. Although we have achieved
success in implementing the majority of the Millennium
Development Goals, concerns still persist in a number
of areas.
Consequently, we stress the importance of the
revitalization of the global partnership for development,
the parameters of which are established in the Addis
Ababa Action Agenda. We submit that a necessary
element of this revitalized partnership must be the
continued recognition of the special case of small
island developing States and the unique development
challenges they face, and of the need to design financial
tools and facilities to effectively respond to these issues.
We wish to highlight that a key area of outstanding
work, which should be completed as soon as possible,
is the design of new and broader indices of development
that complement gross domestic product per capita.
Trinidad and Tobago believes that the cornerstone of
the integrated Sustainable Development Agenda should
be the development of tools to measure and monitor
implementation that is fit for purpose. As a responsible
Member State committed unreservedly to this agenda,
with tremendous faith in the ability of the multilateral
system to facilitate the implementation of universal
agreements, Trinidad and Tobago will continue to
work with all partners towards the achievement of this
critically important objective.
Trinidad and Tobago joins with other members
of the international community in endorsing the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. Let us work
together for the full and effective implementation of
this landmark Agenda for the benefit of all our peoples.

15-29149

25/09/2015

Co-Chair Museveni: I now call on Mr. Abdullah
Abdullah, Chief Executive Officer of the Islamic
Republic of Afghanistan.
Mr. Abdullah (Afghanistan): It is a great honour
for me to represent my country at this historic Summit.
At the outset, allow me to commend the Co-Chairs of
the intergovernmental negotiations on the post-2015
development agenda for convening this gathering and
to express my sincere appreciation to both for their
skilful leadership and tireless efforts.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(resolution 70/1) offers a compelling vision, promising
peace and prosperity to the peoples of the world through
global partnerships to ensure that we live and manage
the resources of our planet in a sustainable manner.
His Excellency President Ghani asked me to convey
to Member States that the Agenda — a synthesis
of past efforts, as articulated in key United Nations
conferences — is an inspired leap of aspiration into the
future. We therefore pay tribute to the work of several
generations of thinkers and practitioners who devoted
their lives to understanding and changing the economic,
social and environmental dimensions of development.
The
Millennium
Development
Goals
(MDGs) — which, sadly, have yet to be fulfilled by
some countries — focused our attention on resultsoriented development, forcing Governments and their
development partners to think through the linkages
among policy, delivery, measuring, monitoring,
accountability and having a voice in public resource
mobilization and management. Yet, as President Ghani
reminds us, the unfinished MDG agenda in the poorest
countries and the unintended consequences of focusing
on some Goals require us to pay careful attention to
learning and acting on the lessons learned. One of those
lessons is that, while the United Nations system does an
excellent job in setting global agendas, its development
machinery requires a major transformation if it is
to be a catalyst for the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development.
The five pillars of the 2030 Agenda, however,
require that systematic attention be paid to regional
cooperation and coordination. To cite just one example,
if regional barriers to trade and transit between Central
and South Asia were to open up, tens of millions of
people would be lifted out of poverty into a life of
dignity. Even more significant, if true and meaningful
cooperation in the arena of peace and security took

A/70/PV.4

place, the spectre cast by radicalism and terrorism over
our lives would be lifted.
Afghanistan began to pursue its MDGs almost half
a decade later than other Member States. According
to our 2005-2015 MDG report, we have had a mix of
achievements and setbacks. While the poverty rate has
remained constant for several years, we have made
considerable progress in primary education, gender
equality and women’s empowerment, and child and
maternal mortality rates have been reduced.
A big part of Afghanistan’s transformation
decade 2015-2025 coincides with the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. Afghanistan will remain
committed to developing strategies and policies to
integrate our national development agenda with the
2030 Agenda. My Government’s efforts to provide
villages across the country with a minimum level of
basic services in health, education, clean water and
improved agriculture through a citizens’ charter top the
national development agenda.
Afghanistan has been making strides to become
an economic hub in the region and to establish
corridors that connect people, goods and resources
and create opportunities for investment, development
and economic growth. I am grateful to see that the
Agenda attaches importance to the implementation
of special and differentiated treatment for the least
developed countries, in accordance with World Trade
Organization agreements.
The adoption of the Addis Ababa Action Agenda
was a milestone. We also support interconnectedness
with other relevant programmes, including the Istanbul
Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries
and the Vienna Programme of Action for Landlocked
Developing Countries. We agree with the notion that
responsibility for the follow-up and review of the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development lies primarily with States.
In conclusion, allow me to express Afghanistan’s
firm belief that in order to achieve the ambitious Goals
of the new Agenda, a strong political commitment
and revitalized global partnership and cooperation
are essential. I would like to reaffirm our strong
commitment and dedication to implementing the
Agenda and our unwavering effort in fulfilling all its
Goals and targets by 2030.
Co-Chair Museveni: I now call on Mr. Mark
Wilson, Group Chief Executive Officer of Aviva.

15-2914923/26

A/70/PV.4

Mr. Wilson (Aviva): It certainly is an honour and a
privilege for me to be here and set out the role of business
in achieving the global goals. I have spent much of my
career in emerging and developing economies, and have
sometimes seen the unacceptable face of capitalism.
But I have also seen that business and capitalism have
been among the great forces of liberation in history. I
am crystal-clear as to why I am in business. I am in
business to positively impact the lives of customers and
society. Making a profit is a by-product, albeit a very
important one, that allows my business to also remain
sustainable.
In my company, Aviva, one of our core values is
to create legacy, or, as I call it, to be a good ancestor.
Aviva has been in business since 1696 because our
ancestors made good long-term decisions. We do the
same thing today for our 34 million customers and for
the over $500 billion in assets we manage for them.
The Sustainable Development Goals are a unique
opportunity to create a global legacy.
I was born in New Zealand, and I now live in the
United Kingdom, which is also a sporting nation. To
deliver the Goals and win, just as in sport, we have to play
as one team. This quest is far too big for Governments,
non-governmental organizations, business, finance
or regulators on their own. We have got to mobilize a
global coalition the likes of which the world has never
seen. Nothing less than Team Humanity.
Aviva is a founding partner of Project Everyone and
has done a stellar job in planning to get the message about
the Goals to everyone on the planet. Our duty now is to
transform that message into action. The United Nations
Global Compact, an excellent organization, has helped
companies implement the Millennium Development
Goals, and the work is even more important for the
Sustainable Development Goals.
The question is: How do we align business and
the Goals together? The Goals certainly contain some
fine aspirations for the $150 billion or so of overseas
development assistance, but we have to do much more
to mobilize the $300 trillion of capital in the financial
markets. To return to my sporting metaphor, we are
currently trying to illuminate a stadium with a candle
when there is a huge set of floodlights towering above
the grandstand. All we need to do is to turn on that
$300-trillion switch, and I believe the glow will
enlighten the world.

24/26

25/09/2015

Today I have one very simple request. I would
respectfully suggest that the General Assembly target
2017 for the adoption of a resolution on sustainable
finance. That resolution would set out the United
Nations own road map for sustainable capital markets,
which to date simply does not exist. I suggest we
convene the best minds in the United Nations, around
the world and in finance to work out exactly how to do
this. The United Nations talks rightly of a duty to look
after future generations. Our legacy will be determined
by our success aligning the actions of the United
Nations, its Member States, civil society, business and,
indeed, finance globally. If we can do that, we will play
as one team and I can assure everyone present that we
will then win with the global Goals.
Co-Chair Museveni: I now call on Mr. Jim Yong
Kim, President of the World Bank Group.
Mr. Kim (World Bank Group): I thank you, Sir, and
the Secretary-General for the opportunity to address
this historic Summit.
Together, we have reached an important milestone
in adopting the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (resolution 70/1). Its Goals and targets
represent our commitment to a more ambitious agenda
for international development in the next 15 years.
The Goals reflect our dream for a world in which
everyone everywhere can reach their full potential.
And they seek to preserve our planet — what Pope
Francis has called “our common home” — for all future
generations. At the World Bank Group, we pledge to
use our comprehensive experience and knowledge of
financing development to support the Goals. We will
adapt the financial tools of the rich to serve the poor.
As we discussed two months ago in Addis Ababa,
the multilateral development banks together plan to
provide financial support of more than $400 billion for
the first three years of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. In addition, the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) have launched a
joint initiative to strengthen tax systems in developing
countries. Our aim is to assist lower-income countries
to increase their tax collection by at least 2 to 4 per cent
of gross domestic product. Those actions are the first
essential steps towards raising the resources needed for
the Sustainable Development Goals — moving from
billions of dollars to the trillions needed in development
assistance.

15-29149

25/09/2015

We will also bring our best global development
knowledge to tackle the world’s toughest challenges.
We have over 50 years of development experience in
helping countries grow their economies and invest in
their people and insuring them against falling back into
poverty. More than ever, we know what has worked and
what has not when it comes to development. Working
with the priorities set by developing countries, we
will tackle challenges and create strategies to resolve
them. Based on our experience with the Millennium
Development Goals, we also know that the Sustainable
Development Goals will and must change the way we
work. They will ensure that we are doing all we can, as
effectively and as fast as we can, to help the poor and
the vulnerable.
I personally have experienced the power of setting
goals and putting the poor first throughout my career.
In the suburbs of Lima, where we will be holding our
annual meetings of the IMF and the World Bank in
just a few weeks, my organization, Partners in Health,
worked to provide poor people a standard of health
care available previously only in the richest countries.
When I was Director of the World Health Organization
HIV/AIDS Department in Geneva, we set a target of
treating 3 million people infected with HIV/AIDS in
less than three years. At the World Bank Group, we
have committed to ending extreme poverty by 2030 and
boosting shared prosperity.
In each instance, clear goals focused our wills, our
minds and our actions. They made us look carefully at
whether what we were actually doing helped those in
need. They also made us work differently; they ensured
that our strategy had a clear focus with expected
outcomes. For too long, our low aspirations for the poor
have often turned out to be their worst enemy. We have
not been bold enough in helping them lift themselves
out of poverty. The poverty of our own imagination
and aspirations has prevented us from building a more
just and more prosperous world, but the Sustainable
Development Goals give us an Agenda that is much
more ambitious than any before it.
I believe that we are up to the task. The multilateral
development banks and the IMF will work closely
together to substantially increase the amount of
financing available to meet our high aspirations. We are
building upon a record of great accomplishment. Just
over the past 15 years, close to 1 billion people have
lifted themselves out of extreme poverty. Such progress

A/70/PV.4

shows that even seemingly impossible development
goals are entirely possible. We are now the very first
generation in human history that can see the end of
extreme poverty. We must not turn away from that
challenge. We must seize the moment and use all our
knowledge and grit to reach those new goals. We will
succeed. Together we will make the world a more just
and prosperous place for generations to come.
Co-Chair Museveni: I now call on Ms. Christine
Lagarde, Managing Director of the International
Monetary Fund.
Ms. Lagarde (International Monetary Fund): As
we say, “In unity lies strength”. Two months ago in
Addis Ababa, the international community put that
to the test. We pledged to secure financing to make
sustainable development not a goal, but a reality for
all. Today we face yet another moment of truth as
we come together to adopt the ambitious Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs). Our joint success will
depend on decisive action and implementation at both
the country and collective levels.
With regard to countries, countries can and
must act at three levels: economically, socially and
environmentally.
The first priority is macroeconomic stability,
which is not sufficient on its own. While priorities will
vary across countries, structural reforms and economic
diversification will be needed. Equally, as mentioned by
Mr. Kim, revenue mobilization and efficient, effective
public spending, including investment, will be key.
A second priority is inclusion. I affirm that more
inclusive growth is also stronger growth, so we must
empower people to fulfil their potential. Improving
girls’ education and removing barriers to women’s
employment and access to finance would not only
boost growth but would also tackle income inequality
and poverty because — let us not forget — poverty and
exclusion are sexist.
The third priority is the environment. Countries
have a crucial stake in managing their natural resources
efficiently and effectively. At the same time, limiting
the harmful impact of economic activity on the
environment can and will require targeted interventions.
In short, each country must do all it can to drive its
own development, but durable progress cannot be
achieved in isolation — it requires the engagement of
the international community.

15-2914925/26

A/70/PV.4

We therefore need collective action. Why? Because
in today’s interconnected world, for good and for ill,
cause and effect, spillovers and spillbacks travel across
borders instantly and unceasingly, irrespective of the
walls that are being built. And they do so at all levels:
macroeconomic, where an economic shock in one
country will affect all others; inclusion, where social
transformations drive the winds of change; and the
environment, where, with global warming, everyone
reaps what others have done.
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) — with
its 188 members and 70-year track record of promoting
global economic cooperation and stability — well
understands the need for, and power of, collective
action. Indeed, we are not only promising; we are also
delivering. In our research, policy advice and capacitybuilding, we have included social and environmental
dimensions that were not there, and we will continue
to do so.
We are also expanding our support for developing
countries in several ways. First, the poorest countries
can now borrow 50 per cent more from our interest-free

26/26

25/09/2015

facilities. Secondly, we are strengthening our technical
support to help countries boost domestic revenue
mobilization to finance development spending. We are
doing that together with the World Bank. Thirdly, we
are intensifying our support for fragile and conflictaffected States. Importantly, in the long-term we are
maintaining the zero interest rate on our Rapid Credit
Facility loans.
The IMF is working with its member countries and
international partners in the spirit of global cooperation
to achieve the SDGs. We have done so, we are doing so
and we will continue to do so. In 2000, they clapped
with two hands. Earlier today, we clapped with two
hands. The second Secretary-General of the United
Nations, Dag Hammarskjöld, once said: “We are not
permitted to choose the frame of our destiny, but what
we put into it is ours”. Likewise, the year 2030 — the
SDGs target date — will one day be upon us, and what
it will look like lies in our hands. Let us hope that they
will clap, too.
The meeting rose at 2.20 p.m.

15-29149
