2383rd

United Nations

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY
7HIRTIETH SESSION

PLENARY MEDlIG

8)

Friday, JO October /975,
at / / .05 a.m.
NEW YORK

O.fJkial Records

6. Mr. HARRY (Australia): By the unanimous decision of the Assembly, Papua New Guinea has been
admitted to membership in the United Nations, and
on behalf of the Australian Government and people,
I extend hearty congratulations and a warm welcome to
our friend and near neighbour. We are happy, indeed,
to have Papua New Guinea in this great Organiza-.
tion, and we are p.articularly glad to see the Prime
Minister, Mr. Michael Somare, seated in this Hall
today. We look forward to hearing the voice of Papua
New Guinea in a few minutes.

CONTENTS
Pug~

Agenda item 22:
Admission of new Members to the United Nations
(continued):
(b) Other reports of the Security Council
Agenda item 121:
Observer status for the Islamic Conference at the
United Nations.................................

598'

Agenda item 12:
Report of the Economic and Social Council
Report of the Third Committee (part l) . . . . . . . . . . . .

599

587

7. It is because of the former relationship between
our two countries that the Australian delegation has
the honour and pleasure to speak first on this happy
occasion. But today the significant fact is not Papua
New Guinea's history but its established status as a
sovereign and independent country. Actually, attainment by Papua New Guinea of de jure independence
on 16 September was only formally declaring what
had long been the de facto position. There had been
a steady and smooth transition through self-government to independence, an evolution stimulated and
supervised by the United Nations through the Trusteeship Council and the Special Committee on decolonization. Consequently, the recommendation of the
Security Council of 22 September 1975 was warmly
unanimous.

President: Mr. Gaston THORN
(Luxembourg).
In the absence of the President, Mr. Algard (Norway). Vice-President, took the Chair.
AGENDA ITEM 22

Admission of new Members to the United Nations
(continued):
(b) Other reports of the Security Council

1. The PRESIDENT: This morning we shall consider first agenda item 22, entitled .. Admission of new
Members to the United Nations". In document
A/10261 the Security Council has recommended the
admission of Papua New Guinea to membership in the
United Nations. The relevant draft resolution has been
circulated in document AIL. 764. May I take it that the
General Assembly accepts tne recommendation of
the Security Council and adopts the draft resolution
unanimously?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 3368
(XXX».
2. The PRESIDENT: I declare Papua New Guinea
admitted to membership in the United Nations.
The delegation of Papua New Guinea was escorted
to its place in the General Assembly Hall.
3. The PRESIDENT: On behalf of the General
Assembly it is both an honour and a pleasure to offer
sincere congratulations and to extend a warm welcome
to the delegation of Papua New Guinea.
4. Following an agreement reached with the chairmen
of the regional groups, I shall invite the representative
of Australia, the President of the Trusteeship Council,
the Chairman ofthe Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, and the chairmen of the various groups
to address the General Assembly.
5. I call first on the representative of Australia.

8. I should like to take this opportunity to express
the appreciation of my Government for the numerous
references by delegations in their speeches in the
general debate to the part played by Australia in
assisting the people of Papua New Guinea to develop
their free political institutions and to take the final
steps of accession to independence and entry into the
world community.
9. Australians are in a unique position to appreciate
the eminent qualities of Papua New Guinea as a Member of the United Nations. That beautiful and dramatic
archipelago lies close to Australian shores. If the
first contacts between our peoples were motivated by
strategy or trade, missionary zeal or simple scientific
curiosity, they have grown through the years into a
many-sided relationship of respect and friendship, cooperation and mutual interest. We intend to deepen
that relationship further into an enduring partnership
of peace, transcending cultural differences. We hope
that this will continue to be facilitated by the use of a
common language. Our only hope is that an excess of
Australian accent will not hamper the international
contacts of Papua New Guinea.

.

,

My Government has tried, particularly in recent
years, to accelerate and correct by constructive measures the slow or unbalanced development of earlier
periods. But it is primarily the people of Papua New
Guinea themselves who have by their own efforts
created in their own land this new State, able to take
10.

587

A/PV.2383

S88

General Assembly-Thlrtielh SessIon-Plenary Meetings

its place proudly among the Members of the United
Nations.
11. And there is no doubt that the Papua New Guinea
Government has already demonstrated not only its
determination but its capacity for the maintenance of
peace, both in its domestic affairs and in its international relations. Its leaders have shown, sometimes
in difficult circumstances, qualities of patience and
tolerance, and the will to reach agreement. These
qualities are in fact embodied in a deep-rooted Papua
New Guinea tradition which I understand the Prime
Minister describes as "the Melanesian way". It is a
way which rejects the ephemeral victory of the vote in
favour of the continuing harmony of consensus.

12. Our confidence that Papua New Guinea will
carry out its obligations under the Charter ofthe United
Nations in good faith is strengthened by the opportunity
we have had to appreciate the quality of Papua New
Guinea diplomacy. The delegation of Papua New
Guinea to the United Nations will, we are sure, play
an important role in this Organization. Papua New
Guinea representatives have already participated
actively in the proceedings of the Trusteeship Council and also in the law of the sea negotiations. The
Papua New Guinea observer delegation at the most
recent session of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea at Geneva made a notable
contribution to the drafting of articles on archipelagic
States and fisheries. A more recent example of Papua
New Guinea's contribution in the international legal
field occurred immediately after independence last
month. Even while the independence celebrations
were in full swing, Papua New Guinea showed its
sense of intemationallegal responsibility by promptly
submitting to the Secretary-General a declaration on
succession of States in respect of treaties.
13. In regional affairs Papua New Guinea representatives have already demonstrated their ability
in meetings of the Economic and Social Commission
for Asia and the Pacific [ESCAP] and the South Pacific
Forum, as well as in negotiations with the European
Economic Community, and in the Commonwealth
of Nations.
14. This responsible attitude adopted by Papua
New Guinea is particularly appreciated by Australia
since there are inevitably questions to be discussed
between our two countries, of the kind which arise
mainly between neighbouring States. There are already
some issues consequent upon independence to be
resolved. But we are confident that we shall always
be able to deal with such problems without increasing
the length of the agenda of this Assembly. Indeed,
we hope that Australia has learnt something from
Papua New Guinea about solving problems in the
-Melanesian way, which has many lessons even for the
United Nations.
.

15. In short, Australia looks forward to a close
association with Papua New Guinea in the United
Nations, because we have come to know the country,
its leaders, its people. It is therefore a pleasure for
my delegation to add to the universal welcome these
special greetings.
16. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the President
of the Trusteeship Council.

17. Mr. MURRAY (United Kingdom): It is rare that
the President of the Trusteeship Council has the occasion from this rostrum to convey fraternal greetings to
his rather more august colleague, the President of the
General Assembly. Accordingly, it gives me the greater
pleasure to have this opportunity to do so.
18. On behalf of the Trusteeship Council, I take great
pleasure in welcoming Papua New Guinea most warmly
as a Member of the United Nations. New Guinea has
been a Trust Territory of the United Nations for nearly
29 years. During this time a close relationship was
established between our Organization and the Territory. The United Nations dispatched no less than nine
visiting missions to the area, each of which submitted
detailed and constructive reports on the political,
economic and social advancement of the Territory.
Moreover, Papua New Guinea participated in the
activities of the Trusteeship Council during the latter's
annual examinations of conditions in that Territory.
Papua New Guineans, therefore, are no strangers to
the United Nations, its activities and what it stands
for.
19': With the independence of Papua New Guinea,
the objectives of the International Trusteeship System
will have been attained in to of the original 11 Trust
Territories. This, I believe, demonstrates quite clearly
how useful and constructive the International Trusteeship System has been. It underlines the important role
played by the United Nations in the last three decades
in assisting Trust Territories to achieve national
independence and to take their rightful place among
the sovereign States of the world.
20. As current President of the Trusteeship Council, I had the honour last month of leading a delegation
ofthe Council which took part in the colourful independence celebrations of Papua New Guinea at Port
Moresby. I was also present along with colleagues
from the Trusteeship Council and the Special Committee on decolonization and Mr. Tang Ming-chao,
the Under-Secretary-General for Trusteeship Affairs,
as official guests at the local independence celebrations at Wabag in the Enga district in the western
highlands. Although our group spent only a few days
in Papua New Guinea, we were much impressed
by the striking beauty of its land and, above all, by
the warmth and generous hospitality of its people.
21. Throughout the celebrations I was gratified by
the frequency· with which it was emphasized by prominent Papua New Guineans that the Australian
flag was being lowered, not torn down. This is indeed
a considerable tribute to Australia, and on behalf of the
members of the Trusteeship Council I should like to
congratulate that country once again on its co-operative
and selfless efforts in fulfilling its responsibilities
under the Trusteeship Agreement of 1946.
22. May I also congratulate most warmly the Governor-General of Papua New Guinea, Sir John Guise,
the Prime Minister, Mr. Michael Somare, and his
colleagues in the Cabinet, for leading their country so
ably and successfully to independence, and for the
efficient and skilful manner in which they have guided
it to membership in the United Nations. I especially
welcome Mr. Somare' s presence here today, and the
opportunity which it gives me to thank him personally
for his Government's generous hospitality to myself
and my colleagues on the Council during our visit.

23.

Abal,
Guin
andp
for t
Ourr
onth
izatio
truste

24.
as fo
selve
Unite
ane
negle
that
them.

25.
Trust
few r
newe
in Int
repo
yeste
gene
a rep
Itgi
exten
welc
its a
It ha
positi
this
Guin
in th
impo
goal
26.

the a
of th
toric
close
impo
West
conti
look
ourn
the ti
he ca
27.

appre
colon
sayt
Aust
relati
28.

Gove
We
State
cont
here.
perit
pros
29.

ofth

-

5

2383rd meeting-to October 1975

Lt
Loo

o
e
r
It

Y

s
y
s
i-

e
d
c,

I

e
s
I)

s

11

t
V

e
s
J

g

t

s

1
S

i

{

f

23. I wish to say a word of thanks also to Mr. Tei
Abal, the Leader of the Opposition in the Papua New
Guinea Parliament, and to the district administration
and people of Wabag and the neighbouring mountains
for their touching and memorable welcome there.
Our reception amply demonstrated a spirit offriendship
on their part towards the representatives of our Organization, and a sense of gratitude towards their former
trustee: the United Nations.
24. I know that the people of Papua New Guinea,
as former wards of the United Nations, regard themselves as having a special claim on the services of the
United Nations in their tremendous task of building
a new and prosperous society which will not however
neglect what is best in their ancient traditions. I hope
that our Organization will not have to disappoint
them.
25. That concludes my statement as President of the
Trusteeship Council. I should like now to add a very
few remarks on behalf of my own Government. The
newest and youngest member of our delegation-and
in International Women's Year I am glad to be able lO
report that she happens to be female-remarked
yesterday that after the occasional acrimonies of the
general debate it would be a pleasure for her to draft
a report on an item where harmony was sure to prevail.
It gives my delegation great satisfaction to join in
extending our sincere congratulations and warm
welcome to the new nation of Papua New Guinea on
its admission to membership in the United Nations.
It has already made its influence felt by altering the
position of every delegation in the General Assembly
this morning-no mean achievement. Papua New
Guinea's presence amongst us and its participation
in the activities of the international community is an
important development and a proper step towards the
goal of the universality of the United Nations.
26. The United Kingdom welcomes in particular
the arrival on the international scene of a new member
of the Commonwealth, with which we have had historical links and with which we hope to develop still
closer links in future. Papua New Guinea has an
important part to play in the affairs of the SouthWest Pacific, a region ofthe world in which my country
continues to have interests and responsibilities. We
look forward to maintaining a close association with
our new partner. We anticipate with particular pleasure
the forthcoming visit of Mr. Somare to London, where
he can be assured of a warm welcome.
27. I should also like to add my Government's
appreciation of Australia's role as a trustee. As a
colonial Power with much-indeed, some would
say too much-experience, we admire the way in which
Australia has changed a colonial relationship into a
relationship between free and independent nations.
28. I conclude by repeating the best wishes of my
Government to the people of Papua New Guinea.
We warmly welcome the new independent sovereign
State in our midst, and we look forward to the valuable
contributions that it will make to our deliberations
here. We wish Papua New Guinea success and prosperity as it embarks on the great task of building a
prosperous and united nation.
29. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the Chairman
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard

S89

to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples.
30. Mr. SALIM (United Republic of Tanzania):
It is with a sense ofgreat satisfaction that I am speaking
now to welcome warmly the admission of Papua New
Guinea to membership in our Organization. I am
doing so in my capacity as Chairman of the Special
Committee.
31. The independence of Papua New Guinea last
month and its admission today to our Organization
constitute an important victory not only for the people
of that new country but, indeed, for the forces of
freedom and independence. The United Nations, which
had a particular responsibility over that Trust Territory, has every reason to rejoice at these developments. For the triumph of the people of that Pacific
country constitutes yet one other victory for the purposes and principles of the Charter of our Organization. The freedom and independence of Papua New
Guinea reinforces our collective freedom. The Special
Committee on decolonization, which has steadfastly
supported the struggle of the people of Papua New
Guinea for self-determination and independence, is
particularly gratified at the emergence of that State
as a sovereign and independent nation and its assumption today of its responsibilities as a full Member of the
international community. And I am sure that because
of the Assembly's own involvement in the evolution
of the process of the decolonization of Papua New
Guinea, members of the Assembly will not consider it
presumptuous on our part if we say that the Special
Committee considers the independence of that country as its own victory.
32. The liberation of nations and their admission to
our Organization is always a source of joy and inspiration. But the admission of Papua New Guinea has an
added significance which we must not lose sight of.
Like the liberation of Mozambique, Cape Verde, and
Sao Tome and Principe, whose representatives we
have already welcomed and acclaimed, the independence of Papua New Guinea and its membership in
the United Nations is an outstanding reward for and
vindication of our Organization at a time when we are
commemorating its thirtieth anniversary and the
fifteenth anniversary ofthe Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
33. This solemn occasion today reminds us-if that
reminder were indeed necessary-that given the
determination of a people and the support of this
United Nations, colonialism in all its forms and manifestations can be, and indeed is being. rapidly reduced
to a relic. It is no exaggeration. therefore. that occasiuns of this nature inspire us to redouble our efforts
towards the final liquidation of colonialism. The fact
that the Trusteeship Council will very soon have
outlived its usefulness and that the Special Committee
is rapidly working its way towards its self-liquidation
is something that all of us should he proud of. As we
hail Papua New Guinea's memhership in the United
Nations, therefore. we must all strive to do our utmost
to accelerate that process so Ihat the intenmtionul
community can once and for all bring In an l'ml the
anachronism of l.:olonial scrvitlllk'.
34. As wc all know. rulil il'ill im!l'pl'nlk'n"'l' unly
marks the end of onc phase of a pl'Upk"S struggle.

S90

General Assembly-Thirtieth Session-Plenary Meetings

And with it a new, and more often than not a more
difficult, phase unfolds. That is the period of economic
independence. That truism is equally valid in the case
of Papua New Guinea. And I have no doubt in my mind
that no one is more conscious of that than the Prime
Minister, Mr. Somare, and his colleagues, who,
through their dynamic leadership, have succeeded
in charting their nation to the present status. But as
they confront new challenges, the people and the
leadership of that new nation will need, and have a
right to expect, not only the sympathy but also, and
above all, the active support of the international
community. I therefore sincerely hope that the United
Nations family of organizations will do its utmost in
playing a catalytic role in supporting the development
efforts of Papua New Guinea.
35. I should be remiss in making this address were
I not to pay due tribute to the Government of Australia,
the former Administering Authority of Papua New
Guinea. Its role in positively fulfilling the responsibilities of the administering Power, in accordance
with the principles and goals of the Charter of the
United Nations and the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
has repeatedly been commended both in the Special
Committee and in this Assembly. I do not therefore
need to labour that point. I should like, however, to
place it on record that in my capacity as Chairman
of the Special Committee for the last four years,
I have been greatly impressed by the positive attitude
of the Australian Government. Its total co-operation
with the Special Committee in this regard has been
exemplary. And I have no doubt that its approach
not only has greatly assisted the United Nations in
discharging its responsibilities over Papua New
Guinea, but has indeed helped to create favourable
conditions in the Territory facilitating the efforts of
the people of Papua New Guinea in their struggle for
self-determination and independence.
36. Following the precedent set up by my eminent
colleague, the President of the Trusteeship Council,
I should also like to conclude with a few remarks on
behalf of my Government.
37. Tanzania is particularly proud to have had the
opportunity of supporting in the Security Council the
application of Papua New Guinea to admission in
our Organization and to have reaffirmed that position
today.
38. I should like here to salute the people of Papua
New Guinea through their eminent leader and Prime
Minister, Michael Somare, whose presence in our
midst today we warmly welcome and appreciate. My
Government, which has already benefited through
contacts at various levels with the Government and
with the people of Papua New Guinea, is confident
of warm and friendly relations between our two nations. And we look forward to a close collaboration
with the delegation of that State both in this Organization and other international forums and institutions.
We shall certainly have many occasions to do so,
since among other links both Papua New Guinea and
Tanzania are members of the Commonwealth of
Nations.
39. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative
of Kuwait, who will speak on behdlf of th~ Asian
group.

40. Mr. BISHARA (Kuwait): The General Assembly
welcomed very recently the admission of the People's
Republic of Mozambique. the Republic of C:'\pe Verde
and the Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe to membership in the United Nations. In my
capacity as the Chairman of the Asian group for the
month of October, I today welcome Papua New
Guinea to membership in the United Nations. It is my
privilege and honour to let the voice of Asia be heard
on this great occasion.
It is indeed a cause of great satisfaction to note
that the process of decolonization in Papua New
Guinea has taken place in an orderly and peaceful
manner. If evolutionary change is prevented, tben
revolutionary change becomes inevitable. Australia
grasped this fundamental truth when, as an administering Power, it progressively transferred governmental powers to the people of Papua New Guinea.
thus making it possible for Papua New Guinea to
attain, by peaceful means, independent nation status.
We commend Australia profoundly and with admiration, for this enlightened policy. We also praise the
Special Committee for its tireless efforts on decolonization. We believe that other administering Powers
should emulate the example of Australia, and have the
readiness to understand the new forces in the world.
the courage to accept change, and the wisdom to
formulate and pursue viable means to make peaceful
change possible. Otherwise. the inexorable forces of
history will prevail and the colonial Powers will have
to retreat when faced with the tide of liberation, self~
determination and national sovereignty.
41.

44.

Ne
na
the
whe
of t
ord
ishe
45.
tati
Mri
46.

Fre
and
of
I a
the
Uni
bec
wh
on
se

We should also like to congratulate the United
Nations on its success in making our Organization
more representative of the international community.
We are confident that Papua New Guinea has a major
contribution to make to the work of our Organization.
It will definitely buttress the ranks of the Group
of 77 and take part in the new constructive process of
establishing th~ new international economic order.
All of us fully realize that if peace is indivisible, so is
prosperity. Fundamental peace is not a negative
concept; it means not only the absence of conflict but
the existence of real harmony among all the members
of the international family. When every man, woman
and child, regardless of race, religion or national
origin is guaranteed the right to a full realization of
their potenthdities in freedom, then and only then will
the world be at peace. This fundamental right can
only be achieved within the framework of self-determination and independence. By welcoming Papua New
Guinea in our midst, we are reaffirming our faith in
human rights and the dignity and worth of the human
person. We are also strengthening the cause of ~nter­
national security, because independence and freedom
are the pillars of peace founded on justice and moral
order.
42.

43: Thus we; as members of the Asian group. see
thiS as an occasion for rejoicing. It is an hour of triumph
and great solemnity. Triumph because there are very
f~w remnants of colonialism in the world today. Solemmty because independence is only the beginning of a
long and arduous ascent. It is the beginning ofa process
to cement political independence with economic and
sodal development, a process of collaborating with
other countries to promote the cause of freedom
...

~;;

....

49.
Co
[se

328
of
par
t

2383rd meeting-l~ October 1975

:mbly
lple's
/erde
Prin~ my
,r the
New
ismy
leard
note
New
,ceful
tt,en
tralia
linis-

verninea,
:a to

atus.
mira~ the
niza'wers
e the
orld.
m to
ceful
es of
have
self-

nited
ation
nity.
lajor
tion.
roup
ss of
rder.
so is
ative
t but
Ibers
.man
ional
In of
I will
can
eterNew
th in
Iman
nterdom
loral

see
mph

very

lemof a
cess
and
with
dom

everywhere, and a commitment to the great task of
economic and social development.
44. In conclusion, may I warmly congratulate Papua
New Guinea on its great exploit, wish it good luck in the
name of the Asian group and welcome it to the fold of
the international community and the Group of 77,
where it is expected to work hard for the establishment
of the highly cherished, new international economic
order and for the triumph of peace based on unblemished justice.
45. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of I.'ahomey, who will speak on behalf of the
African group.
46, Mr. ADJIBADE (Dahomey) (inlerpretat;ofi!mm
French): It is with a genuine feeling of satisfaction
and great joy that I undertake the very pleasant task
of welcoming, on behalf of the African group, of which
I am the Chairman this month, and also on behalf of
the Government of Dahomey, the admission to the
United Nations of Papua New Guinea, a State which
became independent on 16 September of this year and
whose admission the Security Council, at a meeting
on 22 September, recommended to the General Assembly.
47. In approving unanimously the recommendation of
the Security Council, the General Assembly has now
given this Organization a chance to advance one more
step towards its objective of universpUty. It is true that
a certain delegation, to support a certain artificial
thesis, has not hesitated to declare in this very chamber
that universality is not mentioned in any part of the
Charter of th~ United Nations. To this delegation,
we are tempted to say that it is easy to prove anything,
even starting from false premises, especially if they
are founded on erroneous political concepts. But the
purpose of the African group today is not to engage
in new polemics with anyone, nor do we wish to
reopen a suspended debate.
48. Thus, retuming to the case ofPapua New Guinea,
I should like to say that as far as the African group is
concerned, a group where the overwhelming majority
of members are States that are relatively new in the
concert of nations, the admission of a new Member to
the United Nations can only be a source of pride and
'.' satisfaction. The African group can only rejoice at
the smooth path which has brought this Pacilic Territo.y from the status of a Trust Territory, through the
Act of Papua New Guinea, 1949-1973, to the status
of a self-governing territory with its own Government,
with the assistance of the Australian authorities.
The cordial relations between the Administering
Authority and the Trust Territory, and the sincerity
and the good faith with which the former has fulfilled
its mandate, has enabled the Government of the Territory to work out a Constitution on the basis of independence, a Constitution which reflects the particular
needs and the aspirations of that country.
49. It is therefore not surprising that the Trusteeship
Council, on 29 August 1975, at its forty-second session
[see A/IOOO4, chap. V, sect. Cl, endorsed r~solution
3284 (XXIX) of the General Assembly on the question
of Papua New Guinea, and especially the operative
paragraphs, which read:

Resolves, in agreement with the administering Power, that on the date on which Papua New
"I.

591

Guinea shall become independent the Trusteeship
Agreement for the Territory of New Guinea, approved by the General Assembly on 13 December
]946, shall cease to be in force;
"2. Requests the administering Power to notify
the Secretary-General of the date on which Papua
New Guinea will accede to independence and on
which the Trusteeship Agreement shall cease to be
in force."
50. By establishing, in agreement with the authorities
of Papua New Guinea, the date of independence as
16 Septemoer, and by so informing the SecretaryGeneral, Australia, in the view of the African group,
could certainly not furnish a better token of its sincerity
in the strict execution of its mandate in compliance
with the resolutions of the United Nations. We have
here before us an act which should be pondered by
certain impenitent colonial Powers, which must understand that there is no need to resort to armed confrontation before negotiating independence with
honour.
51. I should like to take this occasion to address to
the Government and the people of Australia the sincere
congratulations of the African group on the courteous,
sincere and dignified manner in which they have carried
out the terms of the mandate that was entrusted to
them, and on the way in which they have respected
the aspirations of the peoples under their administra~ion.

52. I should like to address to our brothers of Papua
New Guinea the warm congratulations of the African
group on their accession to independence and on their
admission to the United Nations. We wish the new
nation every success, and all prosperity to the Govern-ment and people of Papua New Guinea.
53. I shall conclude by saying that, by admitting
the new state of Papt.3a New Guinea to the United
Nations, the General Assembly has just given the best
proof that admissions to this Organization are in no
way selective. That is why we dare to hope that very
soon there will be an end to the reactions of mnCOU!f
which prompted a great Power, thrc9gh the tyranny
of a minority of one operating through the veto, to
block the admission to the United Nations of two
countries that fully deserve their seats in this Organization, and that this injustice will soon be corrected.
54. The PRESiDENT: I now call on the representative of Hungary, who will speak on behalf of the
Eastern European group.

55. Mr. HOLLAI (Hungary): It is a gratifying event
for us to be witnessing the emergence of a series of
new independent States on the thirtielh anniversary
of the establishment of the United Nations and the
fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration
on the Granting of In!lependence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples. This is strong evidence of the results
attained in consequence of the lessening of international tension, the strengthening of the national
liberation movements, and thf' efforts m~de by the
Member States in the process of eliminating the last
vestiges of the colonial system.
The present session of the General Assembly,
by the admission of Papua New Guinea-another
country which has become ~nd~pendent followin~ the
56.

592

General Assembly-Thirtieth SessIo_Plenary Mee:lngs

entry into our Organization of Mozambique, Cape
Verde, Sao Tome and Principe-has taken a new step
towards giving effect to the universality of the Organization.
57. The principle and practice of universality would
assert themselves more strongly in our Organization
had the veto of the United States of America not
prevented us from welcoming to our ranks also the
representatives of the Democratic Republic of Viet
Nam and the Republic of South Viet Nam on this
auspicious occasion.
58. It is a great satisfaction for me, on behalf of the
group of the Eastern European States, to welcome
Papua New Guinea on the occasion of its admission to
membership in the United Nations and to express our
best wishes to the people and Government of Papua
New Guinea in their efforts for all-round development
and progress.
59. The efforts of the people of Papua New Guinea
to assert its right to self-determination and independence have for long years been a recurring item on
the agendas of the different forums of the United
Nations, particularly at meetings of the Trusteeship
Council and the Special Committee on decolonization. Among the Member States of the United Nations,
the representatives of the socialist countries have
voiced their firm political determination, as a most
important principle guiding the foreign policy of the
socialist countries, to seek the complete liquidation
of the colonial system and to give unconditional
support to the struggle of peoples for independence.
60. We are convinced that the date of 16 September
1975, that of the accession of Papua New Guinea
to independence, heralds the initiation of a new era
in the political, economic and social life of the people of
that country with a population of 3 million.
61. On behalf of the Eastern European group,
I should like once again to convey our cordial best
wishes to the people and Government of Papua New
Guinea on the occasion of gaining independence and
joining the family of the United Nations, and to assure
the representatives of that country of our readiness
for close and friendly co-operation in the interests
of the realization of the objectives of the Charter of
the United Nations.
The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
Argentina, who will speak on behalf of the Latin
American group.

62.

63. Mr. ORTIZ DE ROZAS (Argentina) (interpretationfrom Spanish): On behalf of the Latin American
group, of which Argentina has the honour of being
Chairman for this month, it is my privilege to extend
the Warl!'lest welcome to this Organization to the
young republic of Papua New Guinea. Latin America.
which in the most difficult momeqts of this Organization was always among the first to support and promote
the right of all peoples to eradicate all forms or vestiges
of colonialism, wishes to be among the first to hail
the emergence of the new, independent State which
today takes its rightful ,lace in our midst.

64. We rejoice to see that the action which began
almost two years ago with the granting of autonomy
culminated so swiftly and happily on 16 September
1975 in the accession of the former territory of Papua

New Guinea to the community of free and sovereign
nations. We rejoice too that the transition was peaceful
and harmonious as a result of the fruitful co-operation
and understanding between the native leaders and the
representatives of the administering Power.
65. Finally, we applaud the exemplary action of
Australia, which, testifying to its complete identification with the principles and norms of the United
Nations, has faithfully and efficiently discharged the
important responsibilities entrusted to it by the General
Assembly.
66. The entry of every new State brings us ever
closer to the objective of universality to which we so
steadfastly aspire for this Organization. This Assembly, which now has 142 full-fledged Members,
is representative of virtually all the peoples of the
world.
67. However, there still remains a great deal to be
done before that ideal becomes an absolute reality.
Colonial situations of flagrant injustice still persist by
reason of the l'efusal of some States to abandon anachronistic and oppressive policies and practices. This is
a propitious occasion for us to reaffirm our will to
contribute actively to the process of decolonization.
This process is one of the imperatives of our time and,
as no one any longer doubts, is irreversible in character.
68. I would not wish to conclude without reiterating
to the representatives of Papua New Guinea the
satisfaction of Latin America at having them share in
our important tasks. We are convinced that with their
dedication and efforts they will make a positive contribution to the United Nations, and to that end we
offer them our fullest co-operation.
69. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
the Federal Republic of Germany, who will speak on
behalf of the group of Western EuropeaiJ and other
States.
70. Baron VON WECHMAR (Federal Republic of
Germany): As the last speaker for the regional groups
it is difficult not to repeat what has been said before,
and! shall therefore try to be brief.
It is a great honour and pleasure and a very
pleasant duty for me, as the current Chairman of the
group of Western European and other States, to
welcome Papua New Guinea to our midst as a new
Member of the United Nations. I should like to congratulate the Government of Papua New Guinea for its
pragmatic and peaceful approach towards independence and the way in which it set up its admiDistration
before taking this important step. The positive attitude
the Government of Papua New Guinea has shown
towards international co-operation confirms my
conviction that the presence of Papua New Guinea
in the United Nations will be of great value to our
Organization.
71.

72. I should like also to take this opportunity to
congratulate Australia, as the former administering
Power, on its exemplary decolonization policy. If its
example had been followed by others, the world would
have been spared many difficult problems which have
occupied the attention of the United Nations for
decades.
73. The new State of Papua New Guinea is about to
assume new tasks and responsibilities which I am

convinced its peo
this road to a hap
of Western Euro
worthy partners.
74. The PRESI
tative of the Liby
behalf of the Ara'
75. Mr. KIKHI
pretation from Ar
pleasure on this
New Guinea as
Member of the
gratulations to th
achieving their in
on 16 September
this international
member States of
on behalf of the
a member of the
76. The achieve
Guinea and its a
step towards full
liquidation of co
which we all aspi
as soon as possibl
sality of this Or
peoples which ar
sion to our Orga
77. The admiss
Nations undoubt
of democracy, p
considered a con
world and the Gr
78. It gives me
appreciation to t
structive efforts i
Guinea to build t
79. I should li
of the United N
appreciation to t
tion for their lau
80. I should lik
co-operation wit
other United N
happy finale.
81. I reiterate,
welcome to Pa
fraternal suppo
Organization, W
Arab States or
that nation.
82. The PRES
sentative of Indo
Association of S
83. Mr. ANW
pleasure and a p
the delegations
the Philippines,
to congratulate
to the United
fifteenth anniver
of Independenc
we note with
made by the pr

2383rd meeting-lG October 1975

----------------

-

convinced its people will shoulder cQuragt;,Jiusly. On
this road to a happy future the members of the group
of Western Europeal1 and other States will be trustworthy partners.
74.. The PRE.SIDENT: I now c~ll on th~ representatlve of the Libyan Arab Repubhc who will speak on
behalf of the Arab States.
75. Mr. KIKHIA (Libyan Arab Republic) (interpretation from Arabic): It is for me an honour and a
pleasure on this historic occasion to welcome Papua
New Guinea as the one hundred and forty-second
Member of the United Nations. I extend my congratulations to the people of Papua New Guinea on
achieving their independence, which was proclaimed
on 16 September 1975, and on becoming a Member of
this international Organization. I do so on behalf of the
member States of the League of Arab States, and also
on behalf of the Palestine Liberation Organization,
a member of the League of Arab States.
. .
76.. The aC~leveme~t ~fIndependen?e b~ Pa~ua ~ew
Gumea and Its ad!"lssl~n to the Umte.d ~atlons IS a
s.tep. to\yards full hb~r~tIon from colomahsm, and the
hq~Idatlon of~ c~lomahsm. throughout the worl~, to
which we all a'3plre an~ which we hope to see achI~ved
as ~oon as p~ssIble. I~ IS ~so a step towards the umversahty of thiS OrgamzatIon, and we hope that other
peoples which are still deprived of their right of admission to our Organization will soon achieve it.
77. The admission of this new State to the United
Nations undoubtedly gives new support to the forces
of democracy, progress, freedom and peace, and is
considered a consolidation of the position of the third
world and the Group of 77 as well
.
.~.
.
78. It.8lyes me pleasure on t~IS occasl.on to ~xpress
appre?latlon to ~he T~~teeshlp Council for Its constructlve efforts In assIstmg the people of Papua New
Guinea to build their State and attain sovereignty.
79. I should like also to congratulate other bodies
of the United Nations, and in particular to express
appreciation to the Special Committee on decolonization for their laudable efforts in this connexion.
80. I should like also to congratulate Australia on its
co-operation with the Trusteeship Council and various
other United Nations bodies in order to reach this
happy finale.
81. i reiterate, on behalf of the Arab States, our
welcome to Papua New Guinea, and pledge our
fraternal support and co-operation, whether in this
Organization, within the context of the League of
Arab States or within that of our own relations with
that nation.
82. The PRESIDENT: I call now upon the representative of Indonesia, who will speak on behalf of the
Association of South-East Asian Nations [ASEAN].

83. Mr. ANWAR SANI (Indonesia): It is both a
pleasure and a privilege for me to be able, on behalf of
the delegations of the ASEAN countries-Malaysia,
the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Indonesiato congratulate Papua New Guinea on its admission
to the United Nations. As we are now nearing the
fifteenth anniversary ofthe Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
we note with great satisfaction the rapid progress
made by the process of decolonization. That process

593

-

has brought our Organization increasingly closer to the
goal of universality, which constitutes one of the most
important conditions for the effective functioning of
our Organization.
84. At the beginning of the present session we
welcomed with great joy and satisfaction three new
Member States in our midst: the People's Republic
of Moza~bique, th~ Republic of Cape Ve~de. and ~e
Democratic Repubhc of Sao Tome and Princlpe. It IS
with ~ingular satisfa~tion that today the ASEAN
countnes, together with the other Members of the
United Nations, most w~mly welcome a!l0ther new
Member, Papua New Gumea, a close neighbour, as
it takes its ~ghtful place a~ong us. VIe are sure that
our newly md~pendent ~elghbour will so0!l play.an
important role m the affairs of the South Pacific region
as well ~s. in th~se of the. Sout~-East Asia region,
and partIcipate m our deliberations and efforts to
ensure progress and well-being for our peoples. We
are convinced that Papua New Guinea, as a fullfledged Member of the United Nations, will participate
constructively in the work of seeking solutions to the
global problems which confront us. The delegations
of ASEAN look forward to working closely and
fruitfully with the representatives of the new Member
St te thro ghout the United Nations system.
a s
u
85. The ASEAN countries are glad to acknowledge
on this occasion the important contribution which the
Government of Australia, as the Administering Authority, has ~ade to the progress of the pe.ople of Papua
New ~:.:mea towards freedom and mdepen~e!1~e.
Australia has demonstrated a profound sensltlVlty
towards the needs of the people of Papua New Guinea
and a readiness to meet those needs, which have
earned the appreciation of the international community
as well as that of the people of Papua New Guinea
itself
.
86. I should like now to speak on behalf of the Government and people of Indonesia. Sharing as we do a
common border, the peoples of our two nations have
many close ethnic and cultural ties, which provide the
basis for a harmonious approach to common problems.
My Government recognized that fact when it established a consulate-general at Port Moresby over a
year ago, which it recently raised to the level of an
embassy. When the people of Papua New Guinea
celebrated their independence on 16 September,
Indonesia had the privilege of sending a special deputation to attend the ceremonies in the capital city of Port
Moresby. That deputation included the President
of the Supreme Court, as the special representative
of President Suharto, and the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Indonesia, Mr. Malik. They were accompanied by cultural groups and performers who took
part in the fe.:-tivitics and shared the joy of our brothers
and sisters ih Papua New Guinea. While there, the
Indonesian deputation had the opportunity to observe
closely the spirit and determination of the people in
fa~ing their future as an independent nation. The deputatlon also noted the progress made by the Government of Papua New Guinea, under the leadership of
the Prime Minister, Mr. Somare, towards encouraging
development in every aspect of its society and in
strengthening the bonds of unity, territorial integrity
and ~ommon purpose, so essential to the new country's
survival and growth as an independent State. Indonesia

594

89.

of
Gui
sen
tion
Min
rep
co.
occ
We
So
90.

wit
Our
past
our
ago.
we
edu
our
me
Sou
acti

S94

General Assembly-Thirtieth Session-Plenary Meetings

is confident that the people of Papua New Guinea
will continue to advance in every respect.
87. In conclusion I should like once more to extend,
on behalf of the delegations of the ASEAN countries,
a most warm welcome to the representatives of the
newest Member of our Organization and to wish them
every success as they participate in our work.
88. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of Fiji, Ratu Sir Penaia Ganilau, Deputy Prime
Minister of Fiji.
89. Ratu Sir Penaia GANILAU (Fiji): The attainment
of independence on 16 September of Papua New
Guinea was a welcome event in Fiji. We were represented at the Papua New Guinea independence celebrations by our Governor-General and by our Prime
Minister. Today it is my great pleasure and honour to
represent the Government and people of Fiji in welcoming Papua New Guinea on this special and historic
occasion of their admission to the United Nations.
We warmly welcome the Prime Minister, Mr. Michael
Somare. and the members of his delegation.
90. Fiji has enjoyed very close and warm relations
with Papua New Guinea over a long period of time.
Our ties, which were forged in the dim and distant
past, have grown since the coming of Christianity to
our part of the world almost one and a half centuries
ago. In addition to our association in Christianity,
we have over the years also co-operated in medical,
educational, cultural and economic fields. Apart from
our bilateral relationships, both countries are also
members of the South Pacific Commission and the
South Pacific Forum, where we participate fully in the
activities connected with those regional bodies.
91. Because of our close association, the Government and people ef Fiji have watched with admiration and satisfaction the steady political, social and
economic developments in Papua New Guinea since
the end of the Second World War, but more especially
during the last 10 years. Remarkable developments
have taken place, particularly in education, in the
economic sector, and in the political awareness of the
people, despite numerous divisive factors such as clan
and regional differences, the extremely difficult
geographic features and political rivalries which are
normal aspects of a democratic society. Credit for
those outstanding achievements must be given to the
people and in particular to their leader. They are
appropriately and well represented here today by their
dedicated and tireless Prime Minister, together with
the other members of the Papua New Guinea delegation.
92. Though Papua New Guinea is the youngest
Member of this world Organization, their leaders are
not young in wisdom, for to lead their country under
very difficult circumstances from colonial status to
one of internal self-government and to full independence and membership in this Organization requires
wisdom, statesmanship and maturity of the highest
order. Because of their successful experience in
reconciling clan and regional diff,~rences in development work, I am confident that the Papua New Guinea
representatives will soon begin to make worth-while
contributions to the work of the United Nations.
93. May I hasten to express my delegation's appreciation for the excellent part played by the former Admin-

istering Authority, Australia, in guiding the political
and economic development that has taken place in
Papua New Guinea. We have admired the wellplanned. patient and systematic approach made by
:uccessive Governments in Australia in encouraging,
training, guiding and aiding Papua New Guinea to
attain independence. In this connexion, we should be
sadly remiss if we did not mention the excellent contributions made by the Australian dvil servants and
others who have contributed so much to help make
Papua New Guinea what it is today. In passing, we
should also mention the contribution made by the
Trusteeship Council, the Special Committee on DecoIonization and the United Nations staff who have
served Papua New Guinea's cause with dedication
and perseverance.
94. The admission of Papua New Guinea gives us
particular pleasure in that one more voice from our
oft-forgotten region will now have to be heard in this
world Organization in support of what is just and to
oppose all injustices. They have all our best wishes
when they take their well-earned place in this world
Organization.
95. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of Japan.
96. Mr. SAITO (Japan): The delegation of Japan
finds extraordinary satisfaction in the action just taken
by the General Assembly. As an Asian and a Pacific
nation we are delighted with the unanimous decision
to admit to the United Nations the newly independent
State of Papua New Guinea.
97. On this historic and auspicious occasion, it is a
great honour and privilege for me, on behalf of the
Government and people of Japan, to extend our most
sincere congratulations to the Government and people
of Papua New Guinea on their admission to this world
Organization.
98. I am especially gratified that the Prime Minister
of Papua New Guinea, Mr. Michael Somare, who has
made such brilliant preparations for the accession of
his people to independence, is present among us on this
memorable occasion. To him we should like to express
directly our congratulations on the admission of his
country to the United Nations and our best wishes
for his sm:cess in the task of nation-building. If the
Prime Minister will excuse a personal reference,
I should like to recall that I had the honour and pleasure
of knowing his great qualities during my last assignment before coming to the United Nations. We are
all confident that this newly independent State, under
his able guidance, will preserve its national unity and
advance the nation's progress and the people's welfare.
99. Papua New Guinea's accession to independence
on 16 September, followed so promptly and happily
by its admission to this family of nations, constitutes
an imposing achievement which is a tribute to the
successful operations of the United Nations trusteeship
system. My delegation wishes to express its deep
appreciation to the Trusteeship Council, which is now
presided over by Mr. Murray of the United Kingdom,
the Special Committee on decolonization, which is at
present presided over by Mr. Salim of the United
Republic of Tanzania, and the other United Nations
bodies which have provided valuable assistance for the
emergence of the new State.
~. ',," 'ol/",',,',

100. My deleg
appreciation to
faithful and dev
sibilities entrust
Administering A
10 1. The good
new State have
generous aid pr
tering Authority
ment of economi
102. It should
neighbour acros
emerging nation t
of nations. It is
sembly's action
a step nearer it
bership and has
participation in
strengthen the ti
ticular in the fie
region it is an im
ment of a peac
equal sovereign
the region.
103. The Gov
already given a
newly independ
dence, Japan es
Moresby last Ja
relations and cl
104. On this w
by assuring the
of the Governm
thing within thei
Papua New Gui
good-neighbourl
delegation is th
tion with the del
efforts, both wi
to help in achie
perity will pre
pleasure in the f
playing an outs
moting regional
the South Pacifi
bership in the
New Guinea to
international ar
welfare of the p
105. The PRE
tative of India.
106. Mr. JAIP
great deal of pie
Government of
as the one hun
United Nations.
to have among
Papua New G
New Guinea is
had some links
field and we ar
Iishment of dipl
oping mutual c
107. Papua N
Trust Territory

2383rd meeting-IO October 1975

100. My delegation wishes to express its special
appreciation to the Government of Australia for its
faithful and devoted fulfilment of the high responsibilities entrusted to it by the United Nations as the
Administering Authority of the Territory.
101. The good relations between Australia and the
new State. have been further demonstrated by the
generous aId programme which the former Administering Authority is putting into effect for the advancement of economic and social progress.
102. It should go without saying that Japan, as a
neighbour across the Pacific, rejoices to see this new
emerging nation take its rightful place in the community
of nations. It is significant also that the General Assembly's action today has brought the United Nations
a step nearer its goal of true universality of membership and has assured us that Papua New Guinea's
participation in the work of the United Nations will
strengthen the functions of the Organization, in particular in the field of decolonization. For the Pacific
region it is an important advance towards the achievement of a peaceful and prosperous era, based upon
equal sovereignty and benefits for all the States in
the region.
103. The Government and people of Japan have
already given a warm welcome to the youngest of the
newly independent States. In advance of independence, Japan established a consulate-general at Port
Moresby last January with a view to promoting friendly
relations and close co-operation.
104. On this welcome occasion, I wish to conclude
by assuring the General Assembly that it is the desire
of the Government and people of Japan to do everything within their power to strengthen the ties between
Papua New Guinea and our own country and to develop
good-neighbourly relations in the best sense. My
~elega~ion is thus looking forward to close co-operatIOn with the delegation of Papua New Guinea in joint
efforts, both within and outside the United Nations,
to help in achieving a world in which peace and prosperity w~ll prevail for all mankind. We take great
plea~ure m the fact that Papua New Guinea is already
playmg an outstanding and constructive role in promoting regional co-operation in the area as a member of
the South Pacific Forum. Its independence and membership i~ the United Nations will now enable Papua
New GUlOea to expand further its activities in the
international area, promoting in turn the stability and
welfare of the people of the Pacific region.
105. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of India.
106. Mr. JAIPAL (Inr.ha): It gives my delegation a
great deal of pleasure and satisfaction on behalf of the
Government of India to welcome Papua New Guinea
as the one hundred and forty-second Member of the
United Nations. Furthermore, we are fortunate indeed
to have among us here today the Prime Minister of
Papua New Guinea, Mr. Michael Somare. Papua
New Guinea is a nation-State with which India has
had some links for several years in the educational
~eld and we are keenly looking forward to the establishment of diplomatic relations with it and to developing mutual co-operation in all fields.
107. Papua New Guinea became an international
Trust Territory some 55 years ago, in 1920, and,

595

since the founding of this Organization, the United
Nations has been overseeing its administration and
watching over its political destiny. With the ending of
United Nations tutelage and the emergence of Papua
New Guinea as a sovereign, independent country,
the United Nations and Papua New Guinea are entering
an era of new relationships.
108. One may well ask what are the new obligations
of the United Nations towards Papua New Guinea now
that its trusteeship has ended. One may well answer
that the United Nations is obliged by 55 years of
historical ties to continue to provide assistance and
co-operation to Papua New Guinea, so as to ensure its
further economic and social development. The bonds
that were forged between Papua New Guinea, the
world community and Australia during 55 years of
international trusteeship are such that they can only
deepen with the advent of independence.
109. The political evolution of Papua New Guinea to
independence has been somewhat isolated from that of
the mainstream of national liberation movements
elsewhere. In that sense it is unique and Australia, as
the administering Power, has played a progressive
role in fulfilling the objectives of trusteeship. My
delegation wishes to congratulate the Government of
Australia no less than the people ofPapua New Guinea
for the remarkable and rapid progress made, particularly during the last 20 years, and for bringing about
a peaceful transfer of power to the people and Government of Papua New Guinea.
110. Papua New Guinea is a large country, rich in
natured resources, and it is a developing country with
a bright future. It will no doubt go through the usual
teething troubles common to all newly independent
countries. My delegation welcomes Papua New Guinea
with complete understanding of the aspirations of its
people and with assurances of sympathy and support
for their future development. We extend our congratulations to the Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea
and his Government and all good wishes for the future
of his country and people.
111. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of Canada.
112. Mr. STANBURY (Canada): The Canadian delegation has taken great pleasure in joining with many
other delegations in the sponsorship of the resolution
admitting Papua New Guinea to the United Nations,
and we warmly welcome its Prime Minister and its
delegation.
113. The Canadian Government applauds the steady
progress which has taken place in Papua New Guinea
in recent years, first towards internal self-government
a~d now to self-determination and independence. We
wish to congratulate the Government and citizens
of Papua New Guinea on the progress they have made
and which we feel certain they will continue to make
in developing a strong and cohesive nation. We wish
also to compliment the Government of Australia on
the firm commitment it has demonstrated over 20 years,
working in partnership with the people of Papua
!'lew Guinea to help them develop the institutions,
IOfrastructure and the trained personnel necessary to
an independent nation. It must be a matter of considerable pride and satisfaction to the United Nations
that the trusteeship arrangement has facilitated the

5

p
p

c
e
a
t

ti

P

11

a
ex
se

12
tra
N
di
th
me

S96

General Assembly-ThIrtieth SessIo9-Plenary Meetings

peaceful emergence of this nation whose future
prospects for stable social and economic development are so bright.
114. The Canadian Government was pleased to send
a special representative to participate in the Papua
New Guinea independence celebrations held at Port
Moresby on 16 September, and looks forward to the
conclusion of formal discussions which will lead to the
establishment of diplomatic relations between Canada
and Papua New Guinea. Ties already exist to bind our
two countries; dozens of young Canadian graduates,
for example, have for several years been working with
Papua New Guineans on social and economic projects.
We anticipate a steady growth in different forms of
co-operation between our two countries, and look
forward to a continuing development of our family ties
as countries of the Pacific Basin, as members of the
Commonwealth, and as Members of the United
Nations.
] ]5. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of New Zealand.
] ]6. Mr. TEMPLETON (New Zealand): I have
asked to speak on this happy occasion as the representative of one of Papua New Guinea's neighbours
in the South Pacific.
1]7. In his wise and percipient speech to this Assembly on 8 October [2380th meeting, paras. 42-95],
the Prime Minister of Fiji remarked that the South
Pacific was an area not so well known to Members
of the United Nations. He pointed out that since 196]
there have been profound political changes in the
region, all of them the outcome of a peaceful constitutional process. I like to think that this willingness to
make necessary changes peacefully in a spirit of mutual
understanding and consensus is a principal and maybe
even a distinguishing characteristic of the Pacific
way.
118. Since ]961, five South Pacific countries-Western Samoa, Fiji, Nauru, Tonga, and now Papua New
Guinea-have 1ttained independence. Other island
countries in the South Pacific have completed an act
of self-determination under United Nations auspices,
and have opted for full self-government.
] 19. In the South Pacific the word "neighbour" has
a special meaning. Separated we may be by wide
expanses of the Pacific Ocean. Linked we are by a
sense of common purpose, by a determination to work
together for peace and prosperity in our region, by a
desire to help one another in the development of our
resources, by a concern to prevent the South Pacific
from becoming an arena of military confrontation.
Our determination to work together has been demonstrated in several regIOnal organizations, the most
important of which is the South Pacific Forum, in
which nine heads of South Pacific Governments
regularly meet and to which Papua' New Guinea has
been making a dynamic contribution for the past two
years. This determination to work together is what we
in the Pacific mean when we call each other neighbours.
120. Now, Papua New Guinea comes to join Australia, Fiji and New Zealand as a Member of the United
Nations. Its progress to independence has had its
difficulties. It is to the credit of the statesmanship of
the leaders of Papua New Guinea, and of the Government of Australia, that these difficulties hav~ been
"~ ,

..~'

~""

~,

"':, '

"

:,

';:,~~,

'

"

"

successfully overcome. Papua New Guinea will make
a strong addition to the South Pacific voice in the
United Nations. It is a remarkable country, diverse
in its language and culture, rich in natural resources,
spectacular in its scenery, fortunate, if I may say so,
in its leadership.
121. May I, on behalf ofthe Government and people
of New Zealand, extend to Papua New Guinea, our
newest Member, and to its Prime Minister, the Maori
greeting which I am sure will be well known to him:
Haeremai, haeramai-welcome.
122. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of the host country, the United States of
America.
123. Mr. BENNETI (United States of America):
Just as we have warmly supported Papua New Guinea's
candidacy, the United States has co-sponsored wholeheartedly the resolution on the admission of Papua
New Guinea to membership in the United Nations.
We extend enthusiastic greetings to Papua New Guinea
as the newest Member of this ever more universal
Organization.
124. As representative of the host country, my delegation welcomes Papua New Guinea's representatives
at this Headquarters. May our hospitality match that
for which Papua New Guinea is so justly renowned.
I can testify personally to the warm and outgoing
friendliness one meets in Papua New Guinea because,
along with representatives of several other Member
States, I had the honour of serving on the United
Nations visiting mission there in 1972 to observe the
elections for the House of Assembly. Those elections,
which were an important element in Papua New
Guinea's self-determination process, were carried off
with smooth efficiency by Australia, the administering
Power, and with the reasoned exercise of their free
will by the people of Papua New Guinea. Permit me
to underscore once again my Govemment's deep
admiration for the exemplary manner in which Australia discharged its responsibilities as the Administering Authority under the Trusteeship Agreement.
125. My delegation warmly greets and salutes in this
Assembly Mr. MichaeI Somare, Prime Minister of
Papua New Guinea. This distinguished leader is moving
swiftly to establish his country in the family of nations.
On 8 October, for instance, in Washington, where
it was a special honour and pleasure for my Government to receive him, P!ime Minister Somare signed
the articles of agreement of the International Monetary
Fund and of the World Bank. In so doing, he emphasized his country's will to play an active role in institutions important to the international community. As a
member of the Trusteeship Council, the United States
witnesses these developments with special interest
and enthusiasm.
126. My delegation also salutes our friend and
colleague, Ralph' Karepa, as Papua New Guinea's
representative in New York. We anticipate keenly
the s~tisfaction of working with him and his delegation
in the period ahead.
127. The United States wishes Papua New Guinea all
the fruits of membership in the United Nations. It
looks forward to Papua New Guinea's contribution
in the deliberations and activities of our global Organization. Once again, welcome, Papua New Guinea.
"

"

.

,~"

~

~

,-"

,~'~,

128, The P
in inviting th
Mr. Michael
]29. Mr. S
four days a~
pendent Stat
this Organizll
history, I sh(
the Membe
Papua New
made about
130. These
was any gr(
nationhood,
geography h
our nation.
ereign natioIl
This is the m
and we will
of our new 11
131. I wist
to others wl
Papua New
debt is owe
the respons
within a few
and later ace
Nations Mar
Trusteeship
132, Proba
Australia di
policy upon
by the fact th
under the tr
133. After
became less
ical autono
Australia to
thetic donor
will continu
neighbourinl
that the rei
the basis fo
aad co-oper

134. I also
Council and
for their rol
the Preside
admission t
acceptance

135. Becal
Member St
way in whic
affairs. Our
by our reali.
We must c
economic d

136. As le
I state with
welfare of
conditions (
achieve this
affairs, eve
size and ine

238Jrd meetinl-lO October 1975

128. The PRESIDENT: I now have great pleasure
in inviting the Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea,
Mr. Michael Somare, to address the General Assembly.
129. Mr. SOMARE (Papua New Guinea): Twentyfour days ago Papua New Guinea became an independent State. Now, as my country takes its place in
this Organization, this is a second great moment in our
history. I should like to take this opportunity to thank
the Member States that have just complimented
Papua New Guinea for 'the kind remarks that were
made about my country and its people.
130. These events have taken time, not because there
was any great opposition to our progress towards
nationhood, but because the accidents of history and
geography have combined to delay the formal birth of
our nation. Despite these difficulties, we are a sovereign nation. Our people now has a national identity.
This is the most significant achievement in our history
and we will prize and protect the territorial integrity
of our new nation.
131. I wish to acknowledge our debt of gratitude
to others who have made possible the emergence of
Papua New Guinea as an independent State. This
debt is owed primarily to Australia, which assumed
the responsibilities of an Administering Authority
within a few years of its own attainment of statehood,
and later accepted furi-her obligations under a League of
Nations Mandate, and again under the United Nations
Trusteeship Agreement.
132. Probably because it was a new State itself,
Australia did not inflict an authoritarian colonialist
policy upon my country. This is shown most clearly
by the fact that today 90 per cent ofthe land still remains
under the traditional ownership of its people.
133. After the Second World War, Australia's role
became less and less that of an overlord. As our political autonomy increased, on our own insistence,
Australia took up a new role as a generous and sympathetic donor of aid. It has guaranteed that this role
will continue in our new relationship as partners and
neighbouring States in the Pacific. It is my sincere hope
that the relationship of the past years will provide
the basis for a continuing close bond of friendship
aud co-operation between our countries in the future.
134. I also express our gratitude to the Trusteeship
Council and the Special Committee on decolonization
for their role in our progress to nationhood, and to
the President and those who have sponsored our
admission to this distinguished body, because our
acceptance represents a culmination of that progress.
135. Because I represent my country, and a new
Member State, I wish to say a few words about the
way in which Papua New Guinea sees its role in world
affairs. Our every action and attitUde will be dominated
by our realization that our first commitment is at home.
We must consolidate our programmes of social and
economic development.
136. As leader of a new third-world Government,
I state without apology that our first priority is the
welfare of our own people. We wish to advance in
conditions of peace and security, and realize that to
achieve this we must also take our position in world
affairs, even though our influence will be limited by
size and inexperience on the world stage.

597

137. We understand the increasing interdependence
of all Member nations of the world family and for this
reason see the United Nations as the main hope for
the third world. Within the limits of our slender financial means and human resources, we hope to play
an active and positive role in this world body and in its
subsidiary and affiliated organizations.
138. Papua New Guinea has had a long historic
connexion with the Commonwealth of Nations and we
are endeavouring to pursue this further. Already we
have found friendship and understanding with our
fellow Members. Our geographical location means that
we are concerned with the affairs of two regions
-the South Pacific and South-East Asia.
139. Ethnically and culturally, we are a South Pacific
people. We believe in close co-operation among the
island peoples for the protection of our environment.
The strength of this conviction is shown by our intention to sponsor. with New Zealand and Fiji, a resolution in this Assembly to make the South Pacific a
nuclear-weapon-free zone. It is appropriate that this
should be our first contribution to the work of the
Assembly. Our further commitments to this region
have been expressed through our participation in the
regional organizations to which we belong.
140. At the same time, we share a common border
with our close neighbour, Indonesia, and no part of
South-East Asia lies very far from our shores. Our
priorities at home give us a direct concern for the
peace and security of these two regions and the progressive social and economic development of their
peoples.
141. The attitude we wili adopt in our relationships
with other countries will be best described as "universalist". We seek no involvement in conflicts
that have originated in past history-a history to which
we did not contribute. Similarly, if I may paraphrase
the words of the Mrican leader, the President of the
United Republic of Tanzania: "We do not want our
friends to choose our enemies for us." With very
few exceptions-namely, those countries with social or
racial policies that are unacceptable to us-we will
recognize Governments that wish to recognize us.
However, if the price of mutual recognition is that
we must take sides in regional, ideological or internal
conflict, then we will reject it.
142. As a country with significant but under-developed resources we realize that trade is a potent factor
in the growth of relationships between States. As our
trading partnerships develop it is inevitable that cooperation will be fostered at other levels. Countries
in partnership depend on each other. Continuing
dependence ensures friendship. Papua New Guinea
therefore fully supports the principles on which the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development was established.
143. Papua New Guinea is one more developing
country and this fact forms a basic element of future
policy in relation to the world. The basis of the economic life of our people remains subsistence agriculture. Like all developing countries we are, therefore, faced with the difficulties and frustrations of
bringing about development within an inequitable
world economic system. Papua New Guinea will join
whole-heartedly in efforts to reform that system. We

S98

General Assembly-Thirtieth Session-Plenary Meetings

--------_.:....-_-------------_. - - - -

know we will find new allies in this cause, especially
within the third world.
144. Finally, though such a statement might not seem
important from a country so new and as yet so uninfluential as Papua New Guinea, I state our fundamental
commitment to the maintenance of peace throughout
our region and the world and to our undertaking to
uphold the Charter of the United Nations.
145. The problems of the world today require a
determined and constructive effort by all countries.
I commit Papua New Guinea to making its contribution to this Organization.
AGENDA ITEM 121
Observer status for the Islamic ConferenlCe

at the United Nations
146. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of the Gambia, who wishes to introduce
the draft resolution in document A/L.765 and Add. I.
147. Mr. N'JIE (Gambia): Since this is the first time
I have spoken at this session, I should like to take this
opportunity to offer Mr. Thorn my sincere congratulations on his election to preside over the thirtieth
session of the General Assembly. His great experience and achievements in this Organization eminently
qualified him to assume that onerous charge, and
I wish him a successful and fruitful tenure of office.
148. May I also take this opportunity to salute and
congratulate my colleague and brother his distinguished predecessor in office, Mr. Abdelaziz Bouteflika, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Algeria, on the
masterly and successful way in which he conducted
the affairs of the twenty-ninth session of the General
Assembly-a success which redounds to the credit
not only of him and his great country but also of Africa
and, indeed, the wh3le international community.
149. This august hous(~ is aware that the Islamic
Conference was established in 1970. The organization
brings together 42 homogeneous communities bound to
one another by ties of history, common heritage and
the abiding Islamic faith. Its headquarters are located
in the city of Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
150. The Conference is dedicated to the same goals
and objectives as are sought by the United Nations.
Its charter enjoins on the member States respect for
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
The Conference in fact supplements the role and
enhances the effectiveness and efficiency ofthe United
Nations.
15I. Since its establishment, the Islamic Conference
has emerged as an important forum for hammering
out international differences, resolving conflicts,
reducing tensions and promoting just and peaceful
solutions to global issues and regional problems. It
has tumed out to be an effective instrument for finding
common ground, settling disputes, harmonizing
divergent viewpoints and strengthening solidarity. The
Conference is seized of all the dominant issues faced
by the United Nations. Some of the most sensitive
problems like Palestine. Jerusalem, the Middle East,
colonialism and racial discrimination in southern
Mrica, the danger of nuclear proliferation and the
establishment of a new international economic order,

are under the continuing consideration of the Conference, and active interest is taken in finding a just
and acceptable solution. The Islamic Foreign Ministers
meet annually to examine old as well as emerging
questions and, if circumstances warrant. summit conferences are convened to take decisions.
152. Apart from political matters, the Conference is
engaged in the development and improvement of international economic relations. It is playing an increasingly significant role in restoring and maintaining the
tempo of socio-economic development in the thirdworld countries. The member States are making an
increasing contribution in the form of economic assistance and humanitarian aid for the welfare and prosperity of people all over the Afro-Asian continents.
In the words of His Royal Highness Prince Saud al
Faisal:
"The Islamic Conference organization has made
notable and dynamic progress in dealing with various
economic and political matters and has established
financial, technical and other institutions...
153. The similarity ofthe objectives and the common
interests of the Conference and the United Nations
make it desirable to institutionalize the relationship
between the two and to have closer co-operation in
all areas of mutual concern. The Conference accordingly wishes to be granted the status of observer in
the General Assembly and its subsidiary organs.
154. On behalf of the member States of the Islamic
Conference, my delegation has the honour to move the
following draft resolution:
"The General Assembly.
"Noting the desire of the States members of the
Islamic Conference for co-operation between the
United Nations and the Islamic Conference,
"I. Decides to invite the Islamic Conference to
participate in the sessions and the work of the General Assembly and of its subsidiary organs in the
capacity of observer;
"2. Requests the Secretary-General to take the
necessary action to implement the present resolution...

ization k
came int
organizat
working
ber State
are at the
All these
on a spi
aim at set
are deriv
theirpeo
and solid
158. Th
steps du
This orga
an effect
closer to
means 0
and econ
worthy
is still de
its memb
lems sue
East, qu
discrimin
ern Rho
nuclear
order. W
ference
settle the
and its e
bringing
sister Sta
159. Th
about pe
these tw
ofallowi
This is in
of the or
activities
of econo
co-operat
La:.ore h

155. Mr. ZHIRI (Morocco) (interpretation from
Arabic): The delegation of Morocco is indeed happy
that, with the approval of the General Assembly, the
item on observer status for the Islamic Conference
at the United Nations has been included in our agenda.

the setti
with a c
States to
develop
Fund, w
natural c
nical and
That Fun
year to s
161. Th
construct
peoples I
and deve
belongin
to those e
and its 0
of other
mon aspi
their me
achieve

156. This subject was requested for inclusion in the
agenda by a large number of delegations. in accordance with rule 14 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly. The Moroccan delegation has asked
to speak to show that its joint support, with the various
other States, of this request is in accordance with the
line taken by Morocco since the idea of the Islamic
Conference came into being.

157. I should like to mention that my country had the
honour and pleasure of being the host for the First
Summit Conference of the Islamic Conference on the
occasion of the fire set at the AI-Aqsa Mosque by the
Zionists on 21 August 1969. The idea and project
crystallized, and the First Islamic Conference was held
at Rabat at the request and the invitation of Morocco
in September 1969, as a result of which the organ-

160.

A

2383rd meeting-to October 1975

izati0I! know!,! by this name-Islamic Conferencecame mto bemg and has become today a permanent
organization with its own subsidiary bodies, which is
working well and producing results. There are 42 member States, members ofthe Islamic Conference, which
are at the same time Members of the United Nations.
All these States have a common cultural heritage based
on a spiritual, cultural and historical foundation and
aim at setting up a model for a community whose values
are derived from the principles of the religion in which
their peoples believe, the principles of equality, justice
and solidarity.
158. The Islamic Conference has taken important
steps during this last short period since its inception.
This organization has proved since its birth that it is
an effective means of bringing its member States
closer together, settling disputes and strengthening
means of co-operation and solidarity, both socially
and economically, in a practical way and a praiseworthy manner. The organization has deployed, and
is still deploying, efforts to co-ordinate the policy of
its member States on a number of international problems such as the explosive situation in the Middle
East, questions relating to the Arab States, racial
discrimination as practised in South Mrica and Southern Rhodesia, the question of non-proliferation of
nuclear weapons and the new international economic
order. We are all well aware what the Islamic Conference did recently when it deployed its efforts to
settl~ the dispute between Pakistan and Bangladesh,
and ItS efforts have been crowned with success in
bringing about an understanding between those two
sister States.
159. The Islamic Conference was able to bring
about peace, co-operation and understanding between
these two States on the Indian subcontinent, instead
of allowing the tension and futile disputes to continue.
This is in itself an achievement, thanks to the efforts
of the organization, but it also carries out economic
activities to find practical, realistic means and methods
of economic interdependence and. social and cultural
co-operation, as a result of the Summit Conference at
La~,ore held in February 1974.1
160. Among the most important developments was
the setting-up of the Islamic Development Bank
with a capital of SDR 1,000 million to help member
States to carry out projects of economic and social
development. Added to that is the Islamic Solidarity
Fund, which is devoted to alleviating the effects of
n~tural catastrophes and to assisting scientific, techmeal and educational institutions in member States.
That Fund was set up and has devoted $50 million this
year to such projects.
161. The Islamic Conference, seeking to establish
constructive consolidation and co-operation among the
peoples living in this world, and to bring prosperity
and development to the various peoples of the world,
belonging to various races, has similar principles
to those enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations
and its objectives are very similar to the objectives
of other international organizations which have comm0!1 aspirations and an organic relationship between
their members, namely, to redouble its efforts to
achieve progress and development.
162. The United Nations has in the past given
observer status to many of these organizations, thus

S99

r~cogn.izing the ~omplem.entary role they play side by

side with the Umted Nations. What we are requesting
today is that the Islamic Conference should also be
granted observer status in our Organization.
163. The Moroccan delegation, fully convinced of the
abilities of the Islamic Conference and what it has
achieved, and plans to achieve in the future, considers
that the granting of observer status to the Islamic
Conference will not only be recognition of the efforts
which it has made at the regional and international
level, but also an enrichment of the United Nations
and what that may entail in the way of fruitful cooperation between both organizations.
164. The Moroccan delegation firmly requests, as a
participant with various other delegations in submitting
the draft resolution, that the General Assembly should
grant observer status to the Islamic Conference at the
United Nations.

165. The PRESIDENT: As there are no more
speakers on this item we shall now take a decision on
draft r€solution AIL. 765 and Add.l. May I take it
that the General Assembly adopts the draft resolution?

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 3369
(XXX».

AGENDA ITEM 12

Report of the Economic and Social Council

REPORT OF THE THIRD COMMITTEE (PART I)
(AI 10284)
166. Mrs. SEKELA KANINDA (Zaire), Rapporteur
of the Third Committee (interpretation from French):
I have the honour to submit the first part of the report
of the Third Committee on item 12 of the agenda,
entitled" Report of the Economic and Social Council" .
The report is contained in document A/10284.
167. In paragraph 4 of the report, the Third Committee recommends to the General Assembly the
adoption of the following draft decishn:

"The General Assembly decides to invite the
Chairman-Rapporteur oftheAd Hoc Working Group
on the Situation of Human Rights in Chile, established by the Commission on Human Rights by its
resolution 8 (XXXI) of 27 February 1975,2 to assist
the Third Committee in its consideration of the
progress report of the Ad Hoc Working Group."
The draft decision was adopted without objection in
the Third Committee.

Pursuant to rule 66 of the rules ofprocedure, it was
decided not to discuss the report of the Third Committee.
168. The PRESIDENT: As there are no requests
to speak in explanation of vote, the Assembly will
now consider the draft decision recommended by the
Third Committee in paragraph 4 of its report [AII0284].
The report of the Fifth Committee on the administrative and financial implications of that draft decision is contained in document A/I0291. May I take

600

United

General Assembly-TbJrtletb Session-Plenary Meetings

it that the General Assembly adopts the recommendation of the Third Committee by consensus?
The draft decision was adopted.

The meeting rose at J.20 p.m.

NOTES

GE

Second Islamic Conference of Kings and Heads of State
and Government. held at Lahore from 19 to 22 February 1974.
2 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Fifty-eighth Session. Supplement No. 4 (E/5635), chap. XXlIl.

ASS

I

THIRTIE

Official

Agenda it
Electio
rity

In th
Ramse

1. Th
this m
membe
whose
The fi
Soviet
tania a
five co
names
2. Ap
Securit
countri
United
those
papers.
3. Of
remain
one fro
Europe
with p
17 Dec
elected
Africa
Latin A
accoun
4. In
dure, t
there s
5. Th
I reque
which
names
wish to
should
membe
non-per

are aIr
