General Assembly-Forty-second Session

184

provement of the channels of communication between the
United Nations and youth and youth organizations, contained in the annex to resolution 36/17, and to encourage
other United Nations bodies and specialized agencies to
do the same;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General to develop
methods that specifically indicate how the channels of
communication could efficiently be attuned to youthrelated projects and activities of United Nations organs
and of the specialized agencies, and to include in his report
thereon to the General Assembly concrete suggestions for
co-operation between the United Nations system and the
non-governmental youth organizations;
4. Calls upon youth mechanisms that have been set up
by youth and youth organizations at the national, regional
and international levels to continue to act as channels of
communication between the United Nations and youth
and youth organizations by putting forth their proposals
for co-operation with the United Nations system, and,
where such mechanisms do not exist, recommends that
national co-ordinating committees of the International
Youth Year should similarly continue to act as channels of
communication;
5. Decides to consider at its forty-third session the item
entitled "Policies and programmes involving youth" on
the basis of the report of the Secretary-General.
85th plenary meeting
30 November 1987

42/56. Status of the International Convention on the
Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of
Apartheid

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3068 (XXVIII) of 30 November
1973, by which it adopted and opened for signature and
ratification the International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid, and its
subsequent resolutions on the status of the Convention,
Reaffirming its conviction that apartheid constitutes a total negation of the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, a gross violation of human rights
and a crime against humanity, seriously threatening international peace and security,
Alarmed by the aggravation of the situation in South
Africa, in particular the further escalation of ruthless
repression by the Fascist-like apartheid regime,
Strongly condemning South Africa's continued policy of
apartheid and its continued illegal occupation of Namibia,
as well as its policy of aggression, State terrorism and destabilization against independent African States,
Mindful of Commission on Human Rights resolution
1987/ll of 26 February 1987, 26 in which the Commission
expressed its conviction that the crime of apartheid is a
form of the crime of genocide,
Stressing that the racist apartheid regime is the root
cause of the conflict in southern Africa and that as long as
it exists there will be neither peace nor security for any
country in the region nor early independence for Namibia
and that it must, therefore, be eradicated,
Condemning the continued collaboration of certain
States and transnational corporations with the racist

26 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,

1987,
Supplement No. 5 (E/1987/18 and Corr.I and 2), chap. II, sect. A.

regime of South Africa in the political, economic, military
and other fields as an encouragement to the intensification
of its odious policy of apartheid,
Firmly convinced that the legitimate struggle of the oppressed peoples in southern Africa against apartheid, racism and colonialism and for the effective exercise of their
inalienable right to self-determination and independence
demands more than ever all necessary support by the international community and, in particular, further action
by the Security Council in accordance with Chapter VII of
the Charter of the United Nations,
Underlining that ratification of or accession to the Convention on a universal basis and the implementation of its
provisions without any delay are necessary for its effectiveness, and therefore will contribute to the eradication of
the crime of apartheid,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the status of the International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid; 27
2. Commends those States parties to the Convention
which have submitted their reports under article VII
thereof;
3. Appeals once again to the States that have not yet
done so to ratify or to accede to the Convention without
further delay, in particular those States which have jurisdiction over transnational corporations operating in South
Africa and Namibia and without whose co-operation such
operations cannot be halted;
4. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Group of Three of the Commission on Human Rights, established in accordance with article IX of the Convention,
and, in particular, of the conclusions and recommendations contained in that report;2 8
5. Draws the attention of all States to the opinion expressed by the Group of Three in its report2 9 that transnational corporations operating in South Africa and Namibia must be considered accomplices in the crime of
apartheid, in accordance with article III (b) of the Convention;
6. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to intensify, in co-operation with the Special Committee
against Apartheid, its efforts to compile periodically the
progressive list of individuals, organizations, institutions
and representatives of States deemed responsible for
crimes enumerated in article II of the Convention, as well
as those against whom or which legal proceedings have
been undertaken;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to circulate the
above-mentioned list to all States parties to the Convention and to all Member States and to bring such facts to
the attention of the public by all means of mass communication;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to invite the States
parties to the Convention, the specialized agencies and
non-governmental organizations to provide the Commission on Human Rights with relevant information concerning the forms of the crime of apartheid, as described in article II of the Convention, committed by transnational
corporations operating in South Africa;
9. Notes the importance of measures to be taken by
States parties in the field of teaching and education for
fuller implementation of the Convention;

27 A/42/449.
28 E/CN.4/1987/28, sect. V.
29 Ibid., sect. IV, para. 50.

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

10. Appeals to all States, United Nations organs, the
specialized agencies and international and national nongovernmental organizations to step up their activities in
enhancing public awareness by denouncing the crimes
committed by the racist regime of South Africa;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to intensify his efforts, through appropriate channels, to disseminate information on the Convention and its implementation with a
view to promoting further ratification of or accession to
the Convention;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to include in his
next annual report under General Assembly resolution
3380 (XXX) of 10 November 1975 a special section concerning the implementation of the Convention.
85th plenary meeting
30 November 1987

42/57.

Report of the Committee on the Elimination of
Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions concerning the reports
of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination and resolution 41/104 of 4 December 1986 on the
status of the International Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, 2 as well as its other
relevant resolutions on the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Second Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, 30
Reiterating the importance of the Convention, which is
the most widely accepted human rights instrument
adopted under the auspices of the United Nations, as well
as of the contribution of the Committee to United Nations
efforts to combat racism and all other forms of discrimination based on race, colour, descent or national or ethnic
origin,
Welcoming the report of the Committee covering its
1986 and 1987 sessions,3 1
Reiterating once again the need to intensify the struggle
for the elimination of racism and racial discrimination
throughout the world, especially the elimination of apartheid in South Africa and Namibia,
Mindful of the obligation of all States parties to comply
fully with the provisions of the Convention,
Recalling the urgent appeals made by the SecretaryGeneral, the General Assembly, the eleventh meeting of
States parties to the Convention and the Committee itself
to the States parties to honour their financial obligation
under the Convention,
Gravely concerned that, in spite of all the urgent appeals
for payment of assessed contributions under the Convention, the situation impeding the proper functioning of the
Committee continues to deteriorate,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on the question of financing the expenses of the members
of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, 32
l. Expresses its profound concern at the fact that a
number of States parties to the International Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination
have not fulfilled their financial obligations under the Con-

185

vention, which led to the cancellation of the August 1986
session and the curtailment by two weeks of the August
1987 session of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination;
2. Expresses once again its concern that such a situation prevented the Committee from submitting an annual
report to the General Assembly at its forty-first session as
required by the Convention and led to further delay in discharging its substantive obligations under the Convention;
3. Commends the Committee for its work with regard
to the implementation of the Convention and the Programme of Action for the Second Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination;
4. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Committee covering its 1986 and 1987 sessions;
5. Calls upon States parties to fulfil their obligations
under article 9, paragraph l, of the Convention and to submit in due time their periodic reports on measures taken to
implement the Convention;
6. Strongly appeals to all States parties to fulfil without
delay their financial obligations under article 8, paragraph
6, of the Convention so as to enable the Committee to continue its work;
7. Calls upon States parties to explore, at their next
meeting on 15 January 1988, all appropriate avenues and
to take a decision that would enable the Committee to
meet regularly in the future;
8. Invites the States parties to consider, pending a fully
satisfactory solution to the current financial difficulties,
the possibility, as an exceptional measure, of the Committee holding one extended session per year;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-third session on the financial situation of the Committee;
10. Decides to consider the report at its forty-third session under the item entitled "Elimination of all forms of
racial discrimination".
85th plenary meeting
30 November 1987

42/58.

Implementation of the World Programme of Action concerning Disabled Persons and United
Nations Decade of Disabled Persons

The General Assembly,
Recalling all its pertinent resolutions, including resolution 37/52 of 3 December 1982, by which it adopted the
World Programme of Action concerning Disabled Persons, 33 and resolution 37 /53 of 3 December 1982, by
which it, inter alia, proclaimed the period 1983-1992 the
United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons,
Recalling its resolution 41/106 of 4 December 1986 and
reaffirming all of its provisions,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution
1987 /43 of 28 May 1987, in which the Council, inter alia,
requested the Secretary-General to make all appropriate
efforts to mobilize international support and action for the
Decade,
Further taking note of the Guiding Principles for Developmental Social Welfare Policies and Programmes in the
Near Future, 21 adopted by the Interregional Consultation

30 Resolution 38/14.
31 Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-second Session,
Suff1ement No. 18 (A/42/18).
A/42/468 and Corr. I and Add. I.

13 A/37 /35 I/ Add. I
and
recommendation I (IV).

Add. I/Corr. I,

annex,

sect. VIII,
