9

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

teeship Agreement has been terminated, all with the
approval of the United Nations ;
4. Considers it necessary that, pending the establishment of popular governments on the basis of the
legislative elections to be held in 1961, broad-based
caretaker governments be constituted immediately in
both parts of the Trust Territory to attend to current
affairs of administration and to act in strict conformity
with the obligations of the Administering Authority
for the implementation of the resolutions of the General
Assembly;
5. Declares that it is clearly the obligation and the
responsibility of the Administering Authority to create
the necessary conditions and atmosphere for the proper
conduct of the national elections and not to permit any
local authorities to impede the implementation of the
resolutions of the General Assembly;
6. Decides that the referendum on the question of
the Mwami, contemplated in resolution 1580 (XV), and
the legislative elections in Ruanda-Urundi should be
held in the month of August 1961 on the basis of direct
universal adult suffrage, under the supervision of the
United Nations, and that these be organized by the
Administering Authority in full consultation with the
United Nations Commission for Ruanda-Urundi, the
actual dates to be fixed, after mutual consultation, in
the light of the prevailing circumstances ;
7. Decides further that the questions to be put at the
referendum on the question of the M wami in Ruanda
should be the following :
"1. Do you wish to retain the institution of
the M wami in Ruanda?
"2. If so, do you wish Kigeli V to continue as the
M wami of Ruanda ?";
8. Requests the United Nations Commission for
Ruanda-Urundi, composed of three members elected by
the General Assembly on 20 December 1960, hereafter
to be designated United Nations Commissioners, to
return to Ruanda-Urundi at the earliest possible time
to assist and advise the Administering Authority in the
full and proper implementation of resolution 1579
(XV) and the present resolution, and to perform the
other tasks entrusted to it ;
9. Notes the information given by the representative
of the Administering Authority concerning measures
of amnesty already implemented, and recommends
that:
( a) Full and unconditional amneiity, as envisaged in
resolution 1579 (XV), be immediately granted by the
Administering Authority;
( b) The few remaining cases which, in the Administering Authority's view, are guilty of "very grave
crimes" be examined by a Special Commission composed of the representatives of three Member States to
be elected by the General Assembly, with a view to
securing their release from prison or return from abroad
in the full implementation of the Assembly's recommendation concerning amnesty not later than two months
before the national elections ;
10. Notes the observations contained in paragraphs
199-203 of the interim report of the United Nations
Commission for Ruanda-Urundi and calls upon the
Administering Authority to observe strictly its international obligations under the Trusteeship Agreement;
11. Requests the Administering Authority to ensure
that the material conditions essential to the successful

discharge by the United Nations Commissioners of their
responsibilities, such as housing, office space, travel
facilities, information and the free use of official broadcasting facilities are provided, and that the local authorities co-operate fully with them;
12. Requests the United Nations Commission for
Ruanda-Urundi to submit a report on the implementation of the present resolution to the General Assembly
at its sixteenth session;
13. Decides to maintain this item on the agenda of
the present session, without closing the debate thereon,
and authorizes the United Nations Commission for
Ruanda-Urundi, in the event that the performance of
its duties is hindered through deliberate obstruction or
lack of the requisite co-operation from any quarter, to
return to United Nations Headquarters and request the
President of the General Assembly to reconvene the
Assembly immediately to consider further measures
essential to the discharge of the United Nations obligations with respect to the Trust Territory of RuandaUrundi;
14. Calls upon the Administering Authority to rescind Legislative Order No. 221 /296 of 25 October
1960, so as to ensure that there is no unwarranted interference with the exercise of public freedom and that
no persons may be removed or detained without recourse
to due process of law;
15. Reiterates its conviction that the best future for
Ruanda-Urundi lies in the accession of that Territory
to independence as a single, united and composite State ;
16. Considers that the full implementation of all the
provisions of the present resolution will enable the
General Assemblv at its sixteenth session to consider
the termination ~f the Trusteeship Agreement at the
earliest possible date.
994th plenary meeting,
21 April 1961.
*

*

*

At its 994th plen-0ry meeting on 21 April 1961, the General
Assembly appointed the members of the Special Commission
established under the terms of paragraph 9 (b) of the above
resolution.
The Special Commission is composed as follows:

BRAZIL,

CANADA and TUNISIA.

1606 (XV).

Land tenure and agrarian reform
in Ruanda-Urundi
The General Assembly,
Recalling that the United Nations Visiting Mission
to Trust Territories in East Africa, 1960, stated in its
report on Ruanda-Urundi that since the November 1959
disturbance,, the question of the necessary changes in
the land tenure system has become even more urgent,
and that the present position represents an obstacle to
lasting peace in the country and impedes the rational
utilization of land, without which agriculture and stockbreeding canm,t properly develop,4

Recalling that the Trusteeship Council at its twentysixth session adopted the following recommendation :
"The Council, noting that basic reforms are needed
in the land tenure system of the Trust Territory, expresses the hope that the new representative bodies
• 0 fficial Records of the Trusteeship Council, Twenty-sixth
Session, Supplement No. 3 (T/1551), document T/1538, para.
-t94.

10

General Assembly -

to be constituted in Ruanda-Urundi will give urgent
consideration to these problems", 5
Recalling that the Trusteeship Council and the Committee on Rural Economic Development have in the
past made various studies of the problem of population,
land utilization and land tenure system in RuandaU rundi,
Bearing in mind that the majority of the petitioners
are agreed that this problem is of vital importance to
the Territory,
Considering that a satisfactory land tenure system is
essential to the peaceful evolution and satisfactory economic development of newly independent territories,
1. Recommends that the Administering Authority
urgently request the United Nations and the specialized
agencies, under the technical assistance programmes, to
dispatch an expert mission to study the problem of land
tenure and land utilization in Ruanda-Urundi, in cooperation with the local authorities, with a view to determining how far the present system is prejudicial to
the Territory's social and economic development, and to
recommend corrective measures;
2. Expresses the hope that the Technical Assistance
Board and the specialized agencies concerned will give
favourable consideration to such a request.
994th plenary meeting,
21 April 1961.
1607 (XV). Dissemination of information on
the United Nations and the International
Trusteeship Sy,stem in Trust Territories
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1276 (XIII) of 5 December
1958 and resolution 1410 (XIV) of 5 December 1959
whereby the General Assembly, inter alia, requested the
Secretary-General to initiate discussions with the Administering Authorities of Trust Territories with a view
to establishing, during 1960, in at least some of the
larger Trust Territories, such as Tanganyika, RuandaUrundi and New Guinea, United Kations information
centres in which the responsible positions would be
occupied preferably by indigenous inhabitants of the
Trust Territories concerned,
Having perused the report of the Secretary-General6
prepared in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1410 (XIV), and observing therefrom that the
dissemination of information on the United Nations
among the peoples of the Trust Territories is still far
from satisfactory,
Keeping in view the special status of Trust Territories
and their inhabitants and also the General Assembly's
own special responsibilities under Chapters XII and
XIII of the Charter of the United Nations,
Reiterating that it is essential, in the General Assembly's view, that the peoples of Trust Territories
should receive adequate information concerning the
purposes and operation of the United Nations and of
the International Trusteeship System, the principles of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and the
Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial
countries and peoples contained in Assembly resolution
1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
5
Official Records of the General Assl'mbly, Fifteenth Session,
Supplement No. 4 (A/4404), part II, chapter II, para. 184.
'Ibid., Fifteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 46, documents A/4542 and Add.I.

Fifteenth Session

1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on dissemination of information on the United Nations
and the International Trusteeship System in Trust
Territories ;

2. Considers that United Nations information centres
constitute one of the most important means of disseminating information about the United Nations in these
Territories;
3. Takes note of the statement of the representative
of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland that, as a result of discussions between the
Secretary-General and the Administering Authority,
steps have been taken to establish, in the near future, a
United Nations information centre in Tanganyika;
4. Takes further note of the recommendation in
paragraph 224 of the interim report of the United
Nations Commission for Ruanda-Urundi 3 that a United
Nations information centre should be set up with all
possible speed in Ruanda-l:'rundi;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary action to establish, without any further delay, in
Tanganyika, Ruanda-Urundi and New Guinea, United
Nations information centres in which the responsible
positions would be occupied by indigenous inhabitants
of the Trust Territories concerned;
6. Invites the Administering Authorities to extend
their co-operation and assistance to the SecretaryGeneral in implementing the present resolution ;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the immediate and mass publication and the widest possible
circulation and dissemination, in all the Trust Territories through all media of mass communication, of the
Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial
countries and peoples ;
8. Requests that the information referred to in the
present resolution should be disseminated in the principal local languages as well as in the language of the
Administering Authority;
9. Further requests the Secretary-General to prepare
for the Trusteeship Council at its twenty-seventh session and for the General Assembly at its sixteenth
session a report on the implementation of the present
resolution.
994th plenary meeting,
21 April 1961.
1608 (XV). The future of the Trust Territory
of the Cameroons under United Kingdom
administration

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1350 (XIII) of 13 March
1959 concerning the future of the Trust Territory of
the Cameroons under United Kingdom administration
in which the General Assembly recommended, inter
alia, that the Administering Authority take steps, in
comultation with the L'nited Nations Plebiscite Commissioner for the Cameroons under United Kingdom
Administration, to organize, under the supervision of
the United Nations, separate plebiscites in the northern
and southern parts of the Cameroons under United
Kingdom administration, in order to ascertain the
wishes of the inhabitants oi the Territory concerning
their future, and that the plebiscite in the Northern
Cameroons be held about the middle of November 1959
