ITY
L

COUNCIL
RECORDS

I

TWENTY-

FIFTH

rd
1533

MEETING:

NEW

YEAR
13 MARCH 1970

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (SIAgendall.533)

. . . . , , , . . , . . ,, . , . , , , . ,. , . , , .. . .. . . .. 1

Adoption

of the agenda . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . , , , . . , , . , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . , 1

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 3 March 1970 from the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/9675);
Letter dated 6 March 1970 addressed to the President of the Security Council
by the representatives of Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon, the
Central African Republic, Chad, the Congo (Democratic Republic of),
Dahomey, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, the Ivory
Coast, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Morocco, the Niger, Nigeria, the People’s Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra,Leone, Somalia, the Sudan, Swaziland,
Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, the United Arab Republic, the United Republic
of Tanzania, the Upper Volta and Zambia (S/9682) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

SIPV. 1533

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention qf such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ , . , ) are normally published
in quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The
date of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in ‘yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions
of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

Held in New York on Friday, 13 March 1970, at 3 p.m.
/I
18

!

Mr.

President:

Joaquin VALLEJO
(Colombia).

Ivory Coast, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya,
Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco, the Niger, Nigeria, the People’s Republic
of the Congo, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Somalia, the Sudan, Swaziland, Togo, Tunisia,
Uganda, the United Arab Republic, the United
Republic of Tanzania, the Upper Volta and Zambia (S/9682)

ARBELAEZ

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Burundi,
China, Colombia, Finland, France, Nepal,
Nicaragua,
Poland, Sierra Leone, Spain, Syria, Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom’of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
and Zambia.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l533)
1.

Adoption

2.

Question
concerning the situation in Southern
Rhodesia:
Letter dated 3 March 1970 from the Permanent
Representative
of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/9675);
Letter dated 6 March 1970 addressed to the President of the Security Council by the representatives of Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon,
the Central African Republic, Chad, the Congo
(Democratic
Republic of), Dahomey, Equatorial
Guinea,
Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, the
Ivory Coast, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya,
Madagascar,
Mali,
Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Morocco, the Niger, Nigeria, the People’sRepublic
of the Congo, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Somalia,
the Sudan, Swaziland, Togo, Tunisia,
Uganda,
the United Arab Republic, the United
Republic of Tanzania, the Upper Volta and Zambia (S/9682).

1. The PRESIDENT
(interplvtcrtion from Spanish):
In accordance with the decisions previously taken by
the Council, and with the Council’s consent, I propose
now to invite the representatives of Algeria, Senegal,
Pakistan, Yugoslavia and India to participate in the
Council’s discussions without the right to vote. Since
there is insufficient room at the table to seat all representatives participating in the debate, I shall, in
accordance with past practice of the Council in similar
cases, request them to take the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber, on the understanding that they will be invited to take a place at
the Council table when it is their turn to speak.

of the agenda.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. N. Harbi
(Algeria), Mr. I. Boye (Senegpl), Mr. S. A. Karim
(Pakistan),
Mr. L. Mojsov (Yugoslavia) and Mr. S.
Sen (India) took the places reserved for them in the
Council chamber.

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Spanish):
Before calling on the first speaker on my list, I should
like to point out that documents S/9696/Corr.l and
Corr.2 have been distributed.
3. The first name on my list is that of the representative of Pakistan, whom I invite to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda

was adopted.

4. Mr. KARIM (Pakistan): Mr. President, the Pakistan delegation is grateful to. you and the other members
of the Security Council for kindly permitting us to participate, without vote, in this debate. While conveying
to you and your colleagues the profound esteem of
my delegation, I should also like to pay a tribute to
your wisdom and high-mindedness which guarantee
the success of your Presidency.

Question concerning the situation in Southern
Rhodesia
Letter dated 3 March 1970 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain
and Northern Ireland to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/9675);
Letter dated 6 March 1970 addressed to the President of the Security Council by the representatives of Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon,
the Central African Republic, Chad; the Congo
(Democratic Republic of), Dahomey, Equatorial
Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, the

5. I hope it is not necessary for me to restate the
reasons which prompted my delegation to ask to participate in this discussion; they are evident from the
Council’s records on the question of Southern
Rhodesia, starting from November 1965. The most
recent statement of my Government, which has been
1

rai
Phi

A measure is effective to the degree it forces or helps
to force a reversal of the course adopted by the Salisbury rtgime. It is ineffective if it fails to do SO, however
well intentioned it might be.

circulated in document S/9677, is but one expression
of the sense of outrage prevailing in Pakistan at the
continuance of the odious Smith rCgime in Zimbabwe.
We fully share the widespread indignation evoked by
the persistence of the men in Salisbury in resorting
to increasingly brazen acts of defying all standards of
legality and every decision of the Security Council.

doI
ful
the
bet

9. Looking at the problem in that perspective, my
delegation cannot persuade itself to believe that any
reaffirmation of a decision already made by the Security Council would be adequate to the present situation,
On the contrary, we are apprehensive that such a
reiteration, unless accompanied by other decisioris,
will be construed by the Smith rCgime as a confession
of the Security Council’s impotence. The Council has
had ample experience of the mentality of the men in
Salisbury. It can well judge the impact ofits pronouncements and decisions on them. There cannot be any
manner of doubt regarding their cynicism, their stubborness and their complete disregard of the elementary
decencies of international life. Can it, therefore, possibly be assumed that another pronouncement
on the
basic illegality of this rkgime, another declaration that
it is disqualified for international recognition, will sway
the minds of these men and deflect them from their
defiant course? To ask that question is not to deny
the pertinence of the emphasis that the United Kingdomplaces on the issue at recognition. On the contrary,
it is only fair to acknowledge that the request by the
United Kingdom for an urgent meeting of the Security
Council and its sponsoring of a draft resolution have
already led to some good results. I refer here to the
severance of consular relations
with Southern
Rhodesia by a number of Governments, including those
of two permanent members of the Security Council.
Nevertheless, it is the sincere and firm conviction of
the Pakistan delegation that the assumption by the
Salisbury rCgime of a so-called republican status calls
for a more meaningful response from the Security
Council than any the Council has made so far. In this
context, we.consider it appropriate to recall the proposals which were embodied in a draft resolution sponsdred by Algeria, Nepal, Senegal, Zambia and Pakistan
in the Security Council on 19 June 1969, contained
in document S/9270/Rev.l. Unfortunately,
that draft
resolution failed to obtain the required majority in the
Security Council. We would appeal to those members
of the Security Council that did not support it at that
time to reconsider their position now, We, who were
among the co-sponsors of that draft resolution, are
happy to see that its main elements are contained in
the one embodied in document S/9696 and Corr. 1 and
2, which was ably introduced by Mr. Tonzeh of Syria
on behalf of the Asian-African members of the Council.

6. While addressing oneself to this question in this
forum one is fortunately free of the burden of having
to stress any proposition of a legal or ethical nature.
As the permanent representative of Pakistan, Ambassador Shahi, said at the 1475th meeting of the Security
Council on 13 June 1969:
“The question before the Security Council is
whether or not the sanctidns imposed under resolution 253 (1968) of 29 May 1968 have been effective
and, if not, how they can be reinforced by other
possible measures under Chapter VII. This is a question altogether different from an adjudication of
rights and wrongs, a balancing of claims and counterclaims. There is no controversy here on questions
of law or morality. The issue before us is predominantly of an executive nature; it has to be faced
with candour. If acrimony is undesirable, equivocation is also out of place.”
7. The fact that the problem of Rhodesia has been
the subject of action under Chapter VII of the Charter
of the United Nations is a logical consequence of certain determinations made by the Security Council.
Because they constitute determinations, the propositions implicit in them are incontestable. They are: first,
that the racist minority rhgime in Southern Rhodesia
is wholly illegal, and no recognition should be accorded
to it by any State; secondly, that the continuance of
that rbgime constitutes a threat to international peace
and security; thirdly, that the people of Southern
Rhodesia are entitled to full self-determination and
independence and that all States Members of the
United Nations should render them moral and material
assistance in their struggle to secure the enjoyment
of their rights; fourthly, that the responsibility of dealing with the situation caused by the acts of the Salisbury
rkgime continues to rest primarily with the United
Kingdom as the legal administering Power pending the
accession to independence of the people of Southern
Rhodesia; fifthly, that, since all attempts at a peaceful
settlement of this situation made by the United Kingdom have repeatedly failed, the situation calls for coercive measures which the United Nations Charter
empowers the Security Council to take; sixthly, that
States which afford assistance or encouragement to
the illegal r&gime and persist in trading with it are violating their obligations under Article 25 of the Charter,

10. IS it not a fact that developments since last June
have reinforced the already powerful arguments for
the adoption of those proposals? Can it be denied that
the measures taken so far have failed to resolve the
situation in Southern Rhodesia? Is it not, therefore,
necessary that the United Kingdom, as the administering Power, should no longer abjure the use of force
to enable the people of Zimbabwe to accede to their
rightful independence? Is it not also imperative now
that all States should sever consular, economic and
other relations with’ the minority r&gime, including

8. I need hardly add that all these propositions are
more or less explicitly stated in previous resolutions
of the Security Council on the subject. The principle
of action that the situation in Southern Rhodesia calls
for punitive measures means that any contemplated
decision of the Security Council must be judged solely
by the criterion’of the effectiveness of the measures
envisaged by it, rather than by any other consideration.
2

Ha
the
an
sal
tiv
nel
pri
tio
am
bri
lioi
Il.
tio
the
ZeT

wil
to 1
tio
tat
Mi
by
tati
SLl
pe*

in
use
in I
me
COI

ofi
the
ign
sit1
the
12.
the
do
OUl
HO

de1
set
the
for
SlI(
sit1
abl
rat
EIi
thi
tigt
Th
rer
we
unl
to

railway, maritime and air transport and postal, telephone and wireless communications?
Is there any
doubt that the measures taken so far have not been
fully complied with by all States and that in particular
the Governments
of South Africa and Portugal have
been openly and actively aiding the Salisbury rCgime?
Have they not thus made it possible for it to counter
the effects of economic sanctions? Is it not, therefore,
an essential requirement for the success of economic
sanctions that all loop-holes in them should be effectively plugged? Last, but not least, are not the permanent ‘membkrs of the Security Council, who bear the
primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security, expected to help in devising
and implementing
measures sufficiently effective to
bring about the termination of the racist minority rebellion in Southern Rhodesia?

13. Mr. YOST (United States of America): ‘Mr. President, may I first join my colleagues in expressing to
you our congratulations
and pleasure on your assumption of the Presidency of this Council? We are keenly
aware of your long experience, your distinguished
career and your high qualifications, My delegation and
I are particularly happy to welcome to the Presidency
a representative of the sister Republic of Colombia
with which we enjoy such intimate and cordial relations. We are sure that the month of your Presidency
will be graced by distinction.
14. I have listened with great care and interest to
the statements made before this Council, particularly
the statement made by the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Zambia. I also listened with great interest to the
interventions of Lord Caradon, representative of the
United Kingdom, who stressed the importance of and
the need for urgency in acting in unison in not recognizing the so-called republic of Rhodesia.

1 1. I would apologize for raising this series of questions if we did not feel that it is only by squarely facing
them that the Security Council can fulfil its commitments in the present situation. Since the fact has been
demonstrated
that the rebellion in Southern Rhodesia
will not be suppressed without the use offorce, it seems
to us that the time has come, over and above the adoption of ally resolution by the Council, for the representatives of the permanent members and the Foreign
Ministers of the African States who are duly accredited
by the Organization of African Unity to initiate consultations about the possibilities of that course of action.
Such consultations
will be Fruitful if they are not hampered by too many preconceptions, if they are held
in an open-minded
spirit, if they recognize that the
use of force can take diverse forms and if they bear
in mind all the resources commanded by the permanent
members
of the Security Council. In suggesting such
consultations,
my delegation is regretfully conscious
of the fact that too often in the history of this question
the assessments made by the African States have been
ignored and their warnings have gone unheeded. The
situation
in Southern Rhodesia will not improve unless
the Council discards that kind of approach.

15. To say that we are meeting at a sad or shocking
or deplorable time in the history of the Rhodesian question is but to state a truism. These adjectives apply
indeed to the entire period since the unilateral declaration of independence in November 1965. Yet the situation with which we are now confronted does have a
special significance, for we are told that a constitution
which was approved by 1 per cent of the Rhodesian
population is now in effect and that a “republic” which
was approved by a similarly small percentage of the
electorate has been established. I commented in some
detail at our meeting last June on the specifics of that
constitution, on the provisions which assure that political power will for ever remain in white hands, and
on the ironically entitled declaration of rights. I should
like only to remind members of the Council of one
of my remarks which I made at the 1475th meeting
on 13 June 1969:
“Since these proposals-despite
all the trappings
of law in which they are dressed-are intrinsically
unjust,
and since they emanate from an unlawful
rigime, they will be without legal effect, regardless
of the results of the voting of 20 June.”

12. The Pakistan delegation, not being a member of
the Council, does not have the right to vote, and we
do not presume that our suggestions will affect the
outcome
of any proposal now before the Council.
However,
we feel obliged to submit that the present
deliberations
of the Security Council will represent a
setback if they do not in some way serve to make
the Council’s action against the Salisbury regime more
forceful.
Needless to say, we shall be dismayed by
such a failure. Apart from our distress at the human
situation
in Southern Rhodesia, apart from our anxiety
about the dangers to peace and the possibility of a
racial war in the southern half of Africa, apart from
QUI- sentiments
of solidarity with the whole AsianAfrican community,
Pakistanfeels a close concern with
this question because it engages the honour and prestige of the Security Council to an unparalleled degree.
Therefore
we trust that the Security Council will
remain mindful that a defeat of the many hopes which
were aroused by its well-considered decision to act
under Chapter VII of the Charter will be a grave reverse
to the development
of healthier international relations.

16. My Government’s view has not changed since
that time, Illegal acts perpetrated by an illegal r&me
can in no way be considered to lend any air of legitimacy
to that rigime. Attaching the word “repub!ic” to the
illegal minority rkgime in Salisbury will deceive no one.
My Government has assured the United Kingdom that
we continue to regard it as the legal sovereign in
Rhodesia.
17. Consistent with that position, and following the
Smith rigime’s severance of the last formal ties with
the ‘United Kingdom, the United States Secretary of
State on 9 March announced that the United States
Consulate General in Salisbury would be closed as of
17 March and that the staff would depart. We believe
that this was an important step at a crucial time, a
step which again made clear the posture of the United
States towards the Smith rCgime’s pretensions towards
legitimacy. This step may, we hope, help to discourage
3

any prospect that the newly instituted “republic” might
begin to gain acceptance by the nations of the world.
We have not recognized, and we have no intention
of recognizing, the illegal rCgime in Salisbury. I repeat
this assurance to the members of this Council.

I note that this particular question is included in the
draft resolution submitted by the Afro-Asian members
of this Council.
22. My delegation has had the occasion to state that
the application of sanctions to countries neighbouring
Southern Rhodesia would be following a dubious
course which would introduce new and grave complications in an already complicated situation. There is no
doubt that, in view of the continued refusal of the Smith
rCgime to heed the calls of the international community
to alter its course, we would all prefer to take more
effective and decisive measures. The question, however, arises whether these more extreme measures
which have been suggested would be sufficiently supported by the international
community,
especially
those most directly concerned, to make them in fact
effective, or whether, in seeking such action against
economically powerful States under existing circumstances, they would merely demonstrate the limitations
of the United Nations and further entrench the Smith
rkgime and its supporters in southern Africa.

18. The United States has supported every resolution
adopted by the Security Council concerning Rhodesia
since the unilateral declaration of independence by the
Smith rdgime in 1965. We have implemented strictly
the mandatory economic sanctions imposed by resolution 232 (1966) and resolution 253 (1968). We believe
that our implementation
of the sanctions has been second to none. We and six other members of the Council
regretfully found ourselves unable to support the draft
resolution placed before the Council concerning
Rhodesia last June, I pointed out at that time that the
Council had exerted an effective influence on the
Rhodesian situation only when it worked on the basis
of unanimity, and that the only ones who would find
any solace in the division within the Council would
be Mr. Smith and his friends. I hope and trust that
this will not be the situation that we face during this
series of meetings of the Council.

23. We must, therefore, in our view, seek to avoid
embarking on unrealistic courses of action which,
because they would over-extend the capacity of the
United Nations for effective action, would reflect
adversely on this body and give aid and comfort to
Ian Smith and his collaborators.

19. The United States supports the view expressed
by thedelegation of the United Kingdom that we should
urgently act in not recognizing the “republic”
of
Rhodesia, and we support the draft resolution which
was introduced by the United Kingdom[S/9676/Rev.l).
I liope that all other members of this Council will do
so as well and that we shall not become bogged down
in attempts to call for measures which will divide the
Council and will not assist the people of Rhodesia.
Let us rather adopt this draft resolution speedily and
unanimously so that Mr. Smith and his followers will
be fully aware that the mind of the international community has not been changed by the purported assumption of arepublic status, that we still refuse to recognize
his regime and that we remain firm in our belief that
majority rule will eventually come to Southern
Rhodesia.

24. My delegation also doubts the wisdom and effectiveness of imposing a communication ban as envisaged
in the draft resolution. We in the United States have
consistently attached the greatest importance to the
maintenance of communications
with other States,
even those with which our relations were greatly
strained, and in some cases even when hostilities were
in progress between us. The United States has a long
history and tradition of freedom of movement and
speech, and would view most seriously the prospect
of leaving United States citizens anywhere in the world
without the means to travel or communicate. Furthermore, we do not believe that cutting off communication
and stemming a free flow of information would contribute to a solution of the difficulties with which we
are faced. Rather, it might tend to harden further the
attitude of the white minority. In our view, such
measures tear at the very fabric of internationat relations and would tend to foreclose the free exchange
of information and ideas upon which progress in this
unfortunate situation in part depends.

20. My Government shares the desire felt around this
table that an equitable solution to the situation must
be achieved. This is indeed a most difficult and complex
problem. We are convinced that all of us here in this
Council must meet our responsibilities
concerning
Rhodesia with perseverance, but also with prudence.
The Security Council has steadfastly condemned the
actions of the present Salisbury rCgime and has taken
the unprecedented
step of imposing
mandatory
economic sanctions. These sanctions must be firmly
maintained and strictly enforced. We must persevere
in our opposition to racism and repression.

25. I should like to close my reMarks by quoting from
President Nixon’s recent report to the Congress on
United States foreign policy for the 1970s. The President said:

21.

In charting our course for the future, however,
care that we continue
to act with unanimity.
My delegation is aware that
the failure of South Africa and Portugal to adhere to
the sanctions programme provided for in resolution
253 (1968) is a major source of concern. It is regrettable
that these two countries continue to flout the sanctions.
Minister Nkama, when speaking the other day, made
a direct reference to this unfortunate situation, and

“Clearly there is no question of the United States
condoning, or acquiescing in, the racial policies Of
the white-ruled rbgimes. For moral as well as historical reasons, the United States stands firmly for the
principles of racial equality and self-determination.”

we shall want to take particular

26. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfiorn
Spanish):
I invite the representative of Yugoslavia to take a seat
at the Council table to make his statement.
4

I
1

I

27. Mr, MOJSOV (Yugoslavia): Mr. President, I am
obliged to follow the established rule for representatives of countries which are not members of the Security Council of refraining from expressing praise and
gratification to you on your accession to the important
functions of President of the Security Council for this
month. We hope that in the month of March the Council
will make further progress in strengthening peace and
in exerting additional efforts in the search for solutions
to problems
burdening
international
relations.
However, I cannot but extend my gratitude and also
express my deepest appreciation to you, Mr. President,
and through you to the members of the Security
Council, for permitting me to participate in the debate,
without the right to vote, and to submit our views
on the important issue which is on the agenda of the
Security Council. As has been clearly evident from
the discussions so far in the Security Council, the problem is of primary
importance
not only for the
neighbouring countries of Southern Rhodesia but also
for all countries of Africa-members
of the Organization of African Unity-and
equally for the international
community as a whole. This problem also constitutes
a test of the consciousness and the effective performance of our Organization, which is faced with the precedent of the violation of the most fundamental norms
of international
relations and disrespect ofthe decisions
of the United Nations-a
situation with far-reaching
consequences, unless an end is put to it.

31. If we were to attempt to analyse the causes leading
to such a situation, then we should, above all, note
that the adopted sanctions formulated in resolution 253
(1968) of the Security Council proved to be insufficient
and, furthermore, inadequately applied and exercised,
as has been so eloquently pointed out by many preceding speakers in this debate. Not only did the Republic
of South Africa and Portugal challenge and openly
refuse to adhere to that resolution, but a number of
other countries with substantial economic interests and
commitments in Southern Rhodesia and with a rather
evident influence in international relations, also failed
to exercise appropriate measures with a view to preventing their citizens from engaging in trade and other
operations in Southern Rhodesia. A report by the
Secretary-General concerning the situation in Southern
Rhodesia states that only ninety-nine countries and
five specialized agencies have submitted reports on
the implementation of the Security CounciI resolution,
while thirty-one countries, among which twenty-seven
are Members of the United Nations, did not send in
reports. Why have those countries failed to submit
such a report? I believe that this is indicative of the
fact that the illegal regime of Ian Smith-thanks
to
the extensive and whole-hearted support of its
allies-has succeeded not only in remaining in power
but also in consolidating itself further.
32. The unsuccessful attempts to eliminate the illegal
regime in Southern Rhodesia and the prevention of
the exercising by the people of Zimbabwe of its inalienable right to freedom and independence
have
strengthened the alliance among the staunch apologists
of racism and colonialism in the southern part of Africa,
that is, the alliance of the Republic of South Africa,
Portugal and the illegal regime in Southern Rhodesia.
That alliance not only constitutes an instrument of suppression of the struggle for freedom, independence and
fundamental human rights which continues to be waged
in the southern part of Africa against colonialists and
racists, but also represents a direct threat to the
independence and freedom of the neighbouring
countries.

28. Regarding developments in Southern Rhodesia
and in the southern part of Africa, Yugoslavia fully
shares the concern of all the members of the Organiza&ion of African Unity, with which my country maintains
very friendly relations and co-operates in the field of
both bilateral and international relations. The Yugoslav
Government
has on numerous occasions, both in the
United Nations and at many bilateral and international
meetings, as well as during the recent visit and talks
of the President of the Socialist Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, Josip Broz Tito, with the leaders of East
African and North African countries, very clearly and
resolutely made its position known on the question
of Southern
Rhodesia. For all these reasons my
Government
is submitting its views to the Security
Council concerning the new situation in Southern
Rhodesia,

33. For these reasons the Yugoslav delegation wishes
once again to draw the Council’s attention to the necessity of undertaking urgent and effective measures for
the elimination of the illegal racist regime in Southern
Rhodesia.

29. The most recent decision of the illegal regime
Of Ian Smith, which has proclaimed an alleged republic
and attempted by the same act to destroy the last bridge
Of any form of relations with the United Kingdom as
the administering
Power, constitutes a serious turning
point, one that will regrettably have grave consequences not only for Africa but also for international
relations as a whole,
30. Although this decision represents an illegal act
of an illegal regime, we must not overlook the fact
that it needed only five years after usurping power-because
of an attitude of appeasement towards
these rebels-to
make Rhodesia a racist State in which
a minority,
numbering less than a quarter of a million
white settlers, rules over a deprived black African
Population of more than 4 million in the most brutal
manner,

34. There is a broad consensus on this question in
the Security Council regarding the necessity of enabling
the people of Zimbabwe to attain freedom and independence. More serious differences, it seems, are appearing with respect to the means and methods of achieving
those objectives. There is no doubt that negotiations
and efforts for a peaceful solution remain the most
desired approach for the settlement of any conflicting
issues and other outstanding international problems.
The Yugoslav delegation naturally would support such
a course of action provided that specific conditions
existed for it and that it would enable a just and appropriate solution to be reached,., The case of Southern
Rhodesia,’ unfortunately, is not one in which there
5

could be a solution through such a desired course.
The illegal r@ime of Ian Smith has in innumerable
instances demonstrated
that it rejects every solution
which does not favour the perpetuation of the domination of the white racist minority over the large majority
of the people of Zimbabwe,

cannot be denied; in fact they have been explicitly
stated in the couyse of the debate in the Security
Council.
4 1. Furthermore, the people of Zimbabwe and its liberation movement are being brutally assaulted not only
by’the armed forces of Ian Smith, but also by those
of South Africa. Does not this brutal intervention of
South Africa constitute another flagrant violation of
the United Nations Charter on the part of a country
that is still a Member of the United Nations? The rapid
elimination of the illegal regime would shorten the sufferings and sacrifices of the people of Zimbabwe, but
it would also prevent-and this is not insignificant-the
inevitable spreading of the racial conflict in that part
of Africa, a conflict that would-not spare the white
settlers either. For all those reason’s an urgent solution
to this problem would make a significant contribution
to the consolidation of world peace and security.

35.

Having in mind what I have just said, the Yugodelegation considers that in the prevailing circumstances the most effective course of action for overcoming the present difficult situation in Rhodesia has
heen clearly stipulated in General Assembly resolution
2508 (XXIV) adopted on 21 November 1969.
Shiv

36. Past experience with regard to the application of
selective sanctions gives rise to justified doubts about
the possibility
of achieving the objectives that have
been set, as well as about the readiness of individual
Member States to abide strictly by the resolutions of
the United Nations. The effectiveness of previously
adopted sanctions depends primarily upon the goodwill
of the Governments
of Member States in applying them
consistently-goodwill
which, unfortunately, has not
been shown up till now. In view of the fact that South
Africa and Portugal have clearly demonstrated that
they do not wish to abide by the decisions on sanctions,
the Yugoslav delegation is of the opinion that those
two Governments
should bear the consequences, as
Members of the United Nations which have refused
to adhere to frequently
reiterated resolutions of the
United Nations.

42. In conclusion, may I be permitted to say that
the Yugoslav Government has in the past extended
full support to all the efforts of the United Nations
in the search for a suitable and just solution to the
problem of Southern Rhodesia? The Yugoslav Government, in its note dated 2 September 1968’ informed
the Secretary-General
of the United Nations that it
does not recognize the illegal rCgime and that it maintains no diplomatic, consular, trade or any other relations with Southern Rhodesia. Furthermore,
the
Yugoslav Government reaffirmed its full support for
the justified struggle of the people of Zimbabwe for
freedom and national independence, pointing out that
it would, in co-operation with other African States and
Members of the United Nations, continue to contribute
to further effective measures aimed at enabling the
people of Zimbabwe to attain their freedom and
independence.

37. Every delay in the implementation
of the abovementioned and other pertinent measures can only lead
to further consolidation
of a new bastion of racism
and colonialism
in the southern part of Africa. Should
the United Nations reconcile itself to this, we shall
be faced in the near future with more serious conflicts
not only endangering
peace in Africa, but also
adversely affecting international
relations and the
United Nations.

43. In that connexion, on 11 February 1969 the
Federal Assembly of Yugoslavia enacted a special
federal law prohibiting the establishment of trade or
economic relations with the illegal minority rCgime in
Southern Rhodesia. Article 1 of that law states:
“Domestic legal and physical persons are prohibited from trading in any goods and from performing services and from maintaining and establishing
other economic relations with legal and physical persons of Southern Rhodesia.
“Also, domestic legal and physical persons are
prohibited from acting as representatives, or in any
other way mediating or soliciting goods originating
in Southern Rhodesia, and engaging in like operations with legal and physical persons of any other
country.”

38. We have always maintained
the view that the
United Kingdom,
as the administering
Power, should
undertake,
within its competence,
appropriate and
effective measures for the liquidation of the abnormal
situation in Southern Rhodesia. In doing this, it would
meet with the understanding
and support of the overwhelming majority of our Organization.
39. My delegation
naturally
welcomes the recent
decision of some countries to close their consulates
in Salisbury. However, this measure should constitute
only the first, not the last, step in a series of other
specific measures
which should be taken by all
countries. Otherwise, if these first measures remain
the only ones, this can create an illusion, which cannot
satisfy international
public opinion.

Article 2 further
“prohibits Southern Rhodesian fransport from using
Yugoslav ports, airports and road facilities, and prohibits Yugoslav transport from using ports, docks,
airports and road facilities in Southern Rhodesia.

40. We arc all aware of the fact that the people of
Zimbabwe
have been the victims of the policy Of
apnl*t/leic/ and of other harsh reprisals taken against
them by the white racists and that they are being deprived of their elementary
human rights. Those facts

* See OjJcinl
Records
Supplement
for July,
S/8786/Add.l,
annex.

6

ofthe Secrrrify Council,
August
rind September

TlrvrUy-third
Year,
1968, document

Physical persons, although possessing valid passports, may not enter Yugoslavia nor transit through
the country, except if such a visit is purely for
humanitarian
reasons.”

tinued suppression of the fundamental rights and freedoms of the majority of the people in Southern
Rhodesia. We believe that the Security Council should
respond to their appeal by taking further measures to
increase international pressure on the illegal regime
in Southern Rhodesia.

In the last articles, the law provides for sanctions and
penalties for Yugoslav citizens and enterprises that violate those provisions,

48. To make that pressure effective it is essential,
in our view, to restore the unity of the Security Council
in dealing with the question of Southern Rhodesia. We
must not allow a repetition of what happened in June
last year when the Council failed to reach any decision
at all on the question of Southern Rhodesia, thus creating the impression that the policy of sanctions had
become bankrupt. A new division in the Council would
only further dismay and confuse all those who have
faithfully carried out the decisions we have taken so
far. It would encourage Mr. Smith and his supporters,
wherever they are, to believe that the Security Council
is weakening in its resolve and that soon the sanctions
will simply fade away.

44. In adopting this Federal Law the Yugoslav Parliament reiterated its conviction that in order to solve
specific international
problems it is essential to undertake, in addition to proclaiming aims and setting goals,
the immediate
implementation
of those objectives
through concrete and effective measures.
45. Kindly allow me, Mr. President, to conclude my
statement by quoting an excerpt from the joint communiquC of the Yugoslav-Zambian
talks held between
the President of the Republic of Zambia, Mr. Kenneth
Kaunda, and the President of the Socialist Federal
Republic
of Yugoslavia, Mr. Josip Broz Tito, in
Lusaka, which was released on 8 February 1970:

49. In actual fact the Security Council is not basically
divided on this issue. On the contrary, it has shown
greater unity in dealing with it than on most other questions relating to the maintenance of international peace
and security. Until last June every resolution concerning Southern Rhodesia had been adopted unanimously,
which is a remarkable expression of international solidarity and determination to put an end to this aggression-and aggression of one race against another. I
am convinced that this time too we should and can
act unanimously, which in the case of an issue affecting
international peace and security is the only way we
can act at all.

“The two Presidents condemned the colonialist
and racist policy pursued by Portugal, South Africa
and the illegal regime of Ian Smith in Southern
Rhodesia.
They stressed, in particular, that such a
situation
and constant threats and provocations
made by those regimes against Zambia and other
independent
countries of Africa constitute a permanent threat to peace and security in that part of the
world. Expressing their great dissatisfaction and concern over the stagnation which has occurred in the
process of decolonization and emphasizing the grave
consequences
that could result from this, the two
Presidents
energetically
demanded to have the
United
Nations and the international
community
take concrete and urgent measures which would
lead, as soon as possible, to the liberation of the
people of Angola, Mozambique, Rhodesia, Namibia,
South Africa and Guinea (Bissau).”

50. It is against this background that, in the view
of my delegation, the Security Council should now
consider what practical decisions it might take. Neither
of the two draft resolutions before the Council would
seem to us to provide a basis for unanimous action.
The draft resolution
of the United
Kingdom
[S/9676/Rev.l]
does not go far enough, as I already
stated at the beginning of this statement. The draft
resolution submitted by the African and Asian members of the Council [S/9696 and Corr.1 and 21, on the
other hand, is likely to recreate the unfortunate situation in which we found ourselves in June last year.

46. Mr. JAKOBSON
(Finland): Mr. President, I am
pleased to have this opportunity of extending the best
wishes of my delegation to you as President of the
Security Council and as representative of a country
with which Finland, in spite of physical distance, maintains very lively trade and other relations. We know
of your very distinguished public career and have
already experienced your leadership in the Council,
which has been both firm and tactful.

51. My delegation believes, therefore, that efforts
should be made to agree on a course of action which,
while acceptable to all the members of the Council,
would serve the purpose I mentioned at the outset,
namely, the purpose of increasing international pressure against the illegal regime in Southern Rhodesia.

47. This meeting of the Security Council was convened by the United Kingdom for the purpose of condemning
the latest illegal act of the racist minority
rkgime in Southern Rhodesia, the purported assumption of a republican status, and of calling upon Member’
States to refrain from recognizing that illegal regime.
Of course every member of the Security Council agrees
that this must be done. My delegation does not agree,
however, that it is enough. The representatives of the
‘African States who have come to New York to attend
this meeting have conveyed to us in vivid terms the
growing concern of the African peoples over the con-

52. The Security Council could decide, in accordance
with Article 41 of the Charter, that all Member States
should immediately cut off all diplomatic, consular,
trade, military and other relations that they may have
with the illegal regime in Southern Rhodesia and terminate any representation that they maintain in the
Territory.
Most States have already done so;
nevertheless,it would be important to make this a mandatory decision of the Security Council.
7

53. The Council could also decide, in accordance with
the same Article of the Charter, that all States should
interrupt any existing means of transportation to and
from Southern Rhodesia. This would be a measure
that would further increase the isolation of the illegal
rCgime from the international community.

of the illegal unilateral declaration of independence in
November 1965. From that day to this, both the United
Kingdom and the world community have agreed that
the Smith rCgime must be overthrown and the people
of Zimbabwe given the opportunity of choosing their
own path into the future. This is in accord with the
basic principles of the Charter. Indeed, the obligation
to promote the advancement of colonial peoples
towards self-government and independence has been
one of the major commitments of the United Nations.

54. It would seem logical that since bilateral relations
with the regime in Southern Rhodesia have been
declared illegal, that rCgime should also be excluded
from participation
in multilateral
relations between
States. Southern Rhodesia continues to be a member
or associate member of a number of specialized
agencies of the United Nations. The Security Council
should now request Member States to take appropriate
action to suspend such membership or associate membership. The Council could further urge Member States
of any international or regional organizations to suspend the membership of the illegal rCgime of Southern
Rhodesia from their respective organizations.

60. It is one thing, however, to talk about objecti;es
and quite another to agree on the means by which
the objectives can be achieved. From the start of the
Rhodesian crisis there has been a divergence of views
in regard to the steps the United Nations may take
td put an end to the illegal rkgime. The gap between,
what has been demanded of the Security Council and
what the Security Council has actually been able to
do seems almost unbridgeable. This was made abundantly clear in the Council’s debate of June 1969, when
Salisbury sought to perpetuate its policy of white SUpremacy through an illegal referendum. On that occasion the debate was bitter and acrimonious, resulting
in the failure to adopt any resolution at all. This could
not have failed to expose the basic weakness of the
United Nations to the world at large and to Salisbury
in particular. The polatization of attitudes within the
Security Council only adds to the generally bleak
atmosphere surrounding the efforts to resolve the
Rhodesian crisis. None of the measures so far adopted
by the Council, including the imposition of comprehensive mandatory economic sanctions in May 1968, have
had much impact on the elimination of the racist rkgime
in Southern Rhodesia. The purported assumption of
republican status on 2 March 1970 is but the latest
proaf of Salisbury’s intransigence and defiance.

55. In addition to such new measures, the Council
could call upon Member States to make a greater effort
to carry out the economic sanctions more effectively.
We all know that much more can still be done by States
complying with resolution 253 (1968) to stop leakages
in the system of sanctions. Governments could adopt
more stringent measures to prevent their nationals or
companies from carrying on an illicit trade with Southern Rhodesia,
56. In. this connexion, my delegation believes that
the Committee established by resolution 253 (1968)
could be given a more active and a wider role. It could
be requested to make specific recommendations to the
Security Council on ways and means by which States
could increase the effectiveness of the sanctions.
57. As we are about to sharpen the policy of sanctions
against Southern Rhodesia, we should not overlook
the consequences of our actions for Zambia, a country
which, as we heard from its Foreign Minister [1531st
meetirzg], stands in the forefront of the international
campaign against the Smith r6gime. Resolution 253
(1968) has already drawn attention to the special
economic problems that Zambia may be confronted
with as a result of the decisions of the Security Council,
but it would seem to us that more could be done to
extend assistance to Zambia by Member States and
specialized agencies and other international organizations.

61, In the face of such a situation, the Security Council must, as its first order of business, condemn in
unequivocal terms this latest act of illegality
and
denounce any form of government which is not based
on the principle of majority rule, and must call upon
all Member States to refrain from iecognizing this
illegal r&gime. I agree with the view that, on this issue
of non-recognition, the Council must speak tiith one
voice and one mind, Indeed, the representative of the
United Kingdom has been the first to impress on the
Council the urgency of such action by the Council.
Of course, the mere act of condemning what has
already taken place will not be of immediate help to
the people of Zimbabwe, nor is the strategy of nonrecognition likely to bring down the Smith rCgime in
short order. Yet, while fully aware of its limitations,
my delegation does not minimize the impact such a
course of action might have in weakening the illegal
set-up in Salisbury. It must none the less be admitted
that in’the absence of any determined and more ethergetic action, any break-through in the Rhodesian situation is not in sight.

58. These are some of the elements which, in the
view of my delegation, could be included in a resolution
of the Security Council, and we would be prepared
to put forward specific proposals along these lines for
the consideration of members, in the hope that on that
basis a unanimous decision could be reached.
59. Mr. LIU (China): With the proclamation of a socalled republic, the Smith rigime in Southern Rhodesia
has broken its final link with the British Crown. This,
of course, is not an unexpected development; it is the
inevitable outcome of a series of events growing out

62. As the administering Power, the United Kingdom
has a continuing responsibility that cannot be abandoned. The dilemma which it now faces is an agonizing
8

one, Some further action in the near future seems
necessary, and it is a decision that the Government
of the United Kingdom may eventually have to make,
however painful and unpalatable that may be. In the
meantime, the increased pressure suggested by the representative of Finland seems to be practical and can
be put into effect without delay.

that have broken away from the irrational and illegal
vocation adopted by Ian Smith will nowjoin the youthful continent and go beyond the gesture which they
have just made. France, in particular, because of its
many friends in Africa, because of its experience when
confronted by rebellious generals, whom Genera1 de
Gaulle courageously swept away, can play a determining and important role in assisting London to bear in
mind the French victory over the rebels. The United
States, which has friendly relations with the Government of Burundi, also has ties of deep friendship with
the United Kingdom and is therefore called upon to
play a decisive part: to influence the attitude of the
United Kingdom Government, and thus to remedy the
state of affairs in Salisbury.

63. Mr. TERENCE
(Burundi) (interpretation j?om
F~cnch): Mr. President, may I first of all express to
You my thanks for the kind words you spoke with
regard to my Presidency during the month of January.
I assure you that what little I was modestly able to
accomplish was thanks to the powerful assistance that
YOU and our other colleagues so loyally and freely gave
me. In turn, Sir, as I promised last Friday, I likewise
wish to offer you my congratulations on the high post
that you have been called upon to occupy during the
month of March. You will recall, Mr. President, that
Colombia has always been termed “the daughter of
Sinion Bolivar”,
the valiant liberator of Latin America.
Furthermore,
there are in fact striking similarities
between Burundi and Colombia. Both countries are
the best producers of coffee in the world, not only
in quantity but also in quality. But, to be less downto-earth, I would point out that there are other reasons
for which we are gratified at seeing you in the Presidential seat. One of them is that both our peoples attribute
very great importance to the humane ideals of liberty,
sovereignty,
and complementary
and peaceful coexistence in the midst of diversity and differences of
race. We are confident that the immense experience
YOU have gathered
in your political and diplomatic
career will inspire you and will give you the necessary
strength to lead these meetings devoted to the liberation
of the Zimbabwe people to a safe haven.

67. Even at a time when the apathy of the Biitish
Government towards the Zimbabwe people and its
paternal solicitude towards the usurping settlers have
culminated, it is nevertheless appropriate for me to
voice the feelings of my delegation. My delegation’s
duty is to interpret truly the non-partisan policy of
the Government of Burundi. I therefore deem it my
duty to devote some moments to the reaffirmation of
my country’s faith in international co-operation.
68. Drawing inspiration from this basic doctrine, we
are convinced that co-operation between a totally freed
Africa and the one-time European mother countries
falls naturally within the context of both logic and history. It is therefore out of its concern to safeguard
and strengthen the ties between Africa and Europe
that my Government has never ceased to advocate
a speedy end to the colonial burden in the interest
not only of the two partner continents but of the entire
human family. Alas, there are still colonial Powers that
set up insurmountable barriers to the final reconciliation between the African peoples and the nations of
Europe.

64. From Charybdis to Scylla, that is the fate of the
Zimbabwe people. On 11 November 1965 Ian Smith
proclaimed
independence. Last week the same Ian
Smith culminated
his impertinence when he turned the
British colony into a republic.

69. By its refusal to release its last colonial bastion
in Africa, the United Kingdom places itself among the
Governments that are obstructing a true friendship
between Europe and Africa based upon close and mutually beneficial co-operation. It is obvious that a responsible government-apart
from not condemning the
Zimbabwe people to tyranny and desolation, thus
further obstructing the noble cause of friendly cooperation between African States and those of
Europe-cannot,
if it does so, claim the sympathy and
the affection of the African people.

65. On behalf of my Government and my delegation
I should first like to express our feelings of appreciation
to the Governments
that have just closed their consulates in Salisbury. I am extremely happy to be able
to place on that list such a country as Belgium, which,
I have been informed in the course of this meeting,
has followed the example of France, the United States,
the Federal Republic of Germany and other countries.
We are gratified for the simple reason that we enjoy
the best of relations with those countries, and particularly with Belgium, the former administering Power
of my own country, Burundi. Belgium, unlike the
United Kingdom,
harkened to the voice of reason and
allowed Burundi to become independent whilst it was
stilr a country under the trusteeship of the United
Nations;
that type of action was even more difficult
for Belgium than it would be for the United Kingdom,
which is dealing with a colony in every sense of the
word.

70. So that the Government of London and its representatives should stop complaining about the outspoken indignation that its defeatist attitude and complicity with the Smith rCgime have provoked all over
Africa and the world, It is not an implacable hatred
against the British people themselves sworn by the
Africans in the Security Council or in Africa itself,
but rather the censure and condemnation which the
British Government has drawn on itself by ‘its connivance with the monopolizers of power in Rhodesia.

66. The Government of Burundi and Africa as a whole
wish to express their hope that all those Governments

71. Speaking of co-operation, we should mention the
Common Market, to which Britain has submitted its
9

candidacy. Within that context the Community
of Six
has without doubt far greater need of Africa than of
the British Isles. The African States still have reasons
to confront and challenge the United Kingdom in that
European economic group. When the British Government gives up its ostrich-like
policy and decides to
transfer to the Zimbabwe people the latter’s inalienable
rights and powers -those
af independence
and
sovereignty
over the direction
of their own children-our
countries will not delay in working for fruitful co-operation
between Zimbabwe and the United
Kingdom.
This is said to prove that neither my delegation nor any other African delegation has resentments
against the United Kingdom.

77. Fourthly, the ultimatum of Smith to Prime Minister Wilson, which has been labelled by some writers
as “the eleventh hour”.
78, Fifthly, the visit of Mr. Wilson to Salisbury from
25 to 30 October 1965. After that meeting between
the British Prime Minister and the rebellious so-called
leader in Salisbury, the Prime Minister of the United
Kingdom offered a surprise present to the African
leaders for the Zimbabwe people; in other words, he
gave Ian Smith full assurances that military force would
not be used to overthrow his regime.
79. Sixthly, the meetings between Prime Minister
Wilson and Ian Smith: twice in Gibraltar-one
on board
the Fear*less, the other on board the Tiger.

72. But as long as the latter is on the side of the
settlers that have grabbed power on the sole pretext
of their racial supremacy, it would be naive to contend
that Africa should be indulgent towards Great Britain.
Therefore, the leaders in Great Britain must choose
in their own interest either to join Africa or to shatter
forever all the ties with her.

80. Seventhly, the private meetings between the British Prime Minister and Ian Smith have always been
surrounded by mystery, and the parties most directIy
concerned-namely,
the Africans-were barred.
81. Eighthly, the British Government showed no concern for the African prisoners during the course of
the entire drama.

73. The flagrant guilt lies with the Labour Government, whilst the peddlers of,upartheid in Rhodesia
merely play the role bf docile acolytes. A series of
events and facts attest openly to the fact not only that
the present fate of the Africans in Rhodesia today was
forged in patent collusion between London and Salisbury but also that Ian Smith took the part of the
executor of a Machiavellian
plan hatched in the British
capital.

82. Ninthly, the Government of the United Kingdom,
at every step taken by the settler clique, rushed to
the General Assembly or to the Security Council-but
on condition that those bodies adopt measures according to the taste and style dictated by London: namely,
that neither dare adopt measures not to the liking and
in the interests of the United Kingdom. One wondered
why the Security Council was being called upon to
meet by the United Kingdom-I
do not refer to today’s
meeting but to earlier ones. We also wondered about
the motivation of the United Kingdom in hastening
to the Security Council and to the General Assembly,
since when those organs proposed appropriate
measures these were promptly rejected because they
did not, of course, fit in with the desires or with the
line of least resistance-namely,
the ostrich-like tactics
-of the United Kingdom.

74. First, Garfield Todd, one-time Prime Minister of
Southern Rhodesia (from 1953 to 1957), stigmatized
the 1961 Constitution,
and accused the United Kingdom before the Special Committee
of the United
Nations,2 stating:
“The United Kingdom
was a party to imposing
the Constitution
on an angry and unhappy majority.
Withdrawal
of British influence
‘would be a tragic
happening, for it will leave us to our own travail,
to bloodshed, and to the eventual rout of the white
people.

83. Tenthly, a number of Africans were sentenced
to death: yet the United Kingdom took no steps to
save them, nor to punish the murderers.

” ‘If the United Kingdom does not act today-and
I plead with it to act . . . then the United Nations
will have to act tomorrow.’
“R

84. Eleventhly-and
here I shall have to dweI1 at
some length on this question to allow this Council to
glance at the previous aspects of British colonization
and the acts which that Government adopted in similar,
even benign, cases-the organization of the Mau Mau
was repressed with merciless brutality, whereas the
usurping settlers in Rhodesia are treated with an almost
maternal indulgence. A comparison between the Mau
Mau of Kenya and the insurgent settlers in Rhodesia
will make it obvious to this Council that there is a
tenderness enjoyed by the latter. Immediately
after
the birth of the Mau Mau movement, exceptional acts
of repression were adopted. For acting weakly, Governor Mitchell was removed from office. His successor,
Evelyn Baring, was dispatched to Nairobi the next
day: a month later he signed the proclamation of the

75. Secondly,
Prime Minister Sir Edgar Whitehead
also proposed a plan to the United Kingdom
which
was intended, first of all, to do away with the entire
racial system and procedures in Rhodesia-that
plan
.was rejected, and we know its fate.
76. Thirdly,
from 4 to 11 October 1965 Smith
in London to talk to the British Government.

was

2 Speciul Committee on the Situalion with regard to theImplementation& the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial

Countries and

Peoulcs.

1 Quoted in Endish
by the speaker; extract from A Principle in
Tonwrrf; I. 7%~ Uuifed Nnriclns cowl Snz/thcr/~ Rlzadesin (United I
Nations publication. Snles NO. E.69,1.26), p. 20.

10

state of emergency. Even before the state of emergency
had been officially decreed, Jomo Kenyatta and eightyIWO other suspects were abruptly awakened before
dawn
and led to prison.
85. Citing from a book called ,4fiicn Ad&o will show
more accurately the military measures adopted by the
Unite Kingdom to strangle the Mau Mau organization.
I quote a passage from that book:
“Since the declaration of emergency the Government had been operating with six battalions of King’s
African Rifles and one battalion of Lancashire
Fusiliers,
, . . It called the 39th and 49th brigades,
the Kenya Regiment, two other East African units,
an armoured car squadron, two flights of RAF Haryards in which each plane was capable of carrying
eight’ bbmbs and a machine-gun, and a squadron of
Lincoln heavy bombers.“4
86. To confront the situation, the United Kingdom
mobilized
an army amounting to 70,000 persons,
equipped with the most modern heavy weapons, and
on 24 April 19.54 22,000 soldiers besieged Nairobi to
carry out the operation which was known as
“Operaation Anvil”.
87. In less than forty-eight hours 11,600 Africans were
interrogated;
two weeks later, 16,538 prisoners lay in
cells in penitentiaries;
an area fifty miles in length by
eight feet in width and ten feet in depth, covered with
barbed wire and patrolled day and night by the military
forces, had been dug around a reservation in which
the adherents of the Mau Mau movement had been
enclosed. More than 10,000 Mau Mau were killed. At
the culminating
moment of the uprising the number
of prisoners rose to 77,000 persons. At: the birth of
the organization
the colonial Government possessed
a surplus of a few million dollars; to meet the needs
created by the measures for putting down the Mau
Mau, $200 million were found necessary for military
operation
alone.
88. From the picture I have drawn and the comparison between Kenya and Rhodesia, it becomes obvious
that the same administering Power which yesterday
shattered
the legitimate and democratic Mau Mau
organization,
and which has acted likewise in Guyana,
Jamaica,
Aden and other countries, is today, with
maternal
indulgence, coddling the usurping settlers.
89. This Council easily notes how quickly the metropolitan
Power decided to stifle the Mau Mau movement and the constant marking-time
of the United
Kingdom
in shattering the insurrection-as
well as the
savage and draconian measures taken against an
organization
that was created to lead the country to
legitimate
independence, and the care lavished upon
a group of usurpers.
90. It is true that only the United Kingdom, which
constantly
calls for a moratorium on a rebellion that

she loves as a child, will have to explain this strange
contrast.
91. After a careful and thorough examination of the
complexity and nature of the Rhodesian problem, my
delegation considers that the breaking of the present
stalemate lies in the resort to force and the applicatibn
of economic sanctions extended to all fields. Any other
measures will be an obvious failure. Otherwise the total
blame will, as heretofore, lie with the Government of
the administering Power.
92. From the colonial war in 1776 in America to the
most recent events in Anguillain 1969, the United Kingdom has always resorted to military force to stifle from
the outset the nationalist movements that might have
harmed its interests but in the case of Rhodesia the
British Government has servilely bowed to the teachings of an adventurer whose mission was to go backwards, to wander around and to expIoit the diamond
mines-Cecil
Rhodes, whose style and credulity are
fitting only for a professional miner. I quote him: “I
have decided that there must be a legislation of classes.
We must be their master. , . . The native must
be ireated like a child. . . . That is my policy, and
that will be the policy of South Africa.” That statement
was made in 1887 by Cecil Rhodes speaking in the
Parliament at Cape Town.
93. Very often the best is the enemy of the good.
When the Wilson Government pretended to try to force
Ian Smith to restore power to the rightful owners, the
Africans, it came up against the resistance of certain
British circles. Among them were those circles that
are directly or indirectly connected with the idolaters
of apartheid in Rhodesia: the business circles and particularly the great British magnates that possess colossal investments in Rhodesia, and also a few isolated
groups of officers in the Army.
94. A short-sighted policy is satisfied with make-shift
measures. It would not be surprising if by acceding
to the urgings of those circles, the Labour Government
was not boasting of having hit on a master-stroke. But
such a political sleight-of-hand worked in Great Britain,
since it silenced those who advocated the monstrous
cause of Ian Smith. In acting thus, the Labour Party
clung to power thanks to the credulity of some and
the complacence of others. How could this Party overcome all the attacks levelled against it by British partisans of coercive measures in order to lead the
Rhodesian colony back to the metropolitan flag first
so that it might be led to independence later? What
mysterious and magic power do the present leaders
of Great Britain use to disarm the justified condemnation and defy the repeated appeals of a certain liberal
press which in that country
has constantly
anathematized
the cowardly capitulation
of the
Government in power to a handful of settlers allowing
them to do what they want with impunity in spite of
the authority of the administering Power?
95. It is obvious that the British Prime Minister has
chosen the road of political opportunism rather than
that of the most elementary justice. Since the ma-

-( Quoted
in English by the. speaker; extract from the book by
John Cohen, Africa Atldio
(New York, Ballantine Books, 1966),

p. 209.

11

noeuvre assures the Labour Party its political lon‘gevity, its leaders will exploit it to the full, even if,
when all is said and done, it has to act as though
unaware that the flood that will follow will sweep away
its Rhodesian pupils.
96. The duplicity which served the British Government as a weapon will be unmasked by the bewitched
citizens of Great Britain, when the Zimbabwe people,
that have been so provoked and reduced to the condition of animals, rise as one man against tyranny. That
event will undoubtedly force certain British circles that
now conspire against the Africans in Zimbabwe to turn
about completely and hold their Government responsible for the losses in human lives on the part of the
settlers, their present prot&gCs, and the material losses
for which the same mentors of Ian Smith are willing
to sacrifice human freedom and human aspirations of
the most fundamental nature among the Africans.
97. African magnanimity will guarantee the fate of
the handful of whites in Rhodesia. The consciences
of the settlers, overburdened by the horrors they have
perpetrated, make them fear reprisals from the African
population they have exploited and terrorized, and fills
them quite justifiably with fear at the thought of the
blacks coming to power. It is true that the criminal
acts they have committed have earned tyrants the
noose, but the sublimity of the African civilization and
culture is above the practice of “an eye for an eye
and a tooth for a tooth”. This fact has been illustrated
by many examples. I shall merely refer to the cases
of the British landowners of the Highlands of Kenya
and of the planters in Tanzania and Uganda, If the
persons and the property of the foreign settlers were
safeguarded and respected elsewhere, there is no
reason why they should be treated differently in
Rhodesia.

ceivable for the Africans to lower themselves to practise an evil they have stigmatized.
101. Once this double premise has been established,
the doctrine of co-operation between the one-time metropolitan country and Africa, on the one hand, and
the repudiation by the African peoples of racism against
the grain on the other, there can be no doubt whatsoever regarding the future of the white settlers in the
case of a majority government’s being established in
Zimbabwe.
102. Doubtless, the pioneers of racism in that country
that attach all power to the pigmentation of the skin
can ill conceive of the aims of the liberation movements, but all misunderstanding must be eliminated.
103. The Security Council and, ihe world, in the light
of the facts I have mentioned, are well able to deal
with the question which the delegation of Burundi must
obviously ask: is it not a fact that the animal instinct
forces the animal to escape from human beings and
to devour the latter when they come close to that savage
beast? The’ misanthropy of the Rhodesian settlers is
in no way different from animal behaviour since they
themselves have banished themselves from human
society. If one of their peers approaches them, his
audacity will earn him tyrannical treatment or even
a lynching-without
any further trial. Therefore, we
are led to ask whether the Africans who do not feel
xenophobia can pretend to be less civil than the
Rhodesian settlers, whose proven barbarism
and
cruelty go beyond those of savage animals.
104. Is it not time for the Rhodesian settlers to give
up their crassly ndive belief that the oppressed people
ardently desire to adopt a white identity and to assume
a white personality as their sole aim?

98. This absence of vindictiveness on the part of the
African peoples, far from being a weakness, is an obvious proof of moral force and attests to their human
nobility. The desire to ensure perfect harmony in multiracial societies explains this atmosphere of fraternity
which Africa has committed itself to create for the
Europeans.

10.5. The black African from one end of the continent
to the other is fully aware of his own complete identity
and personality, and is in no way second to his peer,
the white. Therefore, it would be most na’ive and gullible to believe that the fighters for freedom are undertaking a frantic quest to gain the skin of the white, when
the true end of the struggle can only be to reconquer
their right to life, to independence, and to property.

99. Mr. MicheI Micombero’s message to Africa and
the world on the eve of the year 1970 proves with
what care His Excellency asserts himself as a champion
of the safeguarding of harmonious coexistence among
multiracial communities, The Head of State of Burundi
stated at that time:
“It is the racist and inhuman rCgime of apartheid
that is the shame of our continent and of the civilized
world. Let the populations of that part of Africa
know that our hopes for success accompany them
in their struggle for the total liberation of their territory, and let the disquiet of the whites who wish
to live in a multi-racial and fraternal society in an
independent southern Africa be set at rest, for we
reject and condemn reverse racism.”

106. The subterfuges of the British Government have
reached such a point that the Security Council, without
undermining its own authority, can no longer allow
London eternally to shirk its responsibilities
as
administering Power and to resign itself to the greed
of the settlers, drunk with their impunity,
107. The Council, whose patience has reached an
end, must ask London Cicero’s question to Catilina:
patientia
“Quousque
tandem, Catilina,
abutere
nostra?“--“ How long will you abuse our patience,
Catiline?’ ’
108. The latest event in Salisbury, then, is the last
phase of a lengthy process and a long-range conspiracy
intended to create in southern Africa a seed-bed of

100. In the end, racism is only a degradation of the
person who practises it, It would therefore be incon-

l?

and put down the rebellion so that this twofold commitment will show up the true resolution of the Labour
Government, to fulfil the obligations inherent in its
position as the administering Power.

Hitlerian disciples. The contradiction is made obvious
by what I have said. Only the genius of the Labour
Government
can conciliate its official excuses and the
facts I have set’before you. And yet, the unchallengeable accuracy of what I have said proves that London
has instigated the entire and gradual usurpation by the
white settlers at the expense of the black Africans.

113. I must end by recalling to the United Kingdom
that to govern means to foresee. In other words, to
govern, one must foresee and foresee accurately.

109, Since the present behaviour of the United Kingdom regarding Rhodesia is in revolting contradiction
with the acts it performed in similar circumstances,
or even in perfectly harmless circumstances in the past,
and defies traditional logic, the Security Council therefore must itself turn to the subtlety of the political
technique of the Labour Party and Labour Government.

114. I apologize for the length of my statement, which
I felt necessary because of the gravity of the matter

we are discussing.
from
PRESIDENT
(interpretation
I invite the representative of India to take
a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.

115. The

Spanish):

110. After the interminable delays that Great Britain
has been able to obtain, the time has now come for
it to cross the Rubicon, to face its obligations and do
honour to the power it holds. In fact, at present the
metropolitan
area enjoys the favour of the world community, which has done all in its power to assist the
United Kingdom to take courage and redress the inhuman fate being suffered by 5 million Africans of Zimbabwe. However, if the metropolitan
Power finally
refuses to perform its duty, Africa will invite it to
assume the formal and solemn engagement and commitment:
first, to abstain from intervening in any way
on the side of the white settlers when the inevitable
confrontation
between them and the Zimbabwe people
takes place in the latter’s endeavour to achieve final
liberation.
That fatal encounter will enable us to gauge
the unbeatable strength of the usurping settlers when
left to themselves-without
British assistance. That
bloody encounter fits in to the prophecy of Lord Alport,
one-time
representative of the United Kingdom in
Salisbury, who, according to The New York Times of
8 March,. said: “They will only be able to achieve
their legltrmate expectations as a result of a resort to
force.“‘s Secondly, to supply the Africans with all military means, including anything that may be necessary
to overcome the pretended inability of the United Kingdom to overthrow the colonial oligarchy and thus prove
that the rebellion would have collapsed without resistance had Britain been determined to put an end to
it.

116. Mr. SEN (India): Mr. President, I must thank
you and the representatives on the Council for permitting me to take part in this important debate under
rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Council. In associating myself with all the compliments
which have been paid to your country and to you personally as President of the Council this month, I cannot
but recall a previous occasion-on 24 Juue 1969-when
another distinguished son of your continent, Ambassador Solano Lopez of Paraguay, presided over the
Council. On that occasion Rhodesia was also being
discussed and once again a forward-looking
draft
resolution, submitted by the delegations of Algeria,
Nepal, Pakistan, Senegal and ZambiaiD was defeated
by the abstention of seven members. We would hope
that on the present occasion and under your Presidency
the Council will t,ake substantial action on a problem
which has brought so much misery to many of our
fellow human beings and which has quite rightly
brought forth the frustrated anguish of the whole continent of Africa.
117. It is a measure of that concern and of the fear
of worse things to come- unless of course the international community takes united and timely action-that
has made the Organization of African Unity act in concert and give us its views of what should be done.
The Council of Ministers of the Organization of African
Unity met at Algiers from 4 to 12 December 1968 and
adopted a resolution on the question of Southern
Rhodesia. Earlier, in 1966, this Council itselfhad determined that the situation in Southern Rhodesia constituted a threat to international peace, and at the
beginning of this month the OAU again adopted a
resolution outlining a course of action to be pursued.

Ill,

Now I must very briefly quote Mr. Alexander
the representative
of Trans-Radio
News
Agency, who said:
“If the British Government had been in as big
a hurry to act against the rebel rCgime in Rhodesia
ES it was to call a premature meeting of the Security
Council, this seven-year-old problem would disappear in seven hours, or the time it would take for
a paratroop landing to oust the Smith usurpers from
their lair in Government House in Salisbury.‘F

Gabriel,

118. The pattern that emerges from the debate on
this subject both here and elsewhere is that there has
been no lack of warning, no short-sightedness of the
shape of things to come and certainly no wishful thinking that by shutting our eyes to the looming threat
we will avoid it. What has been lacking is the will
to act by those who can, or at least claim that they
can, act. What is lacking is the determination to strike
at evil and the perpetrators of evil in time. There is

112. Arguments were advanced that the strength of
the rebels and their power were such that the United
Kingdom’s
own forces were unable to confront them

ROfficial Records of the Security Corrncil, Twenty-fourth Year,
Supplement for April, May und June 1969, document S/9270/Rev. I,

’ Quoted in English by the speaker.

13

a degree of insensitivity, bordering on callousne’ss, of
the wrongs the Africans, the Asians and the other coloured peoples have suffered in the past, of what their
feelings are at present, and of thefact that if we continue
in this downward course, we shall be laying the foundations of race conflict and of wars, I presume that it
is in our interest to avoid these.
119. It is in that context that my delegation would
like to pay a special tribute to the Foreign Minister
of Zambia for the moving impression he created of
the thoughts and feelings of Africa and for the clear
statement of his mission as the emissary of the Organization of African Unity [153lst meeting]. We salute
him for this and express our gratitude to him and to
the OAU for leaving us in no doubt of the explosive
nature of this problem. He had the courage to ask
what the reaction in different quarters would be if the
role of the blacks and the whites in Africa were
reversed. I do not know if he will get an answer, but
I should like to think that when the problems of peace
and security are at the same time shot through ,with
racial problems, the Olympians direct their thunder
in a very strange but not unpredictable way.
120. One of the dissatisfactions which a delegation
like mine experiences.in debates of this nature is that
while we are alwaysready to express our deep concern,
we are at the same time aware that a considerable
amount of energy is being spent in talking. We should
be acting instead.
12 1, The measure of our concern has been repeatedly
indicated in this Council, but I hope I will be forgiven
if I quote the statement made by my Prime Minister
on 4 March of this year-that is, soon after we heard
about the latest but not unexpected feat of Mr. Ian
Smith. Mrs. Gandhi said:
“The Government of India considers the decision
of the breakaway r6gime to declare itself a republic
totally illegal. The Government will continue to support the measures taken by the world community
and by the African States against the racist rCgime.
We maintain our firm belief that any constitution
for this colonial territory must ensure the principle
of ‘one man one vote’ in a multiracial society. We
also hold the view that world action should be concerted with a view to taking effective steps leading
Rhodesia towards independence, based on the principle of no independence before majority African
rule.”

in conveying our tribute, sympathy and support to
the patriots of Zimbabwe in theirjust struggle against
the illegal racist rCgime of Salisbury for their inalienable right to freedom.”
123. Time and again over the last few years the
Government of India has expressed concern at the highest level over developments in Rhodesia. India severed
trade and other relations with the illegal rCgime in Salisbury six months before the unilateral declaration of
independence and has ever since continued to exercise
its unequivocal support for the initiatives of the African
countries to bring freedom and justice to the people
of Rhodesia. Similarly, we have cut off all connexions
with South Africa and Portugal. I dare say that this
might have meant a little loss of money and perhaps
a little loss of power to influence friends, but I am
sure that no Indian would regret those losses.
124. The problem of Rhodesia has many aspects, and
I should like to refer to some of them. As a colonial
Territory, Rhodesia is entitled to independence. The
Charter provides for it and the numerous resolutions
of the United Nations call for it. Hence, as far as the
United Nations is concerned, we should in normal circumstances welcome the independence of any colonial
Territory. If such independence cannot be arranged
in a peaceful manner, we would even welcome rebellion
to achieve it. It is thus not the mere act of rebellion
for seeking independence that should cause us any
concern. What does, however, make the acts of Mr.
Ian Smith reprehensible and susceptible of international action is that he is not supporting the independence of the people ofRhodesia. He is simply establishing a racist, Fascist, colonialist rCgime in the heart
of Africa and at the cost of the people of Rhodesia.
He treats them hardly better than savages and exploits
them shamefully and shamelessly for the benefit of
his white cronies.
125. He violates the Charter again and again and
throws to the wind all that we have said in General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) on granting independence to colonial countries and peoples. In the process
he threatens international peace, violates the honour
and digniiy of the African, oppresses men, women and
children simply because they happen to be black and
finally steals their land, deprives them of theil
resources and condemns them to perpetual slavery,
degradation and endless and intolerable humiliations.
In this design he is actively assisted and encouraged
by South Africa and Portugal and draws solace and
sustenance from other quarters which, let us say in
all charity, are unsuspecting and unconscious.

i22. The Indian Deputy Minister for External Affairs
expressed the hope that the so-called republic would
not be recognized by any civilized nation in the world
and that all States which continue to maintain diplomatic, consular, economic and military connexions
with Rhodesia would immediately sever such connexions. He added:
“In line with our policy on this subject, we shall
continue to support any proposals that may be put
forth in the United Nations and outside for establishing majority rule in Zimbabwe on the basis of ‘one
man one vote’. I am sure the House will join me

126. If Ian Smith is a rebel to the British Crown,
it is indeed for the British Government to decide how
it should deal with him. It is not my contention that
the Indian delegation is entitled to talk about how the
British Government should treat its rebels, or what
kind of government Britain should have. If the British
wish to decide to negotiate with him, wine and dine
with him, that is their affair. If they wish to punish
him-and
some startling evidence of how the British
14

132. In this connexion I should like to express oul
appreciation to the United States, France and many
other countries which have recently withdrawn their
consuls or have decided to do so, It is a very small
step, but in this situation every little thing helps, and
we do express publicly our appreciation of the steps
taken.

have sometimes treated their rebels and traitors can
be made readily available-that
again is their business.
What, however, the international
community
can
expect and demand from the British Government is
that it fulfil its obligations to the Charter in ensuring
that Southern
Rhodesia becomes independent “in
accordance with their freely expressed will and desire,
without any distinction as to race, creed or colour,
in order to enable them to enjoy complete independence and freedom.” These words are contained in
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV).

133. Is it now the fear that, with the declaration of
the Republic, if friends like South Africa and Portugal
establish diplomatic relations with Southern Rhodesia,
the theory that it is a British Territory will suffer a
setback? Or perhaps it is the hope that with the type
of resolution the United Kingdom would wish the
Council to adopt, South Africa, Portugal and maybe
a few others of the same ilk would be dissuaded from
establishing relations with Rhodesia.

127. Now, we are told that force cannot be used
against one’s kith and kin. I am not British; I am only
an Indian. But if I were, I doubt if I would be proud
of such kith and kin. It might be noble, of course.
not to lookdown on your depraved relatives, but should
this nobility be carried to the point of tolerating criminals or worse?

134. I cannot imagine that, except for those countries,
any other State would be interested in recognizing
Southern Rhodesia. We are told that recognition is
what Rhodesia wants most. It seems to us that
Rhodesia is doing very well as it is and perhaps recognition is what the United Kingdom wishes to avoid most.
For that indeed would subvert all ideas of the United
Kingdom being responsible for that area.

128. Apart from this, force has been freely used
against kith and kin. It was used in a massive form
in the last quarter of the eighteenth century; it was
used in Ireland, and, if we go further back in history,
in numerous other instances, Need I refer to what happened during the Second World War when various
nations found themselves divided? Need I mention the
different types of force used against settlers and the
like? However, Britain is a sovereign country, a permanent member of the Security Council, with special
responsibility
under the Charter, and if it does not wish
to use force no one can compel it to do so. But whethel
it wishes to use force or not, force is being used in
Rhodesia against the Africans. If there is no solution,
the conflagration
will spread. That is a sad thought.

135. There are many legal implications of this theory
of the United Kingdom being the administering Power,
although it administers nothing. I would touch upon
only one or two. Presumably over the years the United
Kingdom has extended several international conventions, instruments, and so on, to Rhodesia. What happens to those instruments and the United Kingdom’s
responsibilities towards them? Were the frequencies
of the International
Telecommunication
Union, for
instance, allotted to Britain inclusive or exclusive of
Rhodesia? What would happen if one of the neighbouring States of Southern Rhodesia were involved in
armed conflict with Southern Rhodesia? Would the
British Crown automatically be involved in a war with
these African countries because one of the British COIonies had been attacked, or in the reverse, that that
colony had attacked one of the African countries?
Many other questions of that type come to mind and
at one stage or other it may be necessary to study
and analyse them.

129. Britain also claims to be responsible for the Territory, but disclaims all responsibilities.
NO British
administrator
has been in the Territory for scores of
years. No British soldiers or policemen have been sent
to Rhodesia within living memory. The British writ
does not run in that Territory; and after many years
of refusal to supply information under Article 73 e of
the Charter, Britain only recently indicated that it could
not oblige as it had no facilities.
130. One wonders why Britain claims to be responsible for Southern Rhodesia without any responsibilities.
IS it because the Security Council can then take no
action without British concurrence’? Such a theory
would have something to do with the use of the veto
in certain situations,

136. Previous speakers have already referred to the
failure of sanctions, to the international financial backing which the Rhodesians receive from many sources,
and to the way in which the connivance and collusion
among Rhodesia, South Africa and Portugal have
reduced all action by the United Nations almost to
a farce. I shall not therefore deal with them. It may,
however, be pertinent to find out how much South
African gold has recently entered the international
money markets, including such purchase of that gold
by the InternationaI Monetary Fund.

13 1, However many curious things happen none the
less. This morning Reuters reported that the Queen
Mother has ceased to be a patron of the University
College at Salisbury. Why did we have to wait all this
time? The British delegation has been pressing for nonrecognition
of the Salisbury rigime for the last few
days. Yet the total boycott of consular, diplomatic and
other relations with Southern Rhodesia was decided
upon by the Council many years ago. Why were the
exequaturs of the consuls and so on in Rhodesia, a
British Territory, not cancelled or withdrawn by the
British Government?

137. I thought that I should make some of those
points-but
not in the hope of action by the United
Kingdom and much less by South Africa and Portugal.
My only intention is to make it as clear as I can that
15

no progress towards the solution of this problem has
been made and to indicate that if the Council cannot
take timely and suitable action we in India would perfectly understand and appreciate such action as the
African countries may themselves take. Our sympathies will always be with the freedom-fighters of Zimbabwe and we wish them all success; but it is perhaps
not too late yet. The draft resolution submitted by
the African and Asian members of the Council may
still provide a way out, Will the Council approve it?
Let us see, If, however, the useful suggestions made
by the Ambassador of Finland can produce unanimous
and positive results, my delegation will support all such
efforts.
138. Mr. NKAMA
(Zambia): Mr. President, thank
you for calling on me for the third time now. After
listening to the remarks which have been made by our
friend and colleague, Ambassador Charles Yost of the
United States of America, whom I am sure we all hold
in very high esteem, I am compelled to make a few
observations.
139. First of all, I want very sincerely to thank
Ambassador Yost for the remarks to which I have just
referred. We listened to those remarks very carefully
and attentively. At this stage I think I must breathe
a sigh of relief at the assurance of Ambassador Yost
that his Government does not intend to recognize the
illegal minority racist rCgime of Salisbury.
140. Be that as it may, I must express dismay and
amazement at the rigid and indifferent attitude of the
United States to the explosive situation now obtaining
in Rhodesia in particular, and in southern Africa
generally. We do not agree that if the Council adopted
the measures contained in the draft resolution sponsored by the Afro-Asian members ofthe Security Council[S/9696 and Corp.1 cmd2], the capacity of theunited
Nations would be, as Ambassador Yost put it, overextended. In our opinion, what would over-extend the
United Nations and, in particular, this organ of the
United Nations would be inaction and na’ivety on the
part of this Organization, and not the suggestions contained in the Afro-Asian draft resolution.

include communications,
would only serve to harden
the attitudes of the whites in Rhodesia. We do not
share that view at all. The sanctions that we proposed
in OLW draft resolution are really aimed at averting a
bloody holocaust in Rhodesia and, indeed, in the whole
of southern Africa. We cannot expect the people of
Zimbabwe to sit idly by while Smith and his fellow
rebels commit grave crimes against them. The truth
in Rhodesia is that whether or not the people of Zimbabwe resist Smith’s aggression and repression,
Smith’s gangster army is always there to intimidate
and even maltreat and kill them. What choice is there
for the oppressed people of Zimbabwe? What choice
do they have? They have no honourable choice but
to resist and to struggle for their rights.
143. The other day I borrowed from the rich Arabic
language, and I think today it is fitting that I should
borrow from yet another rich language, Russian, which
says: “You drink, you die; you do not drink, you die;
so better drink.” That could be applied to the people
of Zimbabwe. They are essentially people of peace,
but Smith has imposed violence on them and they are
now preparing themselves for a protracted struggle or
conflict.
144. We have no doubt in our mind that if the United
States of America and Btitain and their allies had been
realistic and had initiated firm and honest action against
the rebels in Rhodesia, we could have achieved spectacular results by now, But up to now the United States
has been treading in Britain’s footsteps and echoing
alrnost everything London has been saying. At leasf
we can understand Britain’s attitude towards the crisis
in Rhodesia, but we cannot really understand the
behaviour of the United States in colonial matters and
matters that pertain to justice and democracy, because
the United States itself had to struggle for its own
independence and freedom. We say to the United
States: the people of Zimbabwe are imbued with the
same values and principles as those which prompted
the brave Americans to fight for their rights, a fight
which culminated in their victory in 1776.
145. As I said the other day, the people of Zimbabwe
are not asking for something which does not beiong
to them as a right. No: Far from it. The people of
Africa expect the United States of America to be more
realistic and to urge the United Kingdom to be honest
so that it can shoulder its responsibilities in Rhodesia.

141. Ambassador Yost went on to argue that the
measures proposed in the Afro-Asian draft resolution
would further aggravate the already complicated situation in southern Africa. That is not accurate, What
is now aggravating the situation in Southern Rhodesia
is the connivance of this Organization
and, in particular, of some Member States of the Organization
in the grave situation in that region. It is this covert
and, in certain cases, overt support which Smith enjoys
that has enabled him to commit heinous crimes against
the indigenous black population of Zimbabwe. It is
the West and especially those in the West that have
special responsibilities in the maintenance of international peace and security which, to say the least, have
enabled Smith and his collaborators to proclaim a bogus
republic in Rhodesia.

146. I cannot understand the logic or the reasoning
of some delegations here. They tell us that wider SRW
tions might aggravate the situation in Rhodesia; and
yet they are the same people, the same countries, that
have taught others how to use arms and how to resort
to violence-the
very same. The fact is that we are
not even asking the United Kingdom to use violence,
but simply to take police action to remove the illegnl
Smith regime, as Southern Rhodesia
is, legally
speaking, an integral part of the United Kingdom, lt
is as if there was a revolt in any other part of the
United Kingdom. In such a case I do not think that
the United Kingdom would wait for a Security Council

142. Ambassador Yost even went on to state that
an extension of sanctions against Smith, which would
16

just the other day-only
four or five days ago, I think
-saying that Britain’s trade surplus stands at $300
million and will very soon stand at f450 million

resolution.
The London Government would act in
defence of its territorial integrity. That is all we are
asking the 3ritish Government to do in the case of
Rhodesia, just that and no more.

151I Now then, looking at the Afro-Asian draft
resolution, we see that it is a compromise draft, because
we do not even call in it for the use of force. We
know that the measures we propose in our draft resolution cannot and will not topple the Smith rCgime, but
we believe that they will go a long way towards tightening our present sanction system.

147. Now let me come back to the United States
position. Let me, of course, say quite frankly that we
welcome the decision by a number of countries, including the United States of Amerida, to withdraw their
consulates from Salisbury. But we hope that, as
Ambassador Malik of the Soviet Union said yesterday
[1532nd meeting], the withdrawal of consulates from
Salisbury will not be regarded as an end in itself, but
rather as a means that will enable those countries, and
indeed all of us, to take wider measures to ensure the
total success of our policies in Zimbabwe. To that effect
we would like to appeal to the United States to tighten
its sinews and to stop the continued purchase of
Rhodesian chrome. That is our first request. We appeal
to the United States Government to take steps to stop
the purchase of chrome from Rhodesia. The second
request is equally mild. Now that the United States
has closed its consulate in Salisbury, it should consider
the closure of Smith’s tourist office in this country.
It is indeed amazing, to say the very least, that the
rebels of Rhodesia should maintain and operate a tourist office in the United States of America. We appeal
to the United States to reconsider its position in this
matter.

152. I thought I should make those remarks. I hope
that Ambassador Yost and his delegation will take into
consideration the comments I have just made seriously
and in all sincerity.
153. Mr. BUFFUM
(United States of America): I
shall be very brief indeed, Naturally, we shall wigh
to give very careful consideration to the remarks we
havejust heard from the distinguished Minister of State
for Foreign Affairs of Zambia. I should like to say,
however, by way of introducing this very brief comment that the one thing that pleased me most about
his intervention was that all of his remarks reflect-and
indeed it is an accurate reflection-the
point that we
do share, both of us, a very common objective in dealing with the problem of Southern Rhodesia. If I may
say so, it emerges equally clearly that where we differ
is with regard to the means of achieving that objective;
and I think it is very frequently on such differences
of tactics and methods that friends can honestly disagree. I do appreciate the spirit in which he made his
remarks, and we shall study them in exactly the same
spirit.

.148. Another of our requests is this. We call on the
United States to prevent the production and dissemination of propaganda pamphlets by Smith’s agents in this
country, This is a tremendous stigma on the character
of the United States. We appeal to that Government
to stop the production of these pamphlets.

1.54. There is only one specific matter on which I
should like to comment at this point, and I should
like to reserve our right, if I may, to intervene at a
later stage with regard to the other questions that he
has raised, some of which we shall need to study. He
did, in his comments with regard to the purchase of
the chrome, imply that the United States is in fact
still purchasing chrome in Southern Rhodesia, I can
assure him and the members of the Council categorically that that is not the case, In fact, just the contrary
is true. As a result of our prohibition on the importation
of chrome from Southern Rhodesia it has been necessary for us to secure alternative sources in other
countries, often at considerable extra expense and difficulty and in many instances in a less satisfactory
manner and with a loss of quality. Nevertheless, we
do abide scrupulously by the sanctions imposed by
this Council, We do so willingly and whole-heartedly.

149. We appeal to the United States of America to
stop playing the role of a follower of the United Kingdom and to assume a positive posture that will enable
the international
community to take such steps as will
topple the Smith rBgime in’ Salisbury. I want to tell
Ambassador Yost in all sincerity and honesty-and
I believe I told Lord Caradon this just the other day
-that we should all realize that United States national
interests will be better served under a popular government in Salisbury than under an unpopular rkgime
whose lifespan leaves a lot to be desired and whose
stability is non-existent. I do not have to say that the
existence of Smith depends on bayonets.
150. We have, been told that the use of force in
Rhodesia is out. The United Kingdom, which is the
administering
Power, has said this very often, usin,
a number of alibis or excuses such as difficulties in
logistics and the long distances involved-the
distance,
that is, from London to Rhodesia. Of course, last year
I said in Lusaka that, although I had perhaps forgotten
a bit of geography, the distance from London to
Anguilla seemed to me to be longer than the distance
from London to Rhodesia. At one time they were even
alluding to their economic problems, These days, however, they do not allude to those problems because,
as we all know, the Treasury in London released figures

155. Just to make quite sure that that point is fully
understood in all of its ramifications, I should like to
add that chrome arriving in the United States from
any source in southern Africa is carefully tested. We
have through a consistent and stringent checking system of this kind determined that there has been no
disguised Rhodesian chrome entering this country. I
should like to submit that information as a partial reply
to the remarks of the Minister this afternoon.
17

156. The

PRESIDENT
(interpretcrtiorz
from
Spanish): Consultations have taken place regarding the
possible date of our next meeting. There is some feeling
that an understanding is approaching between the
opposing sides in the search for a consensus. It appears
preferable to schedule the next meeting for Tuesday
at 3 p.m. to allow for consultations between Governments and, particularly, for the possibility of an understanding such as that suggested by the representative
of Finland. Therefore, since there are no objections,

the next meeting of the Council will be held on Tuesday
<afternoon at 3 o’clock sharp.
157. Before we adjourn, I wish to thank the representatives of the United States, Yugoslavia, Finland,
Burundi and India for the very kind references that
they have made both to my country and to me in respect
of our assumption of the Presidency of the Security
Council for the month of March.
The meeting rose at 6.05 p.m.

18

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

Price:

$U.S.

I .OO iw equivalent

in other

currencies)

X2030-June

1973-2.0H’
