S/2016/1011

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 December 2016
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2291
(2016) of 13 June 2016. It covers major political and security developments in
Libya, provides an overview of the human rights and humanitarian situation in the
country and outlines the activities of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) since the issuance of my report of 16 May 2016 ( S/2016/452).

II. Political and security-related developments
2.
Efforts to implement the Libyan Political Agreement of December 2015 have
continued, despite the deeply challenging political and security context. The
Presidency Council worked to expand its authority and govern, but conti nued to
face a number of setbacks. The House of Representatives met on 22 August to
discuss the proposal for a new Government of National Accord, presented by Prime
Minister Faiez Serraj, and a majority of those voting rejected the proposal. Other
important elements of the Agreement remain unimplemented, including the interim
security arrangements, while the security situation remains very challenging.
Limited access to financial resources hampered the ability of the Presidency Council
to deliver basic services.
3.
After the House of Representatives voted to reject the proposed Government,
the Presidency Council initiated consultations on a new proposal. The formation of a
new Government is one of a number of contentious issues requiring resolution. There
are serious differences between the supporters of the Presidency Council and the
leadership of the House of Representatives over the composition and functions of the
Presidency Council itself. The structure and command of the Libyan armed forces and
appointments to senior military and civilian leadership positions are other key issues.
Implementation of the Libyan Political Agreement
4.
The House of Representatives remained unable to meet to amend the
Constitutional Amendment in order to constitutionalize the institutions emanating
from the Libyan Political Agreement. Furthermore, the absence of approval by the

16-20418 (E)

021216

*1620418*

S/2016/1011

House of Representatives for the proposed Government of National Accord led the
Presidency Council to instruct designated ministers to continue to perform their
functions in a caretaker capacity until a new Government was put in place.
5.
Parallel institutions remained in place, attempting to assert authority despite
their lack of legal status under the Libyan Political Agreement. The Bayda -based
“interim Government” refused to recognize the Presidency Council and continued to
exercise authority in the east of the country, encouraging the operation of parallel
institutions, including a branch of the Central Bank of Libya based in Benghazi. The
former “Government of National Salvation” sought to make a comeback in October
2016 by retaking control of the former General National Congres s premises in
Tripoli, which had been used by the State Council. The ouster of the State Council
led to shows of force and clashes among armed groups in the city.
6.
Despite challenges to its legitimacy, the State Council continued to convene
sessions in Tripoli. In response to the continued lack of a vote on the Government of
National Accord, on 21 September, the State Council announced that it would
exercise all its functions, as set out in the Libyan Political Agreement, until the
House of Representatives reconvened. The statement was perceived by the general
public as an attempt to undermine the authority and legitimacy of the House of
Representatives, triggering strong reactions. However, the State Council has taken
no steps in that direction since the announcement.
7.
UNSMIL continued to engage closely with the leadership and senior members
of the House of Representatives, to urge them to convene a legislative session.
UNSMIL also convened meetings of the Libyan Political dialogue, from 16 to
18 July and on 5 and 6 September in Tunis, and on 10 and 11 November in Malta, at
the request of the Presidency Council, to consult on the formation of a consensual,
technically competent and inclusive Government. The members of the Libyan
Political dialogue reiterated its support for the Libyan Political Agreement and for
the Presidency Council and recommended measures to address ongoing challenges
and drive forward implementation of the Libyan Political Agreement, underscoring
the importance of accelerating the provision of basic services.
8.
During the reporting period, UNSMIL continued efforts to promote unity
among and the full participation of all nine members of the Presidency Council. On
8 October, the Presidency Council held its first full session with all nine of its
members since February, to discuss the formation of a new Cabinet.
9.
The Presidency Council, in its capacity as Supreme Commander of the Libyan
armed forces, established regional operations rooms to lead and coordinate operations
against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). UNSMIL assisted the
Presidency Council in convening a high-level meeting on security, held on 17 and
18 July in Tunis, which brought together representatives from the army and police
force and other security actors to further the implementation of the security
arrangements provided for in the Libyan Political Agreement. The meeting provided
guidance to the Presidency Council on establishing interim security structures,
engagement with armed groups and the formation of a presidential guard.
Regional and international engagement
10. The Libyan political process continued to receive regional and international
support. At a ministerial meeting for Libya held in Vienna on 16 May, participating

2/18

16-20418

S/2016/1011

Member States and regional organizations expressed their support for the Libyan
Political Agreement and for the Government of National Accord as the sole
legitimate representative of the Libyan people. This support was reaffirmed at a
ministerial meeting on Libya held in the margins of the general debate of the
General Assembly, in New York on 22 September, at which participants welcomed
the Presidency Council’s leadership in the fight against terrorism and recognized the
need to ensure an inclusive security dialogue.
11. My Special Representative attended the summit meeting of the League of Arab
States, held in Nouakchott on 25 July, and the ninth ministerial meeting of the
neighbouring countries of Libya, held in Niamey on 17 October. On 25 October, my
Special Representative met with the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States
and former President Kikwete, the African Union High Representative for Libya, to
announce the formation of a “troika” to consult on the situation in Libya and
advance the political process. On 7 November, my Special Representative briefed
the African Union High-level Committee on Libya, in Addis Ababa.
Situation in the west
12. The security situation in Tripoli remained fragile. The Presidency Council
partially moved from the Abu Sittah naval base to the office of the President of the
Council in the city centre and installed itself in a number of ministries and other
government buildings. The Council faced serious obstacles in implementing its
mandate to govern. With only limited control on the ground and in the absence of
security forces at its disposal, the Council was compelled to rely on armed groups
committed to the Libyan Political Agreement for its security. Civil servants were
divided between the Council and its political opponents, further complicating efforts
to improve service delivery. The provision of public services in the capital,
including water and electricity, deteriorated, giving rise to public protests.
13. Tripoli remained under the control of a patchwork of armed group s with
differing agendas and loyalties, from both Tripoli and the surrounding areas,
including Misratah. Rivalries over funding and territorial control between the
groups regularly led to clashes. In June and September, elements of the Salah
al-Burki brigade and the Abu Salim armed group clashed in central Tripoli, leaving
at least 10 people dead. Further clashes in October, close to Tripoli’s Mitiga airport,
between the Tripoli Revolutionaries Brigade and the Yusuf al -Buni brigade, caused
a number of fatalities.
14. In the wider western region, ceasefire agreements concluded between local
communities in 2015 remained largely intact. However, clashes in Sabrathah caused
at least four further fatalities in June. Between July and late October, clashes and
reprisals between rival communities in Zawiyah reportedly resulted in several
casualties, before the parties agreed to a ceasefire agreement on 1 November. Parts
of the main coastal highway connecting Tripoli to the west of the country and
Tunisia remained closed by rival armed groups for most of the reporting period.
Situation in the east
15. Fighting continued in Benghazi between Libyan National Army forces loyal to
the House of Representatives and groups including ISIL and the Benghazi
Revolutionaries Shura Council — a coalition of Islamist armed groups that includes

16-20418

3/18

S/2016/1011

Ansar al-Sharia, an entity designated by the Security Council as associated with
Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb. Fighting centred on the Suq al-Hut, Qawarshah
and Qanfudah districts, and Libyan National Army forces made limited progress
owing to strong resistance and an extensive use of land mines and suicide attacks.
The situation there was also complicated by the presence of civilians.
16. In June, fighting flared up in Ajdabiya between the Libyan National Army
forces and the Benghazi Defence Brigades, which were founded on 1 June by
fighters and armed groups who sought to distance themselves from the terrorist
entities Ansar al-Sharia and ISIL. On 18 June, the Brigades attacked Libyan
National Army forces guarding the Man-Made River Project south of Ajdabiya. On
20 July, it was reported that three French military officers were killed after the
Brigades shot down a helicopter south of Benghazi.
17. In Darnah, Libyan National Army forces conducted airstrikes throughout the
reporting period against the Darnah Mujahidin Shura Council, a coalition of local
Islamist armed groups. Since the expulsion of ISIL from the city by the Shura
Council, Libyan National Army forces intensified their sie ge on Darnah, limiting
transport to and from the city, which was reported to suffer from intermittent
shortages of food, medicine, gasoline and cash.
18. On 28 July, the Presidency Council and the leadership of the Petroleum
Facilities Guard, commanded by Ibrahim Jadran, signed an agreement to reopen the
oil load ports under Guard control in Ra’s Lanuf and Sidrah. On 11 September,
Libyan National Army forces attacked the Guard in the oil crescent area and quickly
seized control of oil ports in Sidrah, Ra’s Lanuf, Burayqah and Zuwaytinah with the
support of tribal leaders. The confrontation reportedly resulted in one member of
the Guard being killed and several injured. The Libyan National Army called on the
National Oil Corporation to assume the management of the facilities, and on
15 September, National Oil Corporation chairman Mustafa Sanalla visited the oil
crescent area. On 18 September, the Guard attacked Libyan National Army forces in
Sidrah and Ra’s Lanuf in an effort to retake control of the area, b ut they were repelled
with the support of airstrikes. In a separate development, on 19 September, Libyan
National Army forces expanded the area under their control through the seizure of the
towns of Bin Jawwad and Harawah.
19. During the reporting period, General Abdul Razak al-Naduri, the military
governor of the area between Bin Jawwad and Darnah, removed the elected mayors
of the municipalities of Abyar, Ajdabiya, Benghazi, Kufrah, Shahhat and Sidrah.
The mayors were replaced by military officers in fo ur of the areas.
Situation in the south
20. In Sabha, there were continued instances of kidnapping and killing among
tribal communities, causing at least 18 fatalities. The fear of a spillover of the
military escalation in the east and of possible confrontation in the south between
Libyan National Army forces and the Third Force, predominantly composed of
fighters from Misratah, continued to have an impact on the overall security
situation.
21. The Libyan National Army attempted to expand its influence in the south, and
military elements affiliated with the former regime tried to reorganize. Tensions

4/18

16-20418

S/2016/1011

increased in Sabha on 9 October, when a force affiliated with the Libyan National
Army entered the city. In Kufrah, there were continued tensions between members
of the Tebu community and armed elements from Zway.
ISIL presence
22. In Sirte, ISIL suffered a major defeat at the hand of forces loyal to the
Presidency Council, losing almost all of the 300 kilometres of territory that it had
controlled in the area. The forces participated in Operation Bunyan Marsus (Solid
Wall), backed by airstrikes by the United States of America, and successfully rolled
back ISIL gains over a period of six months, which resulted in more than 650
fighters being killed and more than 2,000 injured. At the end of the reporting period,
the ISIL presence in Sirte was limited to a small pocket in the city centre. The
number of ISIL fatalities is unknown.
23. In a first phase that lasted from early May to mid -June, Operation Bunyan
Marsus forces pushed ISIL back eastwards to the outskirts of Sirte and took control
once more of the areas of Abu Qurayn, Abu Najm and Washkah. The Operation
comprised mostly fighters from Misratah and smaller contingents from other cities,
including Jufrah, Sabha and Tripoli. Simultaneously, Petroleum Facilities Guard
forces and other local units advanced from the east and pushed ISIL out of the
towns of Bin Jawwad, Nawfaliyah and Harawah.
24. In a second phase, Operation Bunyan Marsus forces gradually gained control
of the main neighbourhoods of Sirte and captured strategic infrastructure from ISIL,
including the Qardabiyah airbase, the Ouagadougou conference complex, Sirte
University and the port. At the request of the Presidency Council, on 2 August, the
United States of America commenced Operation Odyssey Lightning, a series of
airstrikes against ISIL targets in Sirte.
25. Sirte was the last significant population centre under ISIL control in Libya,
and the ISIL presence is now limited to small pockets in Sirte and Benghazi.
Smaller groups and cells remain active throughout the country. UNSMIL is working
with Sirte Stabilization Committee, appointed by the Presidency Council, and
international partners to coordinate planning for a comprehensive reconstruction
plan for the city of Sirte.
Economic situation
26. There was a marked increase in the production of oil following the reopening
of oil facilities in the oil crescent. On 15 September, National Oil Corporation
Chairman Mustafa Sanalla stated that national exports would increase from 200,000
to 900,000 barrels per day by the end of the year. On 15 September, Chairman
Sanalla lifted the force majeure clause, which had blocked oil exports from the oil
crescent region, and a number of tankers resumed exporting oil. Following
discussions with members of the Presidency Council, Chairman Sanalla confirmed
that the Corporation had received 300 million dinars and the Presidency Coun cil
was committed to providing an additional 300 million dinars to invest in repairs and
maintenance for national oil infrastructure. By mid -October, production had
increased to 570,000 barrels per day.

16-20418

5/18

S/2016/1011

27. With low oil revenues, the 2016 fiscal deficit is expected to reach 69 per cent
of gross domestic product. With the dinar continuing to lose value, the Central Bank
of Libya estimated inflation at 25 per cent in the year ending June 2016. While the
increase in oil production provides foreign currency ea rnings for the Central Bank
of Libya and has slowed the depletion of national reserves, the economic situation
has not improved. All across the country, banks are running short of cash. The issue
of the Bank releasing funds to enable the delivery of basic services was one element
of discussion at the meeting in support of Libya’s economy held on 31 October and
1 November in London.
28. On 15 August, the Chairman of the Libyan Investment Authority resigned, and
the Presidency Council appointed an interim steering committee to manage
litigation on behalf of the Authority but not to dispose of or transfer assets. In
September, the Authority won two significant cases against foreign investment
management firms, which together lead to the recovery of more than $1 20 million.
However, on 14 October, the Authority lost a case against a United States
investment bank regarding a failed investment of $1.2 billion.

III. Constitution drafting process
29. There continued to be deep differences in view over the substa nce of the draft
constitution produced by members of the Constitution Drafting Assembly, who met
in Salalah, Oman, earlier in the year and voted on the draft in April at a subsequent
meeting in Bayda. Members who did not attend the Salalah meeting continue d to
highlight differences over issues relating to the internal procedures and the
substance of the draft constitution, including representation, the rights of minorities,
the role and composition of the Senate and the presidency.
30. During the reporting period, members of the Constitution Drafting Assembly
who did not attend the Salalah retreat initiated a case challenging the legality of the
changes to the by-laws of the Assembly before the administrative court in Bayda’.
The case questions the legality of the vote taken by those who signed the draft
constitution on 19 April.

IV. Other activities of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya
A.

Electoral support
31. During the reporting period, the United Nations electoral support team
continued to provide capacity-building and technical assistance to the High National
Elections Commission with a view to preparing for future elections. United Nations
support included the organization and implementation of a series of workshops,
trainings, exchange visits and capacity development programmes for the
Commission and relevant stakeholders. The goal of these activities was to address
technical topics, build networks and facilitate exchanges with counterparts in Libya
and the wider Arab region.

6/18

16-20418

S/2016/1011

32. The United Nations electoral support team helped the High National Elections
Commission to finalize a comprehensive gender-mapping document, entitled
“Electoral gender mapping: women’s participation in Libya’s national elections,
2012-2014” to assist decision-makers in addressing barriers and minimizing factors
that discourage women’s participation in elections.

B.

Human rights, transitional justice and the rule of law
33. During the reporting period, violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law continued to be perpetrated by all groups, mostly with impunity.
Violations included: abductions, hostage-taking, enforced disappearances, arbitrary
detention, torture, unlawful killings and attacks on civilians.
34. Civilians were caught in the crossfire in the course of ongoing conflict across
the country. From 17 May to 12 October, UNSMIL documented a total of 246
civilian casualties, including 94 deaths and 132 injuries. Airstrikes caused the most
deaths and injuries, with shelling causing the second-highest number of casualties.
The highest number of civilian deaths was recorded in Benghazi.
35. UNSMIL documented six attacks on medical facilities, including the shelling
of the Benghazi Medical Centre in May and June, and a car bomb attack on the Jala’
hospital in Benghazi on 24 June, which killed five people and injured 13, including
two children. On 19 September, an unidentified armed group stormed the intensive
care unit of the Zawiyah Teaching Hospital.
36. Civilians remain trapped in the Qanfoudha neighbourhood of Benghazi, facing
bombings and shortages of food, water and medical care. Those trapped included
migrant workers and former prisoners from the Bu Hudaymah military prison in
Benghazi. Despite intensive local mediation efforts supported by UNSMIL, the
Benghazi Revolutionaries Shura Council and the Libyan National Army did not
reach an agreement on the modalities for the evacuation of civilians.
Abductions and killings
37. Armed groups from all sides continued to abduct and kill civilians. Individuals
were targeted for their political opinions, affiliations, family or tribal identity.
Armed groups also commonly abducted people for ransom or prisoner exchange.
38. On 21 July, the bodies of 14 people were found in a rubbish dump in the
Laythi neighbourhood of Benghazi. The military prosecutor in Benghazi reportedly
opened an investigation into the killings, but has not made public any findings.
There were also attacks against justice sector and other officials. On 22 July, an
unidentified armed group abducted Mohammad Faraj Abou -Amid, the chairman of
the north Tripoli court. On 25 July, unidentified gunmen abducted two officials from
the civil registry office in Muzurq, and their bodies were found shortly afterwards in
Sabha. Important religious figures and members of civil society have also been
kidnapped for financial or political reasons. On 6 October, Sheikh Nader al -Omrani,
a prominent member of Dar al-Ifta’, was kidnapped by unknown assailants in
Tripoli. On 19 October, the former chairman of Libyan airlines was also kidnapped.
A total of 4 people were killed and 18 injured in an explosion in Kish Square in

16-20418

7/18

S/2016/1011

Benghazi on 29 October. One of the civilians killed was Muhammad Bu gaighis, an
anti-corruption activist.
Detention, torture and deaths in custody
39. Arbitrary detention continued to be a widespread problem in both official
detention centres and detention facilities run by armed groups in all regions of the
country. Little progress had been made to review individual cases to ensure that
those being held are either prosecuted or released, in accordance with Libyan law.
40. UNSMIL recorded cases of arbitrary detention and torture across the country,
including in the Garnadah and Kuwayfiah prisons in Benghazi, the Jawiya and
Taminah prisons in Misratah and the Abu Salim, Fursan Janzur, Hadbah and Mitiga
prisons in Tripoli. Previous allegations of torture and ill -treatment in the Hadhba
prison, including video evidence, which became public in 2015, have not yet
resulted in prosecutions. Dire conditions were observed in the Mitiga and Sabha
prisons. Allegations described a pattern of severe torture and ill -treatment. The
information received indicated that at least three deaths in custody from torture
occurred in the Mitiga prison during the reporting period. On 9 June, following the
issuing of release orders by the Office of the General Prosecutor for 19 prisoners
from the Ruwaymi prison, the bodies of 12 of the prisoners were found in different
locations in Tripoli bearing gunshot wounds. All the deceased were former Qadhafi
regime members and the circumstances surrounding the killings remained unclear.
The Office of the General Prosecutor stated that it had opened an inves tigation, but
it had not announced any findings as at the time of publication of the present report.
On 27 October, 10 bodies were found with their hands tied and gunshot wounds in a
rubbish dump in the Shabnah neighbourhood of Benghazi, which is under the
control of the Libyan National Army forces.
Groups in vulnerable situations
41. Migrants were detained arbitrarily in detention centres run by the Department
for Combating Illegal Migration, and in other forms of informal detention under the
control of armed groups and criminal smuggling and trafficking networks. Migrants
detained in centres operated by the Department did not go through any legal
process, and there was no oversight by judicial authorities. Conditions in the centres
were inhuman, with people held in warehouses in appalling sanitary conditions,
with poor ventilation and extremely limited access to light and water. In some
detention centres, migrants suffered from severe malnutrition, and UNSMIL
received numerous and consistent reports of torture, including beatings and sexual
violence, as well as forced labour by armed groups with access to the centres.
42. Children were victims of abductions and arbitrary detention, often held in
facilities without being separated from adults. Civilian casualties included children,
with at least 24 killed in hostilities during the reporting period, including in
playgrounds and recreational parks. Women were also arbitrarily held in detention,
often because of personal affiliations. Journalists, other med ia professionals and
bloggers were also the victims of targeted attacks, facing unlawful killings,
abductions and arbitrary detention. Three journalists were reportedly killed by
snipers, and other media workers were injured, including in Sirte. One Libyan

8/18

16-20418

S/2016/1011

journalist was killed by a sniper in Benghazi, while two other journalists, a Libyan
and a Dutch national, were killed by ISIL snipers in Sirte.
Transitional justice and reconciliation
43. UNSMIL supported the Misratah/Tawurgha’ dialogue committee, which met
four times during the reporting period in implementation of the 18 December 2015
road map document. On 31 August, the two sides signed an agreement that included
provisions for reparations for the victims of the 2011 conflict and the return of
internally displaced persons back to Tawurgha’. The agreement seeks the
endorsement of the Misratah Municipal Council and the Tawurgha’ local council, as
well as the Government of National Accord. UNSMIL has encouraged both parties
and the Government to ensure the implementation of both the right to reparations
and the right to return without conditions.
44. At the local level, reconciliation efforts progressed in the Nafusah Mountains
and between the Tawurgha’ and Misratahn communities. UNSMIL organized a
national reconciliation workshop from 31 August to 2 September to map and
evaluate existing national and local reconciliation initiatives. The workshop brought
together 75 Libyan activists, experts, politicians and associations to discuss the
challenges and opportunities for national reconciliation in Libya. Consultations
between UNSMIL, the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the
Peacebuilding Support Office are ongoing to support the development of a national
reconciliation strategy by Libyan stakeholders.
Judicial and penal system
45. In an effort to preserve the unity of the judicial bodies from political
interference, on 4 September, the President of the Supreme Judicial Council,
Judge Muhammd al-Hafi, and the Prosecutor General ad interim, Judge Ibrahim
Mas’ud, accompanied by other members of the Council, travelled to Tubruq to meet
with members of the judicial bodies in the east. The meeting resulted in the adoption
of decisions by the Council related to promotions and transfer of memb ers of the
judicial bodies for the judicial year 2016-2017. The delegation also held working
meetings with members of the judicial bodies representing Benghazi, Ajdabiya, Darnah,
Bayda and Marj. UNSMIL continued to meet with representatives and interlocuto rs of
the judicial and correction system to discuss the situation of detainees, the investigation
of human rights violations and plans for technical support to judges and prosecutors.
46. In order to provide support in the transfer of detainees to detention centres under
the full control of the judicial police under the Ministry of Justice, as stipulated in the
Libyan Political Agreement, UNSMIL conducted visits to five prisons in Tripoli, from
26 to 29 September. Only three detention centres in Tripoli were under the full control
of the judicial police, while four others were run and secured by armed groups.

C.

Security sector
Support for Libyan planning for interim security arrangements
47. UNSMIL continued to work closely with the Presidency Council and the
Ministries of Interior and of Defence on the implementation of the interim security

16-20418

9/18

S/2016/1011

arrangements outlined in the Libyan Political Agreement. Key areas of support
included: assessments and planning for Tripoli security; the formation of a presidential
guard and engagement with armed groups; and support to counter improvised
explosive devices and clear explosive remnants of war. UNSMIL staff continue to visit
Tripoli and other cities regularly to facilitate these and other related activities.
48. As a result of work by UNSMIL with the Temporary Security Committee, the
Presidency Council issued decree No. 2 of 9 May 2016, establishing a presidential
guard, to be composed of a mix of police and army personnel. However, the breadth
and scope of the tasks given to the presidential guard were more ambitious than
those originally proposed by the Temporary Security Committee and have caused
some concern among a range of security actors. On 31 August, the Presidency
Council appointed a presidential guard commander and two deputies. UNSMIL has
worked closely with the presidential guard commander, encouraging him to focus on
security for Tripoli. UNSMIL has also continued to engage with armed groups to
widen the support for the Libyan Political Agreement and enabled closer
coordination among security actors in Tripoli.
49. With the assistance of a European Union liaison and planning cell, UNSMIL
continues to monitor police and army unit deployments, principally in Tripoli, to
assess the security situation and the implementation of the interim security
arrangements. UNSMIL also remains engaged on policing reform and security
sector development.
Arms and ammunition management
50. There continues to be a significant risk of death and injury from explosive
remnants of war and booby traps in Benghazi. To address the issue, the United
Nations Mine Action Service arranged for training in Tunis of 30 non -technical
survey personnel from the National Safety Authority, forensic police and military
engineers, to enable areas of the city to be assessed for contamination with
explosive hazards and to determine clearance priorities. Teams undertaking those
tasks were also trained in emergency trauma response and pro vided with medical
equipment in order to improve their safety. The teams are currently receiving
tasking orders from the Libyan Mine Action Service for survey tasks in Benghazi.

D.

Women’s empowerment
51. UNSMIL continued to promote the role of women in the political process, in
accordance with the implementation of Security Council resolutions 1325 (2000)
and 2122 (2013).
52. UNSMIL offered support and technical assistance to the Minister of Social
Affairs, State Minister for Women’s Affairs and Social Development and State
Minister of Institutional Reform in the Government of National Accord. After the
Presidency Council established the Women’s Support and Empowerment Unit on
8 September, UNSMIL convened three meetings of the Women’s Advocacy Group
to support the drafting of an advocacy plan targeting the Presidency Council and the
House of Representatives. The Unit demanded that 30 per cent of the seats in the
newly proposed Government of National Accord be allotted to women.

10/18

16-20418

S/2016/1011

53. On 4 and 30 October, based on a request for technical support from women
members of the House of Representatives, UNSMIL visited the House of
Representatives in Tubruq. The Mission subsequently convened a conference for
women parliamentarians, including from neighbouring countries, in Tunis from 10 to
12 November.
54. In partnership with the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women regional office for Arab States and with financial support
from the Government of Switzerland, UNSMIL organized three training events in
Tunis in May, June and August, on Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) and
women’s political participation, and on negotiation and conflict resolution. In
partnership with UNDP, and with support from the Governments of Germany, the
Netherlands and Switzerland, on 1 August UNSMIL launched a two -year project
entitled “Amal”, or “Hope”, aimed at providing technical assistance to women in
institutions emanating from the Libyan Political Agreement.

E.

Youth
55. UNSMIL and the United Nations country team have intensified efforts to reach
out to Libyan youth, who remain underrepresented in transitional institutions. The
United Nations held two events in August in Tunis that brought together Libyan
youth for exchanges on their role in resolving the current political impasse. Marking
International Youth Day on 12 August, some 30 civil society organizations
conducted activities in 11 municipalities across Libya with support from the United
Nations Population Fund. In October, my Special Representative met with youth
leaders engaged in training young people in dialogue and reconciliation in Tripoli.

F.

Coordination of international assistance
56. The decision by the Presidency Council to delegate ministerial responsibilities
to designated ministers and the active participation of the Ministry of Planning in the
technical bodies of the joint Technical Coordination Committee, provided renewed
impetus for United Nations coordination assistance. On 28 and 29 September,
UNSMIL, in partnership with UNDP, the International Monetary Fund and the World
Bank, convened the fourth Libyan Experts Development Cooperation Forum in Tunis.
Recently registered as a non-governmental organization in Libya and seeking to
promote synergy between the Libyan intellectual community and government
decision makers, the Forum analysed policy options, actions and priorities to be
proposed to the Government of National Accord. The joint Technical Coordination
Committee, which met regularly with national representatives during the reporting
period, convened on 12 October in Tripoli, in one of the first multilateral meetings
with extended international presence to take place in the Libyan capital since
mid-2014.
57. The Stabilization Facility for Libya project, launched by UNDP in April 2016
with support from UNSMIL and the international community, received $30 million
in pledges from Member States, and the Government of National Accord pledged to
match that amount. On the basis of a careful review of selection cr iteria, the Board
of the Stabilization Facility agreed to support Benghazi in eastern Libya, Kiklah in

16-20418

11/18

S/2016/1011

western Libya and Sabha and Awbari in southern Libya. Assistance packages
included the provision of essential equipment for hospitals and clinics, school s,
emergency services and waste and wastewater management, and the rehabilitation
of small-scale infrastructure damaged during the fighting. The delivery of assistance
began in early October.

G.

Humanitarian assistance
58. The Humanitarian Response Plan for 2016, launched in November 2015, had
received only 30 per cent of the required funding, totalling $51.7 million, as at
31 October. The inadequate funding limited the ability of the United Nations and its
partners to provide life-saving assistance to the most vulnerable of the 1.3 million
targeted beneficiaries. In preparation for the Humanitarian Response Plan for 2017,
the humanitarian country team conducted a humanitarian needs overview and
convened a workshop in Tunis on 10 and 11 October for representatives from national
and local authorities and the international community, to identify needs, the most
vulnerable groups and priority responses for 2017. In September 2016, the
humanitarian country team issued a flash appeal requesting $10.7 million for urgent
life-saving assistance to 79,400 internally displaced persons expected to return to
Sirte. Although over 53,000 internally displaced persons returned since September, the
Flash Appeal had received no funding as of the date of drafting of the present report.
59. Figures from the International Organization for Migration (IOM) displacement
tracking mechanism indicate that the number of internally displaced persons in
Libya was 313,236 in October, a reduction from previous months. In Benghazi in
particular, returns brought down the number of internally displaced persons from
115,000 in June to 51,730 in September.
60. Despite the funding shortfalls, United Nations agencies continued to provide
urgent humanitarian relief and assistance during the reporting period, largely
through national responders and government counterparts. The World Health
Organization (WHO) provided life-saving kits, medicines and supplies, including
basic and supplementary emergency health kits, emergency trauma kits, medicines
for non-communicable disease and other kits to various locations, in sufficient
quantities to provide life-saving interventions for a target population of 60,000 for a
period of three months. WHO also continued to support capac ity-building for
national institutions, including by offering trainings on mental health, assessing
health needs and providing supplies and services such as activities for
immunizations against polio. WHO conducted a national assessment of 98 hospitals
between May and October and found that only four hospitals were operating above
75 per cent functionality, while 27 were operating below 25 per cent functionality
and 16 were closed due to conflict-related damage. In order to ensure the operation
of critical medical installations and equipment amid frequent power cuts, UNDP
provided nine hospitals in Tripoli, Benghazi and Sabha with solar panels.
61. The World Food Programme provided food assistance to 113,485 people in
need, primarily internally displaced persons and refugees. The challenges of
increased fighting, lack of cash liquidity and the depreciation of the dinar against
major currencies has severely affected food security in Libya and the population’s
livelihoods throughout 2016.

12/18

16-20418

S/2016/1011

62. The United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) supported psychosocial
assistance programmes for 2,537 children and specialized child protection services
for 656 children. UNICEF implementing partners provided hygiene kits to 12,846
internally displaced persons, including 5,138 children, in different parts of the
country. In Benghazi and other conflict-affected areas, 8,942 school-aged children
benefitted from safe learning spaces. In June, also in Benghazi, UNICEF, in
partnership with national non-governmental organizations, offered catch-up classes
to 5,201 school-aged children, including 179 from Sirte, to enable them to return to
formal education. UNICEF provided 5,641 residents of a camp for internally
displaced persons in Tripoli with water tanks and water treatment chemic als, and
1,500 families in Zintan and 1,300 displaced families in Sirte received hygiene kits.
The municipal council of Sabrathah committed to supporting the protection of
vulnerable children affected by armed conflict, including the reintegration of
children formerly associated with armed groups.
63. Between 17 May and 21 October, IOM recorded 114,152 refugees and
migrants who had reached Italy by boat from the African shores, mostly from Libya.
Over 14,000 migrants were rescued in 2016 by the Libyan Coas t Guard, and 3,156
deaths were recorded in the central Mediterranean Sea corridor. Of the 256,690
migrants identified by IOM in Libya, 3,624 were held in detention centres managed
by the Department for Combating Illegal Migration. The Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) has registered a total number
of 37,744 refugees and asylum seekers, most of whom were Syrian.
64. Since May, IOM facilitated the safe return of 2,016 migrants in Libya to nine
different countries of origin, and provided reintegration assistance to 162 of the
most vulnerable returnees. IOM also distributed non -food items, hygiene kits and
basic commodities to 17,782 internally displaced persons and 21,474 migrants, in
addition to immediate humanitarian assistance to hundreds of migrants rescued at
sea by the Libyan coast guard. In coordination with the coast guard and the Libyan
port security, IOM installed three furnished and equipped medical clinics at main
disembarkation points in Tripoli, Qasr al-Qarahbulli and Zlitan. UNHCR provided
primary health care in three community development centres in Tripoli and
Benghazi, in detention centres and in five major disembarkation points.
65. Assistance by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization to the Libyan Department of Antiquities and cultural institutions in
Libya culminated with the approval of a new priority action plan to address
emergency and short-term interventions. The plan was aimed at safeguarding the
country’s cultural heritage and was approved by more than 80 participants from Libya
and the international community in a meeting held in Tunis, from 9 to 11 May.

V. Deployment of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
and security arrangements
66. The original total resources approved for UNSMIL for 2016 amounted to
$41,181,500, with a staffing table including 195 posts and two United Nations
Volunteer positions. In view of the security conditions in Libya, UNSMIL
international staff remained deployed in Tunis, where the Mission is temporarily
headquartered. As at 30 September, a total of 136 UNSMIL international staff, one

16-20418

13/18

S/2016/1011

national staff member, four government-provided personnel and two United Nations
Volunteers were deployed in Tunis, with an additional 28 national staff in Libya.
Furthermore, three international staff members and one General Service staff
member were deployed at United Nations headquarters, and three national staff at
the Global Service Centre in Brindisi.
67. As set out in resolutions 2238 (2015), 2273 (2016) and 2291 (2016), UNSMIL
has worked towards the phased re-establishment of a permanent presence in Libya
and, to this end, the establishment of the necessary security arrangements. With the
establishment of regular flights from Tunis to Libya on 30 March, UNSMIL staff
have been able maintain access to key partners in particular political and security
interlocutors, inside the country, bolstering popular support for the Government of
National Accord and assisting with the stabilization of security conditions. Regular
flights have also facilitated the implementation of other core mandate areas,
enabling visits to detention centres, meetings with judicial authorities, engagement
in transitional justice activities, discussions with women’s groups and advocates and
increased access to Libya for the United Nations country team, with a view to
enhancing assistance on humanitarian priorities.
68. In line with the findings of the needs assessment mission referred to in my
previous report (S/2016/452), UNSMIL has successfully identified a compound in
Tripoli to serve as its premises. Likewise, UNSMIL liaised closely with its partners
at Headquarters as they identified a troop-contributing country to provide a United
Nations Guard Unit in Tripoli. From 25 June to 3 July, the selected troopcontributing country deployed a team to UNSMIL to undertake an initial assessment
of security requirements and associated needs, to permit a rapid deployment to
Tripoli. Subsequently, an advance team joined the Mission from 30 September to
30 October, working closely with the Office of Mission Support and security staff
from UNSMIL and the Department of Safety and Security, to plan for its
deployment to the Libyan capital.
69. Additionally, UNSMIL, supported closely by Headquarters, continued to work
on the full spectrum of security measures, including the establishment of
arrangements for in extremis support in the case of an emergency evacuation of
personnel out of Libya. With respect to humanitarian assistance, United Nations
humanitarian team partners have reviewed their operationa l plans, with the aim of
increasing programming for target populations.
Security and safety of staff members and operations
70. United Nations personnel in Libya continued to work in a high -risk security
environment and implement programmes and activities based on programme
criticality. The United Nations vulnerability and risk exposure while implementing
its programmes remained high, necessitating continued mainstreaming of additional
security resources in its programmes. State institutions have limited capacity to
provide security, given the incidence of armed confrontation, terrorism and violent
crime throughout the country. Since the arrival of the Presidency Council in Tripoli
in March, the Mission has increased operations in Libya and worked to establish a
permanent presence of security staff in the capital on a rotational basis. In two
incidents in June and September, the Diplomatic Police were hindered by armed
groups while escorting UNSMIL convoys in Tripoli. Demonstrations against the

14/18

16-20418

S/2016/1011

United Nations in the capital and in major eastern cities remained largely peaceful,
but the potential for violence remained. Operation Bunyan Marsus disrupted the
ISIL presence in Sirte. However, ISIL elements may have dispersed to other parts of
the country, posing a risk to operations and the United Nations presence in Tripoli.
ISIL claimed responsibility for vehicle-borne improvised explosive device attacks
near government offices in Tripoli on 8 September. However, the claims lacked
credibility. Three foreign nationals were abducted in Ghat in September and were
subsequently released.

VI. Observations and recommendations
71. More than five years since the revolution of 17 February and one year after the
signing of the Libyan Political Agreement in Skhirat, the Libyan people continue to
strive to move their country forward on the path of a democratic transition. I had the
opportunity to visit Libya in 2011 and 2014 and witnessed first-hand the rising
aspirations of the youth, women and men of Libya for a stable, democratic,
prosperous and peaceful country. I am encouraged to see that their determination
and commitment remains strong amidst the many political, security and economic
challenges facing the country.
72. The Libyan Political Agreement remains an important milestone in the path to
the country’s democratic transition. By creating a framework to unify Libyan
institutions and form a Government of National Accord, the Agreement represents a
unique opportunity for all Libyans to resolve their differences and lay the
foundations for inclusive and democratic governance. I wish to commend the many
political and civil society actors participating in the Libyan political dialogue for
their commitment to support the implementation of the Agreement and its
institutions and for their courage in transcending their differences in the interest of
peace. That same determination to work for a resumption of the country’s
democratic transition must continue to drive all Libyans.
73. However, I am deeply concerned at the slow pace of implementation of the
Agreement and the serious political polarization leading to a deterioration of the
security, economic and humanitarian situation. The Libyan Political Agreement and
its institutions will only be successful, as a transitional framework, if they lead, with
the support of all Libyans and within a reasonable time frame, to the adoption of a
new Constitution and the establishment of democratically elected institutions.
Should these efforts fail, it may be necessary to review the international
community’s approach to the Libyan democratic transition process.
74. The window of opportunity that the Libyan Political Agreement has created is
closing rapidly. For the country to forge a path forward, Libyan actors must pursue
national reconciliation in earnest. To that end, I encourage the Libyan people to
commit to a nation-wide reconciliation process that broadens and reinforces the
political settlement that has already been reached. I also encourage the Libyan
authorities to complement and strengthen reconciliation efforts undertaken by
communities at the local level. I commend the many local reconciliation init iatives
that have already been initiated, and I encourage the parties to make full use of the
good offices of the United Nations to advance local and national reconciliation
agreements in the months ahead.

16-20418

15/18

S/2016/1011

75. I urge all Libyan stakeholders, especially those who are currently not fully
engaged in the process, to work together with the Presidency Council to resolve
outstanding issues and focus their efforts on rebuilding the country. Institutions
emanating from the Libyan Political Agreement should urgently assume their
functions in accordance with the Agreement and commit themselves to cooperating in
the management of the remainder of the transitional period. I call in particular on the
leaders of opposing constituencies to put the interests of their country first and
participate in the country’s political transition through dialogue within the framework
of the Libyan Political Agreement. I urge the House of Representatives to amend the
Constitutional Declaration as a matter of priority, in order to constitut ionalize the
institutions emanating from the Libyan Political Agreement, and to vote on a
Government of National Accord. I also encourage the State Council to exercise its
functions as the highest consultative Assembly of the State in an inclusive and
responsible manner. Moreover, the Constitution Drafting Assembly must resume its
work to finalize the constitutional process that will pave the way for a referendum
and eventually new elections, as set out in the Libyan Political Agreement.
76. I further encourage the members of the Presidency Council to overcome their
differences and to work as a cohesive and unified body to address the critical needs
of the population, supported by effective and transparent financial arrangements.
Coordination between the Presidency Council and the Government of National
Accord on one hand and the Central Bank of Libya is essential to enable the
Government of National Accord to deliver services. In this regard, I urge the parties
to engage constructively to address short-term issues related to funding and liquidity
and longer-term structural issues.
77. Deepening polarization has also prevented progress on the establishment of
security arrangements. As a result, there have been repeated outbreaks of violence
among the various factions and a worrying rise in criminality. Libyan citizens are
suffering the consequences of increasing lawlessness, kidnappings, theft and the
degradation of basic services. I am very concerned about the recent military
build-up in the country. I urge security actors to exercise restraint and adhere to
international humanitarian law. I remind them that there is no military solution to
the Libyan crisis. I also call on them to commit to dialogue and to work
constructively in the higher interest of the Libyan people to support the creation of
professional, inclusive, effective and accountable Libyan armed and police forces,
under full civilian control and oversight. In this regard, I welcome the establishment
of the presidential guard by the Presidency Cou ncil as a key first step in a longerterm process of creating professional and accountable security institutions.
78. I commend Libyan women for actively engaging in peacebuilding initiatives
and the Presidency Council for appointing a chairperson for the Women’s Support
and Empowerment Unit. I encourage all Libyans to continue to strive for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and security, and I
call on the Presidency Council to ensure that women are adequately represented in
the Government of National Accord.
79. I am encouraged by the progress that has been made in the fight against
terrorist and violent extremist groups, in particular ISIL in Sirte and Benghazi.
Military successes against ISIL are crucial to eliminating the grave threat that these
groups represent. I express my sympathies to the victims of terrorism and for the

16/18

16-20418

S/2016/1011

loss of so many lives in this fight. The remaining presence of ISIL in Libya should
serve as an urgent reminder of the need for heightened vigilance and the swift
development of unified security structures across the country. I urge Libyans to
unite and join forces across the political and security divide in their fight against
ISIL in service to their country and under unified command.
80. I remain deeply alarmed by the human rights situation in the country,
especially as it relates to enforced disappearances, arbitrary detention, torture,
unlawful killings and attacks on civilians. I condemn the targeting of civilian
facilities, in particular hospitals and medical centres. I urge all parties to the conflict
and those with influence on the ground to respect international human rights law
and international humanitarian law.
81. Hundreds of thousands of innocent migrants and refugees from across the
African continent and beyond have left the coast of Libya in search of a better
future, escaping conflict, poverty and persecution. Many have lost their lives in this
journey of hope, while others have been detained in inhuman conditions and often
mistreated or abused. Ongoing efforts to respond to the migration crisis are
commendable but not sufficient. I call on all international partners to redouble their
humanitarian assistance and to increase the capacity o f the Libyan authorities to
manage migration flows with full respect for human rights and dignity.
82. I also note with alarm the overall deterioration of the humanitarian situation as
a result of continued armed confrontations in various parts of the cou ntry. Hundreds
of thousands of Libyans, including those who have been repeatedly displaced,
continue to suffer from the appalling consequences of the humanitarian crisis. They
lack public services and basic amenities, including adequate access to safe drin king
water, hygiene and sanitation services. I call on the Libyan authorities to take
immediate action and address the worrying issues highlighted in the comprehensive
national assessment of hospitals, primary health-care centres and disease-specific
programmes.
83. I am particularly concerned by the widespread contamination with explosive
hazards, including improvised explosive devices, in the areas of Sirte and Benghazi,
where the risk of injury and death to civilians and to humanitarian actors is high.
There is limited national capacity to address this threat, and the teams carrying out
these tasks do so at significant personal risk. I urge Member States to fund clearance
activities in the most severely affected areas and to provide training and equipmen t
to the Libyan actors undertaking survey and clearance tasks. I also call on the
Presidency Council and Member States to provide resources on an urgent basis to
the Humanitarian Response Plan for 2016, which remains underfunded, so that
relief can be brought to those in critical need of protection and humanitarian
assistance.
84. As 2017 approaches, the key operational priority of UNSMIL will remain the
phased redeployment to Tripoli, including the deployment of a United Nations
Guard Unit. To this effect, UNSMIL will continue to assess the political situation
and the achievement of security conditions and benchmarks. Re -establishing a
United Nations presence in the Libyan capital will enable consistent access to key
stakeholders and Libyan institutions. Such a presence will also enhance access to
other cities and areas of the country, in both the east and the south. To facilitate this
process, the Secretariat will conduct a strategic assessment review in early 2017 to

16-20418

17/18

S/2016/1011

align the re-establishment of a United Nations presence in Libya with the political,
security and operational realities on the ground.
85. To that end, I recommend that the Security Council renew the mandate of
UNSMIL for a period of one year as an integrated special political mission i n the
areas provided by the Council in its resolutions 2238 (2015), 2259 (2015), 2273
(2016) and 2291 (2016). UNSMIL will continue to support the implementation of
the Libyan Political Agreement and its institutions. UNSMIL will also continue to
provide good offices and support in the implementation of security arrangements
and the constitution-drafting process. In this framework, the United Nations system
will continue to work with key Libyan institutions and coordinate support with
international partners to address the critical capacity and institutional gaps the
country faces.
86. I would like to express my appreciation to the African Union, the European
Union, the League of Arab States and Member States for their significant support to
the United Nations in Libya. I am particularly encouraged by the commitment and
support of regional actors and organizations, including the neighbours of Libya, to
the Libyan political process. Finally, I wish to express my sincere appreciation for
the dedication and hard work of the staff of UNSMIL and the United Nations system
in their efforts to support the transition in Libya, and I commend my Special
Representative, Martin Kobler, for his leadership and tireless efforts to support the
Libyans in driving forward the political process and implementing the Libyan
Political Agreement.
87. As I end my tenure at the United Nations, I urge all Libyan stakeholders to
transcend their political differences and work together constructively to meet the
expectations of the population. I also urge Member States to continue to work on a
unified and coordinated approach, in support of the political process and the
capacity needs of the country.

18/18

16-20418
