UNITED NA TIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIFTH

YEAR

UN LBR.ARY
APR22 I!388

2215’”

MEETING:

UN/S4 COLLECTLQN
15 APRIL

1980

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

.. ... .. .. .. ... ... .. . .. ... .. ... .. .. .. .

1

Adoption of the agenda. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 10 April 1980 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13885);
Special report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (S/13888 and Corr. 1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2215)

WPV.2215

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Ofj?cial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2215th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 15 April 1980, at 10.30 am.
President:

Mr. Porfirio MUfiOZ LED0 (Mexico).

Organization) took the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council chamber.

Presenr: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, China, France, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.
Provisional

2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
I should like to inform the members of the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative
of Nigeria, in which he requests to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In accordance with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
that representative to participate in the discussion,
without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure.

agenda (SJAgendaf2215)

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 10 April 1980 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/13885);
Special report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(S/13888 and Corr.1)
The meeting

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Clark (Nigeria) took the place reserved for him at the side of
the Council chamber.

3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/13892, which contains the
text of a letter dated 14 April from the representative
,of Israel to the President of the Security Council.

was called to order at 11.20 a.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

4. Mr. ALGARD (Norway): The recent events in
southern Lebanon have clearly emphasized the continued volatile situation in the Middle East and
reminded us once more of the urgent need to increase
the efforts to produce a comprehensive solution which
can bring lasting peace to the countries and peoples of
that troubled area.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 10 April 1980 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/13885);
Special report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (S/13888 and
Corr.1)

5. These events are of very serious concern to the
Norwegian Government. We view the situation with
the same seriousness as has been reflected in the
reports submitted to the Council, both in writing and
orally, by the Secretary-General. We also listened with
attention to the statement of the representative of
Lebanon [222&h meeting] describing a situation that is
all too familiar to Norway as a country contributing
troops to the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL).
Norway is participating in UNIFIL
because we consider its presence in southern Lebanon
to have a vitally stabilizing effect on the situation in
that area and, by extension, on the overall situation
in the Middle East. But these recent developments
endanger the entire peace-keeping operation.

1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
In accordance with the decisions taken at previous
meetings [2222th to 2224th meetings], I invite the
representative of Lebanon to take a place at the Council table, and I invite the representatives of Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Jordan, the Netherlands and the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization
(PLO) to take the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council chamber.
At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Tueni
(Lebanon) took a place at the Council table and
Mr. Mtdfoy (Ireland),
Mr. Blum (Israel), Mr. La
Rocca (Italy), Mr. Nuseibeh (Jordan), Mr. van Buuren
(Netherlands)
and Mr. Terzi (Palestine
Liberation

6. We have witnessed, once again, how de facto
forces have penetrated UNIFIL-controlled
areas
with a view to establishing a permanent .presence
1

there. A further increase in the already intolerable
harassment of UNIFIL personnel has similarly taken
place, including the kidnapping of personnel from
UNIFIL as well as from the United Nations Truce
Supervision Organization (UNTSO). This amounts to
an unacceptable affront to the United Nations and to
the men who, on behalf of the world Organization,
are serving the cause of peace. The General Armistice
Agreement between Israel and Lebanon has also been
jeopardized through these actions.

12. In the present serious situation, I feel compelled
to point to the close links that exist between Israel
and the de facto forces. The activities of the de facto
forces cannot be sustained without the moral, financial
and logistic support of Israel. Israel therefore carries
a heavy responsibility in this regard and should be
urged to co-operate in facilitating the deployment of
UNIFIL in the entire area up to the internationally
recognized boundaries. Israel must also co-operate
fully in efforts to compel the de facto forces to cease
their harassment of UNIFIL and to refrain from any
repetition of such flagrant breaches ,of international
law and codes of conduct as we have witnessed
recently. The behaviour of the de facto forces till now
has been unacceptable and will not be tolerated any
longer by the international community.

7. The recent heavy shelling of UNIFIL headquarters by the de facto forces has inflicted damage
of great magnitude and could easily have resulted in
a heavy loss of lives. In particular, we strongly
condemn the deliberate shelling of the United Nations
field hospital, which under international law enjoys
special protection. The fact that that hospital serves
the civilian population of the area as well makes the
matter even more serious.

13. The recent events in southern Lebanon pose yet
another challenge to UNIFIL and to the Security
Council. In the atmosphere of continued armed
attacks, persistent efforts to penetrate UNIFIL’s area
of operations and continued harassment of its personnel, it is becoming increasingly difficult for UNIFIL
to operate with full effectiveness and, in particular,
to prevent infiltrations through the area under its
control. The de facto forces therefore must effectively
cease their actions against UNIFIL. The Force must
be granted complete and unrestricted freedom of
movement throughout its entire area of operation.
Unless that is granted, it is difficult to envisage how
the UNIFIL operation can be continued in a meaningful way.

8. The tense situation already created by the de facto
forces was further aggravated by the incursion of the
Israeli Defence Forces into southern Lebanon,
including UNIFIL-controlled
areas. That incursion
was in clear defiance of the decisions adopted by the
Council. It constituted a violation of the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the State of Lebanon.
9. The Israeli incursion took place after the attack
on Kibbutz Misgav Am. The Norwegian Government
has consistently condemned all acts of violence, and
we also condemn that outrageous attack. That appalling
act cannot, however, justify an armed incursion into
southern Lebanon and UNIFIL’s area of operation.
We have taken note of the fact that Israel now has
informed the Secretary-General that all Israeli forces
have been withdrawn from southern Lebanon. While
welcoming this news we must express the hope that
further incursions will not take place.

14. Finally, I wish to take this opportunity to pay a
tribute to the Commander of UNIFIL and to his men
for their continued dedication in the service of peace
in southern Lebanon. Recent days have all too clearly
demonstrated that their task is an extremely difficult
and challenging one. In this connection, I wish to
extend my heartfelt sympathy to the representative
of Fiji on the most tragic death of a Fijian soldier in
the line of duty.

10. In his statement to the Council on 13 April
[2212th meeting], the Secretary-General concluded
by expressing the hope that the members of the Council would consider what could be done to bring the
situation under control and to make it possible to
proceed with the full implementation of resolution 425
(1978) and other relevant resolutions of the Council.

15. ‘Mr. FLORIN

(German Democratic Republic)
In the last few weeks
the Council has had occasion to deal repeatedly with
events in the Middle East; each time it has been faced
with aggressive actions by Israel.

(interpretation

from Russian):

16. In spite of resolution 425 (1978), which contains
the unambiguous demand addressed to the Israeli
aggressor to respect the territorial integrity, sovereignty and political independence of Lebanon and to
withdraw all its military units from Lebanese soil,
the Israeli troops, once again in the most flagrant
violation of international law and in disregard of the
relevant United Nations resolutions, have committed
acts of aggression on Lebanese territory. The members of the Council are faced once again with this
defiance by Israel. Israeli ruling circles are not only
disregarding decisions of the United Nations and of
the Council, but are also using the gang which they

11. The difficulties that UNIFIL is facing have their
main origin in the fact that the Force has been unable
to deploy in, and to establish control over, the entire
area of its operation. The continued control of the
border area by the so-called de facto forces and the
continued harassment of UNIFIL by those forces
imply a permanent threat, not only to the UNIFIL
operation as such, but to the very authority of the
United Nations and to peace and security in the area
as a whole. It is now imperative that UNIFIL be put
in a position to deploy and to establish its control
in the border area, which is controlled today by the
de facto forces.
2

are maintaining and supporting, a gang led by the socalled Major Haddad, to commit violent military acts
against the posts set up by UNIFIL
pursuant to a
Council resolution,
thus subjecting to tremendous
danger the lives of United Nations soldiers who are
in Lebanon to ensure peace.
17. We find the following comment in paragraph
of the special report of the Secretary-General:

attention. The recent aggressive actions of the Israeli
military and its Haddad .gang against Lebanon, the
bombardment
of the headquarters and other posts of
UNIFIL
can be viewed only as one more link in the
chain of the Israeli policy aimed against a comprehensive, just and lasting solution of the Middle East
conflict. Therefore,
the delegation of the German
Democratic Republic wishes to reiterate its view: the
Middle East crisis can be resolved only if Israel is
compelled to withdraw all its troops from the Arab
territories occupied in 1967, if the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian
people are duly implemented,
in
particular its right to its own independent State, and
if the security of all States of the region is assured.
The German Democratic Republic, together with other
socialist countries, has always acted in this spirit and,
accordingly, in total conformity with the resolutions
of the United Nations.

8

“On 24 March personnel [of the Israeli Defence
Force] at border pillar 33 fired about 40 rounds
of light machine-gun and small arms over the heads
of the observers when they appeared on the roof of
OP Mar. On 27 March, both OPs Khiam and Mar
were forcibly entered into by the de facto forces
and occupied by them for two and one-half hours.”
18. Those and all subsequent military actions, the
ominous consequences of which we have read about
in the Secretary-General’s
report, were planned as far
back as the beginning of March. The aggressive
actions that were actually carried out at the beginning
of March against United Nations military personnel
gave those troops the right to take vigorous countermeasures. Moderation and restraint on the part of the
United Nations were misinterpreted
in Tel Aviv. There
it was thought that they could do whatever they
liked in southern Lebanon, and even dictate to United
Nations bodies what they could and could not do.

22. In view of the danger of the situation that has
arisen and in the face of a continuing threat to the
sovereignty of a Member State, we share the view that
has been expressed here that urgent and effective
measures must be taken by the Council to curb the
unbridled aggressor.
23. We are, of course, always very distressed to
learn of the death of children, whether of the Lebanese
people, the Palestinian people or the people of Israel.
24. Mr. SIKAULU
(Zambia):
On behalf of my
delegation, I wish first of all to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his special report. We are also grateful
to him for the statement he made on 13 April before
the Council [2212th meeting].

19. As was already stressed in the previous report of
the Secretary-General
[S/13691 of 14 December 19791,
after the adoption of resolution 425 (1978), the Israeli
troops did not call a halt to their active operations in
the south of Lebanon, and for those operations they
have been using and are continuing to use the antigovernmental units of Haddad as an instrument in the
execution of their plan for the annexation of individual
parts of Lebanese territory.

25. Quite clearly, the situation that developed last
week in Lebanon is very grave. Both in his report and
in his statement the Secretary-General
has provided
the Council with information which makes it imperative
for it to act without delay to ensure the full implementation of resolution 425 (1978) and other relevant
resolutions.
The representative
of Lebanon,
who
requested these meetings last week, also lucidly and
movingly described the disquieting
situation in his
country in his statement before the Council yesterday
[2213th meeting].

20. In this regard, those countries which, by their
policy and financing, have been providing and continue
to provide support to Israel and are thus constantly
giving encouragement
to the aggressor should really
recall their responsibility
in this matter. It has been
proved that, in particular, if they wanted to, the ruling
circles of the United States could compel Israel to
observe international
rules. But instead of that, what
has been chosen is the course of separate-deals which
fail to solve problems and actually lead to further
sufferings for the peoples of the Middle East, since
those deals are being used by the aggressive forces for
further adventures. The path leading from Camp
David to the firing at the Irish battalion of UNIFIL
is
a straight line.

26. Once again, the precarious situation in Lebanon
has exploded. The fragile peace has been broken.
Israel has invaded Lebanon, as it has repeatedly done
in the past, in flagrant violation of the sovereignty and
territorial
integrity
of Lebanon.
In collusion with
indisciplined
elements in Lebanon which serve its
interests, Israel has launched a savage attack against
UNIFIL.

21. The timing of the actions mentioned
in the
Secretary-General’s
report is precisely what should
draw the attention of the Council to the truth that
really underlies those events, the truth from which such
strenuous attempts are being made to divert our

27. My delegation shares the concern and preoccupation of the Government
of Lebanon and of the
Secretary-General.
It is intolerable that Israel should
continue to violate with impunity the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Lebanon.- Indeed, it is revolting
3

that UNIFIL-the
soldiers of peace-should be subjected to savage attacks, harassment and humiliation.

with regard to the events in southern Lebanon. I do
so in the confidence that under the able presidency of
Mexico, a country which has contributed so much to
the elaboration of principles of international security
and disarmament, we shall bring closer the day of a
final settlement of the strife in Lebanon and in the
Middle East as a whole.

28. Israel should be condemned in the strongest terms
for its acts of aggression against Lebanon and for the
wanton and savage destruction and the attacks against
UNIFIL.

36. I have been instructed to ask to be allowed to
address the Council in view of the great concern felt
by my Government about recent events involving
UNIFIL, particularly in the area where the Irish
contingent serving with the Force is stationed. Our
comments are made, as on the two occasions last year
[2149th and 2165th meetings]
when we addressed
the Council on this subject, with a view to being
constructive and with that restraint which we feel
participation in a peace-keeping force imposes. I do not
intend to deal with the Middle East problem in general
and its tragic consequences for all involved, except to
reiterate that Ireland condemns all acts of violence in
the region and has expressed sympathy to the Govemment of Israel on the loss of life occasioned by the
raid on Misgav Am. I should also wish to take this
opportunity to express the condolences of the Govemment of Ireland to my colleague from Fiji on the recent
tragic death of a Fijian member of UNIFIL.

29. Last Thursday and Friday, the Council con-.
sidered South African acts of aggression against
Zambia. The Pretoria regime was condemned by the
Council for its aggression against my country and called
upon to respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Zambia. There certainly is something in common
between the Pretoria and Tel-Aviv regimes. They have
become partners in crime and in violating the norms of
international law. Lawlessness and intransigence have
driven the two regimes into a military alliance with
ominous consequences for international peace and
security.
30. Zambia, a constant victim of South African acts
of aggression, cannot fail fully to understand the grave
situation in Lebanon caused by the policies and
practices of Israel. We fully sympathize with and
support the Government and people of Lebanon.
31. On behalf of my delegation, I wish to commend
UNIFIL for exercising maximum restraint in the face
of deliberate provocation from the Israeli regime and
its surrogates in Lebanon. It is indeed to the credit of
the Force that it has persevered in the cause of peace,
operating as it does in the most difficult and hazardous
circumstances.

37. This meeting of the Council is timely, not only
because it focuses on the rapid deterioration in the
situation in southern Lebanon in the last few days but
also because it indicates the extent to which the peacekeeping Force created by the Council has been consistently obstructed in its attempts to implement its
mandate. This obstruction has had tragic consequences for the people of the region and has also
placed the lives of the soldiers serving with the Force
in jeopardy--adding to the already heavy toll in lives
both of civilians and of soldiers of different nationalities serving with the Force.

32. My delegation was particularly sad to learn of the
death of a member of UNIFIL from Fiji, as a result of
Israeli aggression against Lebanon and the wanton
assault on the Force. On behalf of my delegation,
I wish to express our heartfelt condolences to the
Secretary-General, the Commander of UNIFIL and
to the Government and people of Fiji on that tragic
loss.

38. My Government has in the past week expressed
its serious concern at recent developments in southern
Lebanon. This concern was formally expressed to the
Secretary-General on 10 April and I wish now to
convey it to the Council. As the Council is aware from
the Secretary-General’s report, defacto forces, which
are supported by Israel, further encroached on
UNIFIL positions, manned by the Irish battalion
among others, and harassed and tired upon the Force.
Units of the Israeli Defence Forces crossed the border
into southern Lebanon in clear conflict with the
mandate entrusted to UNIFIL by the Council. The
Council, as members know, established UNIFIL

33. In conclusion, I wish to reiterate the need for the
Council to act to ensure full respect for its decisions
regarding the unhappy situation in Lebanon. In the
final analysis, the situation in Lebanon cannot be
divorced from the general problem of the Middle East.
It underscores the urgent need to find a just and
comprehensive settlement which will bring conditions
of peace and security to the Middle East as a whole.
34. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
The next speaker is the representative of Ireland.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.

“for the purpose of confirming the withdrawal of
Israeli forces, restoring international peace and
security and assisting the Government of Lebanon
in ensuring the return of its effective authority in the
area” [resolution 425 (1978)].

35. Mr. MULLOY (Ireland): Mr. President, I should
like to express my thanks to you and to the other
members of the Council for their courtesy in allowing
me this opportunity to explain Ireland’s position

That UNIFIL has been consistently obstructed in the
implementation of its mandate is all too clear. What is
4

equally clear is the potentially disastrous-consequences
of such obstruction. Stability in southern Lebanon is
essential to stability in the count-ry as a whole, and this
in turn is vital to peace in the Middle East.
39. Ireland has had a long and active association
with the United Nations peace-keeping and observation forces. The Government of Ireland has recently
confirmed its full support for the United Nations in
its world peace-keeping role. It was in order to contribute in practical terms to the efforts of the Security
Council to maintain international peace and security
in the region and to help to preserve the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and independence of Lebanon,
that Ireland agreed to contribute troops to the United
Nations peace-keeping efforts and to maintain them
with UNIFIL.
40. That decision to send our troops overseas to
serve with the United Nations was based on one clear
understanding: that the Governments concerned
accepted the establishment of the Force and would
give it the necessary co-operation for it to carry out
its difficult mandate. This has been the basic premise
of all United Nations peace-keeping operarions over
the years, and Governments which respond to the call
of the international community by volunteering for
service with such forces are entitled to count on it
as a minimum cdndition. It is, however, a matter of
great concern to my country that the lives of soldiers
serving with the United Nations, including those from
Ireland, should be placed in jeopardy in circumstances
such as those which we have witnessed in recent
days.
41. Ireland’s concern at the deterioration in this
situation has been further increased by the recent
actions of the defacto forces, which have placed the
lives of Irish troops in jeopardy and have led to the
wounding of two Irish soldiers-one very seriously,
with the loss of an eye-and the abduction of nine
soldiers. Moreover, the Israeli incursions into
UNIFIL’s area during these events had the effect of
further increasing tension in the area. The Irish
soldiers were released following negotiations on the
ground and diplomatic activity by the United Nations
and by others in support of the United Nations. We
are grateful to all who lent their assistance to that
end.
42. Last weekend, however, de facto forces caused
extensive damage to UNIFIL
headquarters and
property in Naqoura as a result of sustained artillery,
mortar and small arms fire. On the same day, a fight
took place between UNIFIL troops and de facto
forces at At-TX This was initiated by the de facto
forces and led to the death of a Fijian soldier. Four
Irish soldiers were later abducted by the de facto
forces.
43. We have noted Israel’s assurances on several
occasions that it intends to continue to co-operate

with United Nations peace-keeping forces. We know
that Israel does maintain close liaison with UNIFIL,
but tie are concerned that these assurances should
be fully translated into practical action. This concern
is particularly occasioned by the fact that, first, when
Israel withdrew from south Lebanon, UNIFIL was
not permitted to extend its authority over the whole
area entrusted to it; secondly, Israel does not deny
that it has given extensive military and financial
assistance to the de facto forces; and, thirdly, Israeli
forces have themselves made incursions into
UNIFIL’s area, most seriously in recent days. All
this makes more difficult the task of the Force in
carrying out other important aspects of its duties
including the prevention of infiltration by armed
personnel into its area of operation.
44. My Government has made its concern about the
current situation widely known in the last few days.
I have no doubt that this concern is shared by the
members of the Council, which has responsibility for
the Force, established by it. My Government notes
with appreciation the expression of concern and the
efforts of the Secretary-General, under whose overall
direction the Force operates, to bring about an improvement in that situation. However, as the
Secretary-General pointed out in his report last December [S/13691], the mandate of UNIFIL cannot be
extended indefinitely unless there is reasonable
assurance that the objectives of the relevant Council
resolutions will be fulfilled without undue delay. In
his special report, the Secretary-General again urged
all concerned to extend to UNIJTIL the co-operation
that would enable it to fulfil the responsibilities
entrusted to it.
45. We would whole-heartedly agree with the
Secretary-General that the violence of the past days,
leading to casualties and to the loss of innocent
civilian lives, must be deeply deplored. Likewise, we
share his concern, expressed in his special report of
11 April 1980, that in the present situation
“far too much .of the energy of UNIFIL is distracted
by efforts to resist the harassment and violence to
which it is daily exposed, while its capacity to carry
out its functions is greatly reduced by the fact that
it cannot operate in a vital part of its area of operation which is at present controlled by the de facto
forces” [S/13888, para. 221.
46. It is essential that the difficulties placed in the
way of the Force in its efforts to carry out the mandate
of the Council be removed. If the full co-operation of
all parties is not forthcoming to enable the Force to
carry out its mandate effectively and without interference, then the most serious questions as to its
effectiveness and value must inevitably arise.
47. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
The next speaker is the representative of the Netherlands. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.

48. Mr. van BUUREN (Netherlands): Mr. President,
my delegation is grateful for the opportunity you have
given us to make a statement. We asked to participate
in this debate because the Netherlands contributes to
UNIFIL. My Government is seriously disturbed by the
recent grave escalation of violence in southern
Lebanon. The recent events have gravely imperilled
the implementation of UNIFIL’s mandate of peacekeeping. The Force has been, and still is, faced with
a direct challenge in the performance of the tasks with
which it was entrusted by the Council in resolution 425 (1978). Some of the contingents have suffered
casualties in the course of their duties. In this connection, I wish to extend our condolences to the
Government of Fiji on the death of a member of its
battalion on 12 April. Furthermore, we express our
deeply felt regrets and concern about all the casualties
UNIFIL has suffered in the recent hostilities. Equally
disturbing are the losses suffered by the local civilian
population. Serious material damage has been inflicted
as well. In sum, my Government is particularly disturbed by the current situation of belligerency in the
area, which seems to present a most serious threat to
UNIFIL’s execution of its tasks.
49. The facts contained in the Secretary-General’s
special report speak for themselves. My delegation
wishes to convey my Government’s deep appreciation
to the Secretary-General for his tireless efforts to urge
restraint on all parties, thereby enhancing the safety
of UNIFIL’s personnel. We are equally grateful for the
influence of other parties which were in a position
to exercise such influence and have done so in order
to call a halt to the violence.
50. My Government is seriously concerned, as I have
said, by this sequence of violence, which carries a
heavy risk of further escalation. We are convinced that
the security and peaceful existence to which the
peoples of both Israel and Lebanon are so much
entitled can best be brought about by the full implementation of UNIFIL’s mandate. The Netherlands
recognizes and understands the legitimate concern of
Israel for the safety of its population. I wish to express
here our deeply felt abhorrence of acts of terrorism
against innocent civilians, such as were witnessed
at Misgav Am. We reject this hideous waste of human
life, particularly since a child was among the victims.
Prevention of infiltrations into Israel is a task which
UNIFIL performs with perseverance at great personal
risk to the lives of men of various nationalities. This
should be borne in mind. In the event, these efforts
are severely undermined by Major Haddad’s unjustifiable attempts, arms in hand, to encroach upon
UNIFIL’s area of operation and by the shelling of
UNIFIL positions.
51. It is clear that these actions can only hamper
UNIFIL’s ability to carry out surveillance of movements by armed elements. It is also our belief that the
activities of the de facto forces are detrimental to
UNIFIL’s co-operation with the local population in

southern Lebanon, a factor of major importance in
the execution of the mandate.
52. At this iuncture. we understand that the Israeli
army is completing its withdrawal from southern
Lebanon. While this has led to some easing of the
situation, the militia of Major Haddad continues its
harassment and acts of violence against UNIFIL and
the local population. The shelling on Sunday of
UNIFIL headquarters at Naqoura was an unacceptable act of defiance in no way related to possible selfdefence.
53. The situation in the area is still very tense. Any
further aggravation could only have disastrous consequences for the parties directly concerned and for
general peace in the region. The Netherlands’ participation in the peace-keeping operation is based on
our strong belief in international order and cooperation. We perceive our participation as a contribution to the United Nations’ effort to stabilize the
situation in southern Lebanon, thereby helping the
cause of peace in the Middle East.
54. In these circumstances, the Netherlands Govemment wishes to associate itself with the SecretaryGeneral’s call for restraint. Any other course would
seem unrealistic at this stage and could lead to the
failure of UNIFIL’s operation. My Government
wishes in particular to impress upon the Israeli Govemment the absolute necessity of calling a halt to Major
Haddad’s irresponsible actions. We believe that Israel
is in a position to do this. We attach importance to
UNTSO’s becoming operational again on the intemationally recognized demarcation line between Israel
and Lebanon. As to UNIFIL, we would strongly urge
the parties to extend their co-operation with the
Force in order to allow it to enjoy the freedom of
movement and communication and other facilities
necessary for the performance of its tasks.
55. We feel justified by the recent events in underlining the urgent need for the extension of UNIFIL’s
complete control to the internationally recognized
boundary of Lebanese territory. The Netherlands
considers this to be essential to the task of controlling
movements of armed elements. This extension is a
prerequisite for the fulfilment of UNIFIL’s mandate
contained in resolution 425 (1978).
56. The. PRESIDENT (inrerpretation from Spanish):
The next speaker is the representative of Italy. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
57. Mr. LA ROCCA (Italy): Mr. President., I should
like to thank you and, through you, the other members
of the Council for inviting me to participate in this
most important debate. It is with particular pleasure
that my delegation welcomes your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of April.
You represent a country with which mine is linked by

long-standing and very close ties of friendship and cooperation. We are confident that your well-known
diplomatic skill, sagacity and experience will greatly
contribute to bringing to a positive conciusion the
debate on the delicate issues of which the Council is
currently seized. We wish you the best of luck in your
important task.

of all countries in the area, including Israel, to ensure
those conditions rather than to hamper them. We
therefore hope that the Israeli Government will in the
future show greater co-operation in defusing the
confrontation prevailing in southern Lebanon and in
ensuring the implementation of resolution 425 (1978),
with particular regard to the deployment of UNIFIL
in all its area of operation.

58. I should like also to pay a tribute to your predecessor, Ambassador Mills of Jamaica, for the most
skilful and efficient way in which he conducted the
Council’s proceedings during the month of March.

62. In the light of the events of the last two days,
we also consider it urgent that the same co-operation
be shown in regard to the Secretary-General’s efforts
to ensure adequate protection for UNIFIL headquarters in Naqoura.

59. My Government has instructed me to participate
in this debate to stress once more the importance
Italy attaches to the preservation of the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and national unity of Lebanon. My
Government has actively tried to contribute to the
solution of the difficult internal and external problems
currently afflicting that country and therefore
welcomed the adoption of resolution 425 (1978), which
established UNIFIL and which clearly defined the
ultimate goal of its mandate as the re-establishment of
the full sovereignty of Lebanon over the southern part
of its territory. It is for that reason that one year ago
we decided to participate in the Force, and we feel
compelled today to join other speakers in expressing
deep concern for the most serious events occurring in
southern Lebanon and threatening both the territorial
integrity of that country and the safety of UNIFIL.

63. In considering the events of the past week one
cannot ignore the tragic act of violence against Israeli
civilians which considerably influenced the development of those events. I should like to make it clear
that my Government is in no way willing to condone
such acts, by whatever side they are committed, and
in that regard I wish to stress particularly that the
taking of hostages among innocent children and their
random killing meet with our unqualified condemnation. Such acts only result in harming the cause on
behalf of which they are performed.
64. Those events point once again, in our view, to
the urgent need for a just and comprehensive settlement of the Middle East conflict to be negotiated among
all the parties concerned, including the Palestine Liberation Organization. It is difficult for us to accept that
this escalation of violence may be considered a justification for repeated and often extremely serious encroachments on the territorial integrity of an independent State Member of this Organization. We can see no
valid excuse for acts which recurrently add fuel to an
already explosive situation and which frustrate the
efforts of the Lebanese Government to re-establish
both national unity and normal conditions of life in the
country. Nor can we see a justification for the support given in southern Lebanon to forces which, as
I said, deliberately obstruct the implementation by
UNIFIL of its peace-keeping mandate and increasingly
imperil the lives of its members without even ensuring-as the tragic events of last week sadly showeffective protection against outside infiltrations.

60. UNIFIL has been constantly confronted with
very serious risks in the implementation of its peacekeeping mission. The persistent harassment of which
it has been the object, in particular on the part of the
so-called de facto forces of Major Haddad, has been
a source of great concern to us. However, the level of
hostile activities directed against the Force has increased in the last days to a point at which it is no
longer just a matter of concern. The casualties
suffered by the Irish and the Fijian contingents, for
which we express our deep sympathy to the two
Governments and to the families of the men who
were killed or wounded, have been accompanied by
extensive damage to UNIFIL headquarters and the
destruction of the helicopter unit provided by my
country, which has paralysed an essential service of
the Force. The position of UNIFIL has clearly become
untenable unless firm action is promptly taken by the
Council to promote a normalization of the situation in
the area.

65. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
The next speaker is the representative of Nigeria,
whom I invite to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.

61. My Government considers it imperative that
Israel not only refrain from direct encroachment on
the territorial integrity of Lebanon but also discontinue
its support to the de facto forces which operate in the
southern part of that country, thus making it possible
for UNIFIL to complete its task as defined by the
Council. We believe that it is time for Israel to realize
that the independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Lebanon are essential conditions for
stability in the whole region and that it is in the interest

66. Mr. CLARK (Nigeria): Mr. President, I should
like to thank you for having given me the opportunity
to address the Council. I did not expect to be accorded
this honour so soon after my appearance in the Council last Friday. Even though the subjects of the Council’s last debate and of its present agenda item are not
identical, there is a fearsome similarity between aspects
of each which cannot be overlooked.
7

67. My Government is deeply concerned that the
authority of the United Nations, and particularly of
the Security Council, should so often be challenged
by Member States, which should look to it for justice.
The case involving UNIFIL is an exceptionally
troubling one. That a United Nations peace-keeping
operation should face such a test of will, such hostility
and humiliation, is a problem that goes beyond the
bilateral disputes that traditionally characterize the
preoccupations of the Council. The present case
concerning UNIFIL pits the Council itself against a
party to a dispute. It threatens one of the major
purposes of the United Nations, namely, peacekeeping.

situation which has been developing for several weeks.
That anyone could be so lawless and irresponsible
as to cut all outgoing telephone lines from UNIFIL
headquarters and to mount well-planned and coordinated attacks on United Nations property and
personnel engaged in peace-keeping operations, as
was reportedly done on 12 April, is incomprehensible
to my Government. That United Nations peacekeeping personnel could be held hostage at a time
when the taking of hostages, even for a just”lfiabie
reason, has become a cruel anathema is certainly
an unspeakable outrage.
73. We wish to take this opportunity to pay a tribute
to the sense of mission and restraint of UNIFIL’s
officers and men. We mourn the dead Fijian soldier,
whose country’s sacrifices typify the noblest ideals
of the United Nations and the indispensable services
which Member States, particularly the third world
ones, can render to international peace and security.
We condole with the Irish and other Governments
for the casualties which their contingents have
suffered.

68. When my Government agreed to contribute to
UNIFIL, it was with the clear understanding that
UNIFIL would enjoy the acceptance, if not the
approval, of all the parties to the Lebanese tragedy.
We went to the tiea hoping to do some good. We felt
that we had a duty to contribute to the efforts of the
Council to assist the Government of Lebanon, a
country with which my country has traditionally
maintained most cordial and friendly relations, in
ensuring the return of its effective authority throughout
southern Lebanon. We have so far agreed to stay on
even when the risk to the life and morale of our forces
has been high; when the financial obligations owed
us have not always been honoured; and when parties
to the conflict have not taken advantage of measures
likely to bring about its resolution.

74. We also wish to take this opportunity to repudiate
any allegations or insinuations-to the effect that the
tragic events at Misgav Am on the night of 6 to 7 April
could be attributed to any slackness or connivance
on the part of UNIFIL forces. The Nigerian UNIFIL
contingent is made up of men proud of their professional calling and of their commitment to their United
Nations peace-keeping mission. In spite of obvious
provocation and harassment, they will never be party
to any incident outside their mandate.

69. My Government earnestly believes that UNIFIL
has a .roie to play in preserving the precarious and
brittle conditions for peace, in Lebanon specifically
and in the Middle East in general. We sincerely believe
that UNIFIL has succeeded in arresting the situation
and preventing its worsening. That record should be
built upon and not destroyed.

75. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
I wish to inform the members of the Council that I have
just received a letter from the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the agenda. In accordance with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
that representative to participate in the debate, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure.

70. The special report of the Secretary-General
indicates a situation with grave implications for the
continued existence of UNIFIL. The situation is all
the more grave because it also affects the operations of
UNTSO, which, in large measure, guarantee that the
General Armistice Agreement between Israel and
Lebanon is honoured.

At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Mansouri
(Syrian Arab Republic) took the place reservedfor him
at the side of the Council chamber.

71. My Government strongly condemns the harassment, torture and violence to which UNIFIL personnel are daily exposed at the hands of Major
Haddad’s illegal forces. We also deplore the fact that
the Israeli Government aids and abets those untoward
activities and the misconduct on the part of Major
,Haddad’s illegal forces. Israeli collusion with, and
support for, those forces was recently compounded
by the incursion into and occupation of parts of
southern Lebanon by Israeli forces, in violation of
UNIFIL’s mandate.

76. The PRESIDENT (interpretationfvam
Spanish):
I invite the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
77. Mr. MANSOURI (Syrian Arab Republic):
Mr. President, allow me at the outset to thank you and
the other members of the Council for giving me an
opportunity to express my Government’s point of view
on the issue before the Council.

72. The Secretary-General’s report to the Council
last Sunday [2212th meeting] underlines the grave
8

78. As everyone ‘around this Council table is well
aware, the Council has been seized for over two
years of the question of Israeli aggression against
Lebanon. In March 1978, the Council adopted resolution 425 (1978), which called for “strict respect for the
territorial
integrity,
sovereignty
and political
independence
of Lebanon
within its internationally
recognized boundaries”.
The resolution also called
upon Israel: “immediately
to cease its military action”
against Lebanon. But nothing has changed since, and
what the Council is debating now is another flagrant
act ( of aggression committed
openly by the Israeli
authorities in outright defiance of the numerous Council resolutions which have been adopted since March
1978.

West Bank on the assault by Israeli soldiers on a
small teachers’ college run by the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East, the correspondent of The New York Times
wrote on 11 April:

79. In his special report and through his statements
to the Council during the last two days, the SecretaryGeneral expressed clearly his fear of a dangerously
escalating level of tension in and adjacent to the area
of operation of UNIFIL.
The report also explained
in detail the movement of the Israeli’Defence
Forces
into southern Lebanon, including the area of deployment of UNIFIL,
and the violent harassment by
the so-called de fucro forces.

“In the vehicles on the way to prison, . . .
[students] were forced at knife-point . . . to say:
‘Palestinians lost their land; we have no right to the
land.’

‘6 * . . After an army patrol had passed, firing
shots into the air, the students retreated to the
walled campus, with many taking refuge in their
dormitories.
The Israeli soldiers swarmed through
the gate and over the walls, . . . firing tear gas into
the rooms, breaking down doors and beating and
hauling students to waiting vehicles.
“ . . .

“ . . . When the students [in the prison] requested
water, . . . ‘Some of the soldiers drank water in
front of [them] and poured the rest on the ground.’
“Eighteen of the 41 were released yesterday, the
military spokesman said, and Arab doctors at the
hospital reported that all those released had injuries
requiring
treatment.
Six were still hospitalized
today. The Israeli spokesman said that three had
been seriously hurt.”

80. In the light of such flagrant aggression against
Lebanon in general, and UNIFIL
and UNTSO forces
in particular, we hardly need any proof to reach the
conclusion that Israel is defying not only the rules of
international law and world public opinion, but even the
authority of the Security Council itself, which established UNIFIL
to help the Government of Lebanon
maintain peace and regain its authority and sovereignty
over southern Lebanon. The Israeli actions-whether
directly or indirectly
through their proxy, the socalled de facto forces-are
a challenge to the Council
and it is high time that the members of the Council
assumed their responsibility
and took the necessary
action to face this challenge.

83. To conclude my statement I can find no better
comment on this as well as other armed assaults on
innocent civilians than the implications
of an Israeli
journalist’s
comment reported in yesterday’s edition
of The New York Times. The Israeli journalist said:
“A soldier who has to fire on civilians, on women
and children-something
breaks inside him. He is
not the same person any more. It has poisoned us,
this occupation.”

81. The Council, during this debate, has heard the
Israeli representative
claim his country’s
support
for the national sovereignty, territorial integrity and
unity of Lebanon within its internationally
recognized
boundaries. One wonders how that claim can be true,
when all the evidence indicates clearly that the Israeli
flagrant violation of and aggression against southern
Lebanon have also included attacks on the soldiers
of the United Nations, who come from different parts of
the world to serve the cause of peace. In addition the
Israeli authorities’ creation of and support for the socalled de facto forces of the renegade and outlaw
Haddad are a further violation of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Lebanon.

So, something breaks inside that soldier who fires on
civilians,
on women and children.
Moreover,
the
occupation is poisoning the society to which that
soldier belongs.
84. In this context, it is worth mentioning that the
Government of that society vows never to relinquish
its occupation of the Palestinian and other occupied
Arab lands, and that it will strengthen its existing
settlements and implant new ones; and carry on, with
unprecedented
arrogance and intransigence
and in
defiance of the whole world, its systematic policy of
invasion, occupation and creeping annexation of Arab
territories.

82. None other than the pro-Israel correspondent of
The New York Times provided us with the clearest
evidence and an example of how Israel treats our
Palestinian and other Arab brethren in the occupied
territories
while the deadline
for their ‘so-called
autonomy is approaching. Reporting from the occupied

85. Furthermore,
if the occupation is poisoning the
occupiers and if something breaks inside the soldiers
firing on women and children, then is it not primitive
and naive to ask: if that is how the occupiers, the
9’

87. We should like to welcome the statement of the
Lebanese representative
[2213th meeting],
in which
he expressed the willingness of his Government
to
send its army to the south to share responsibility
with UNIFIL.

invaders, the expansionists feel, then how must those
civilian men, women and children under occupation
feel? Is there any law in the world that might deprive
them of their right to defend by all possible means
the attainment
of their basic human and national
rights?

88. Finally, I should like to express our thanks to
the Secretary-General
for his report and to join with
previous speakers in expressing our condolences to
the people and Governments
of those brave soldiers
for peace who lost their lives or suffered injuries
during the performance of their duties.

86. The answer is once again left to the logic and
conscience of the Council, as well as of the intemational community,
in whose maturity,
justice and
fairness we still believe. We are sure that the Palestinians will leave Lebanon as soon as they can
establish their own State in their own homeland.
Then, and only then, can peace prevail in the area.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

The meeting

00300

rose at 12.35 p.m.

83-61462-August

19862,425
