S/PV.9240

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9240th meeting

Wednesday, 11 January 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ishikane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Dai Bing

Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pérez Loose
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mrs. Frazier
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Mr. Rutley
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the Permanent Representative of
Colombia to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and the President
of the Security Council (S/2016/53)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia (S/2022/1004)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-01198 (E)
*2301198*

Colombia

S/PV.9240

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the
Permanent Representative of Colombia to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
and the President of the Security Council
(S/2016/53)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia (S/2022/1004)

On behalf of the Council, I welcome Her Excellency
Ms. Francia Márquez Mina, Vice-President of
Colombia, and I request the Protocol Officer to escort
her to a seat at the Council table.
Ms. Francia Márquez Mina, Vice-President of the
Republic of Colombia, was escorted to a seat at the
Council table.
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia; and Mr. Armando
Wouriyu Valbuena, the High-level Forum of Ethnic
Peoples of Colombia.
begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2023/30, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2022/1004, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
2/19

In favour:
Albania, Brazil, China, Ecuador, France, Gabon,
Ghana, Japan, Malta, Mozambique, Russian
Federation, Switzerland, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America
The President: The draft resolution received 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 2673 (2023).
I now give the floor to Mr. Ruiz Massieu.

The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of Colombia to participate in
this meeting.

The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

11/01/2023

Mr. Ruiz Massieu: It is a pleasure to address the
Security Council at the beginning of this important
year for peace in Colombia.
(spoke in Spanish)
It is a special honour to be here in the presence of
Vice-President Francia Márquez Mina, who today is
Vice-President but who has been a historic peacebuilder
in Colombia. I would also like to especially acknowledge
Foreign Minister Álvaro Leyva Durán, who is also a
historic figure in achieving peace in the country. I take
this opportunity to thank them both for the confidence
and the support extended by the Government of
Colombia to the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia, and overall to the entire United Nations
system. I want to once again express my solidarity and
to reiterate my absolute condemnation of the attempted
attack on the Vice-President reported yesterday.
I am also pleased with the participation at this
meeting of Mr. Armando Wouriyu Valbuena, a
prominent indigenous leader and Secretary of the Highlevel Forum of Ethnic Peoples of Colombia, which was
established by the Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace, who
works day in and day out to promote the rights of ethnic
communities throughout the country.
(spoke in English)
The developments described in the most recent
report of the Secretary-General on Colombia
(S/2022/1004) speak of the potential of the year ahead
for the consolidation of peace in Colombia. I am
confident that, with the commitment of the parties, the
year 2023 can bring with it decisive progress to deliver
much-needed security and development opportunities
for communities in conflict-affected regions.
23-01198

11/01/2023

Colombia

Just a week ago, President Petro Urrego and
Vice-President Márquez Mina travelled to Chocó,
one of the most neglected regions of the country, to
sign the law to enact the Ministry of Equality. That
is an exciting development for Colombia. That new
institution, under the leadership of the Vice-President,
seeks to address deep inequalities that especially affect
women and indigenous and Afro-Colombian peoples. It
can certainly be an important instrument for advancing
the goals of the peace agreement by helping to bridge
disparities within Colombian society.
In his report, the Secretary-General welcomes
the Government’s recent actions to move forward in
some of the areas of the agreement with the greatest
transformative potential. I echo his praise for steps
taken in the past few months regarding comprehensive
rural reform, such as the agreement on the purchase
of land and the increase in the budgets for agriculture.
Further momentum in rural reform issues was seen in
the convening by the authorities of the first National
Convention of Peasants, which I attended last
December. At the Convention representatives of peasant
communities shared testimonies and came forward
with many proposals for deepening the implementation
of elements of the agreement’s comprehensive rural
reform, thereby once again reaffirming their key role
in peacebuilding. Rural reform is now at last clearly
moving to the centre of efforts to build a more peaceful
and prosperous Colombia.
As the Secretary-General has reiterated,
constructive dialogue between the parties, as well
as between the Government and civil society, is of
the essence. I am very encouraged by the positive
environment that characterized the past few months
within the Commission for the Follow-Up, Promotion
and Verification of the Implementation of the Final
Agreement and other forums created by the agreement.
I trust that that spirit will shortly translate into joint
actions to overcome pressing challenges so as to move
forward decisively.
This year is also key to advancing outstanding
legislation to implement the peace agreement. Victims’
representatives in Congress, as well as members of
political parties from across the spectrum, will all have
a fundamental role to play.
(spoke in Spanish)
The success of the reintegration process is an
essential part of building a stable and lasting peace, as

S/PV.9240

envisioned by the Government and the former Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del
Pueblo (FARC-EP) in the Final Agreement. In that
regard, I welcome the recent appointment of Alejandra
Miller, a former member of the Truth Commission and
a women’s rights advocate, as the new Director of the
Agency for Reintegration and Normalization, which
is a key entity in ensuring that success. Her emphasis
on mainstreaming gender and ethnic approaches in the
reintegration process is extremely encouraging.
The recent extension until 30 June of a basic
income, which guarantees access to a basic monthly
income for thousands of former combatants, is also a
very positive step, while the parties continue to work
together to adopt medium- and long-term measures to
ensure sustainable reintegration. To that end, it remains
critical to ensure the necessary resources to support
the thousands of ex-combatants, men and women, who
remain committed to their transition to civilian life
despite immense challenges and threats.
It is regrettable that, more than six years since the
signing of the Final Agreement, violence continues
against communities, social leaders and former
members of the FARC-EP. In recent weeks, there have
been numerous acts of violence, especially in areas
prioritized for the implementation of the agreement.
Of particular concern is the ongoing violence against
indigenous leaders and communities, such as the
Awá, and Afro-Colombian communities, such as the
Community Council of Alto Mira and Frontera, both
in Nariño department, where the implementation of the
ethnic provisions of the Final Agreement is imperative.
As the Government takes bold steps to reduce
violence under its “total peace” policy and implements
a new human security approach, the coordinated
implementation of the agreement’s provisions on
security guarantees is also necessary. I am confident
that the steps recently taken by the National Commission
on Security Guarantees will enable progress towards
that goal.
The progress made by the Comprehensive System
of Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition,
a fundamental pillar of the agreement and one of its
most innovative aspects, is encouraging. The issuance
by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace (SJP) of its first
concluding resolutions is a decisive step towards the
first restorative sentences, which could be delivered
this year. As noted by the Secretary-General, the

23-011983/19

S/PV.9240

Colombia

recommendations included in those resolutions, arrived
at through a process of dialogue involving victims and
participants, clearly illustrate that peace and justice
can, and should, be mutually reinforcing. The Mission
will continue to support the SJP and Government
entities as they prepare to ensure the conditions for the
implementation of those sentences.
(spoke in English)
While pressing forward with the implementation
of the Final Agreement, Government engagement with
illegal armed actors has continued within the framework
of the total peace policy. Last month, the Government
and the Ejército de Liberación Nacional concluded
the first round of peace dialogues in Venezuela amid
a constructive environment. They plan to hold a new
round in Mexico in the coming weeks. The parties’
decision to reinitiate discussions is widely supported
in Colombian society, and is especially valued by
communities affected by the conflict in several regions.

11/01/2023

great contribution to creating the security conditions
necessary for the realization of the various provisions
of the Final Agreement. The effective implementation
of the agreement in itself would bring about the
transformations required for lasting peace to take root.
The Council’s decision today to authorize the
expansion of the Mission’s mandate to include the
Agreement’s comprehensive rural reform and the ethnic
chapter in its verification tasks will enable the Mission
to increase its contribution to peace in Colombia. I am
very grateful for the Security Council’s trust and that
of the parties. There are many opportunities ahead
for peacebuilding in Colombia. The role of the United
Nations and the solid support of the Council remain as
important as ever. I would like to take the opportunity
to express my gratitude to the hundreds of men and
women in the Mission and the country team whose dayto-day work is a clear reflection of that commitment.
The President: I thank Mr. Ruiz Massieu for
his briefing.

At the request of the two parties, the SecretaryGeneral has agreed to permanently support their
dialogue process through my presence at the talks. I
have been carrying out that role as part of a supporting
group that includes the guarantor and accompanying
countries, and the Catholic Church. The parties
have also decided to share with the Security Council
documents agreed at the negotiating table. I will ensure
that the first such document, focused on the rules and
architecture of the negotiating process, reaches the
Council through the Secretariat.

Mr. Wouriyu Valbuena (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to extend my greetings to Vice-President
Francia Márquez Mina. She is a symbol, unprecedented
in our history, of the country that we are. I also greet
our Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Álvaro Leyva,
who has been a tireless fighter for peace for decades.
To a large extent we are gathered at this meeting today
thanks to his talent and perseverance.

The new year began with a hopeful announcement
by the President of six-month ceasefires with several
illegal armed actors operating in various areas across
the country. The Secretary-General welcomed that
announcement. If carefully designed and carried out
with commitment, such de-escalation measures agreed
with armed groups can help to significantly reduce
the violence and the suffering of conflict-affected
communities, while building trust in ongoing dialogues.

I am Armando Wouriyu Valbuena, an indigenous
member of the Wayuu people, who live in the desert
in the extreme north of Colombia. I speak on behalf
of the Afro-descendant and indigenous peoples and
communities of Colombia as Secretary of the Highlevel Forum of Ethnic Peoples, a mechanism established
in the implementation framework to serve as an
adviser, interlocutor and representative of the country’s
ethnic groups.

There is a fundamental reality that must
be acknowledged. The lasting success of the Colombian
peace agreement, which we all wish to see, is contingent
on the ability of the Colombian authorities to address
the persistent violence that poses its greatest threat.
The Government is making an admirable effort to do
so, in part through differentiated dialogues with the
illegal armed groups aimed at ending the violence.
If the dialogues are successful, they will make a

I should begin by thanking Japan, which as President
of the Security Council invited me to this meeting. I am
especially grateful that the Council has agreed to extend
the mandate to the ethnic chapter. I extend my thanks
to Secretary-General António Guterres and the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia. Above all, it
is a recognition that we consider fundamental and that
is sending a valuable message to Colombian society as
a whole and to the international community.

4/19

I now give the floor to Mr. Wouriyu Valbuena.

23-01198

11/01/2023

Colombia

Ninety per cent of our ancestral peoples were
exterminated at the time of the conquest of the
American continent, while at the same time, millions of
our Black brothers and sisters were literally torn from
their land to work as slaves in this lush new land — a
bad start and one to which it seems we continue to be
condemned. Our inclusion in the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace is a good example of our struggle to transform a
reality that has prevailed for centuries. There has been
advocacy and political dialogue at the international
level and with the parties, in practice making us a third
actor at the table, unparalleled in this process, and
which has resulted in the inclusion of an ethnic chapter
in the agreement to ensure that the grievances of the
Afro-descendants and indigenous peoples are heard.
However, being included in the agreement is
different from seeing it implemented to our benefit. That
is where the difficulties lie. International monitoring
entities, as well as their national counterparts such
as governmental control agencies, agree that the
implementation for ethnic peoples and communities is
being left behind at the end of the process. Much of that
is due to the fact that in the face of the entire country and
the international community, the previous Government
created obstacles to the vital development of the peace
process, preventing us from moving forward on those
strategies and strengthening them. How can we all
avoid committing the same blunder again?
With regard to ethnic peoples and communities
in particular, in addition to the allocation of specific
budget items, we must implement an institutional
framework that takes the ethnic approach into account.
We have lived for centuries in a State that does not
see us and does not think about us, and when the
time comes to make decisions, we are always absent.
In order to overcome that, we must start from the
principle that the relationship with ethnic bodies should
be determined and continued from one Government to
the next. That is, we must guarantee autonomy to the
ethnic communities and strengthen the organizational
structures that make autonomy possible. That should be
the North Star in the dialogue with the ethnic groups.
We have ancestral structures of governance at the
national, regional and local levels, and that is where we
should move forward on agreements related to public
policy with the Colombian State.
We make up one tenth of the Colombian population,
but we inhabit one third of the country’s territory,

S/PV.9240

mostly made up of rivers, lakes and trees — the
abundance of Mother Earth. Only a fifth of the land
is used for agricultural activities. Given that situation,
there must be guarantees of self-determination at a time
when we need effective responses to the climate crisis.
The complement to the effective exercise of governance
is the existence of our own economy, which will ensure
that the main tasks of the organizations are fulfilled.
In that way, public policy would be oriented towards
strengthening sustainability processes within Afrodescendant and indigenous community organizations
in Colombia.
In addition to strengthening our organizations
and ensuring their sustainability, there is the concern
about the issue of land contemplated in the agreement,
which has always been a key issue for ethnic groups.
The collective protection mechanisms for ethnic groups
must have the material guarantees to strengthen them,
including the indigenous and maroon guards, which
are essential as a contribution to the efforts to achieve
what is described as “total peace”. The existence of
coca and cannabis crops in ethnic territories, which
are sacred plants, should involve a special regulatory
mechanism, which has been considered but which
the previous Government completely disregarded.
The peace agreement mentioned special attention for
indigenous communities and territories. It is urgent that
attention be paid to them, as they are facing physical
and cultural extermination. I respectfully request
that the Verification Mission’s follow-up efforts be
carried out on the basis of an understanding of what the
ethnic approach means, which includes the elements
noted heretofore. This can be achieved by talking and
working with us. In that way, we could better orient the
institutional effort, which for centuries has been erratic.
The United Nations system has a varied and longstanding presence in our country. It is very important
that it coordinate with the Colombian Government
and us, so that the effects of implementation can be
maximized through the organizational structures we
adopt. Our inclusion in the mandate of the Security
Council, the designation of the Vice-President as the
highest-ranking official for the implementation of the
ethnic chapter and the willingness of the Governments
of the United States and Mexico to assist the ethnic
peoples of Colombia have encouraged us to invite even
more countries to join us in this endeavour.
To the 115 nomadic, semi-nomadic and sedentary
indigenous peoples in Colombia, including indigenous

23-011985/19

S/PV.9240

Colombia

peoples in voluntary isolation, and to the ethnic and
cultural variety of the country’s people of African
descent, I offer a salute of resistance: after five centuries
of being decimated and mistreated, the struggle for
a dignified life remains ongoing. As I address the
Security Council for the first time today, I hope that it
will be the first time of many.
The President: I thank Mr. Wouriyu Valbuena for
his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Rutley (United Kingdom): The Government of
the United Kingdom remains committed to supporting
the consolidation of peace in Colombia through the
full implementation of the peace agreement with the
Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia. We
welcome the Colombian Government’s commitment to
implementing the 2016 Agreement as a fundamental
part of its work to secure a broad and lasting peace.
We have been pleased to see renewed momentum
over the past three months, including the Government’s
purchase of 3 million hectares from the Cattle
Ranchers Association, the reactivation of the National
Reintegration Council and the concluding resolutions
passed by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace. We
welcome today’s Council’s decision to expand the
mandate of the United Nations Verification Mission, to
cover progress on the rural reform and ethnic chapters
of the peace agreement (resolution 2673 (2023)). It is
clear that progress on these two chapters is vital.
As the Secretary-General set out in his recent
report (S/2022/1004), violence remains the greatest
threat to the consolidation of peace in Colombia. We
welcome the decisive action taken by the Government
to strengthen public security forces in new reintegration
areas, and the Vice-President’s announcement of
increased funding for safeguarding women leaders and
human rights defenders.
We share the Government’s concern about attacks
on human rights defenders, environmental advocates
and other civil society activists. We are committed
to supporting efforts to tackle these threats in order
to secure a better future for the Colombian people.
We also welcome the continued close cooperation
between Colombia and its international partners on
tackling drugs and organized crime. In that context,
we welcome Government-led efforts to secure a
6/19

11/01/2023

ceasefire, in order to reduce insecurity and alleviate
the suffering of conflict-affected populations. We also
welcome Special Representative Massieu’s support for
the Government’s ongoing dialogue with the Ejército
de Liberación Nacional.
Colombia remains an example to the world of the
transformative potential of dialogue and leadership. I
saw that commitment first hand on a recent visit. As
the Colombian people seek to overcome the remaining
barriers to a broad and lasting peace, the United
Kingdom is proud to stand with them.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): It is
an honour for me and for my country to take the floor to
comment on the implementation of the peace agreement
in Colombia. I thank the briefers for their briefings
and welcome Vice-President Francia Elena Márquez
Mina and Foreign Minister Álvaro Leyva Durán to the
Security Council today.
First of all, on behalf of my country, I would like
to express, as President Lula da Silva has already done,
our solidarity with the Vice-President following the
unacceptable attempted assassination attempt she has
suffered. Brazil emphatically condemns what happened
and expresses its unwavering confidence that political
extremism and attempts to block progress on inclusive
policies will not prosper on our continent.
We are pleased that the Council unanimously
approved the extension of the mandate of the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia today
(resolution 2673 (2023)) to cover the Ethnic and Rural
Reform Chapters of the Final Agreement, as requested
by the Colombian Government. Brazil believes that the
peace process will benefit from progress in these two
central axes of the Agreement and congratulates the
Government of Colombia for its decision to prioritize
their implementation and involve the United Nations in
monitoring the progress.
We are pleased to recognize President Petro
Urrego’s Government’s commitment to intensifying
efforts to ensure the security of former combatants
and to strengthening policies with respect to women,
indigenous people and populations of African
descent. The full reintegration of ex-combatants into
civilian life depends on access to land, housing and
productive projects.
As recognized by the Secretary-General in his most
recent report to this Council (S/2022/1004), we welcome
23-01198

11/01/2023

Colombia

the Government’s determination and recent actions to
strengthen the implementation of the sections of the
Agreement with the greatest potential to transform in
a positive manner the reality of the regions that have
suffered most from the conflict. Indeed, in four months
in office, President Petro Urrego’s Administration has
already initiated important actions as part of its strategy
to make progress in integrally fulfilling the peace
agreement. The Government’s decision to increase
resources for the agrarian sector in the 2023 budget
by more than 62 per cent demonstrates its seriousness
with regard to rural reform. The integrated deployment
of State capacity to all corners of Colombian territory,
especially historically neglected areas, is essential for
the consolidation of peace in Colombia, and agrarian
reform will contribute decisively to this end.
Brazil congratulates the Colombian Government
for its tireless efforts to seek a “total peace” in the
country. We view with great satisfaction the bilateral
ceasefire with different armed groups announced
on 31 December 2022. We hope that this positive
development will effectively reduce the violence
affecting the Colombian population, especially AfroColombians, indigenous peoples, women and the most
vulnerable populations. In addition, Brazil hopes that
the ceasefire with the Ejército de Liberación Nacional
can be announced soon and that the dialogue with that
group will make rapid progress.
As we have stressed on various occasions, the
Security Council’s work in Colombia responds to the
aspirations and needs expressed by the Colombian
Government. Brazil reiterates its willingness to
collaborate with the Government so that peace, gained
only through the great efforts of its people, takes root
and spreads widely throughout the country’s territory.
Colombia has already demonstrated its capacity
and political will to overcome the challenges to the
full implementation of the peace agreement and to
consolidate peace in its territory. Brazil reiterates its
confidence in the success of that process.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Special Representative Ruiz Massieu
for his informative briefing. We appreciate the critical
role that the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia continues to play in supporting peace in
the country. I thank Mr. Wouriyu Valbuena for the
important perspective he brings from the High-level
Forum of Ethnic Peoples.

S/PV.9240

I would like to welcome the Colombian delegation,
led by Vice-President Francia Márquez Mina and
Foreign Minister Álvaro Leyva Durán, to the Council,
and I thank in particular our United Kingdom colleagues
for their efforts in drafting the mandate resolution
(resolution 2673 (2023)), which received unanimous
support from the Council. I welcome Minister Rutley.
The United States is encouraged by the steps his
Government has taken to advance the implementation
of the 2016 Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and
Building a Stable and Lasting Peace, and we are fully
committed to supporting Colombia in this vital work.
Today I would like to highlight four areas of progress
and discuss obstacles to peace that must be addressed
with urgency. First, the United States welcomes the
Petro Urrego Administration’s express commitment to
fully realize the objectives of the ethnic chapter. We
appreciate the leadership of Vice-President Márquez
Mina in coordinating those efforts, in partnership with
the Office of the High Commissioner for Peace and
entities across the Colombian Government, including
the newly created Ministry of Equality. The election of
Vice-President Márquez Mina is historic and represents
the Petro Urrego Administration’s commitment to
addressing this important issue.
In October, during a visit to Bogotá, Secretary
Blinken announced that the United States would be the
first international accompanier to the ethnic chapter
of the 2016 peace accord. As Secretary Blinken made
clear: “there can be no lasting peace without justice
and equality for the Afro-Colombian and indigenous
people”. The ethnic chapter sets a vision for an inclusive
peace that addresses a history of inequity and ensures
the rights of Afro-Colombians and indigenous people
going forward. That is a vision that the United States
shares and that we have long worked to help make
a reality.
Secondly, the United States supports rural reform
efforts to distribute property to farmers without land,
and we were encouraged by the significant increase
of resources for the agrarian sector in the 2023
Government budget.
Thirdly, we continue to support the ongoing
transitional justice process. We support that effort and
condemn any actions that threaten the peace process.
All victims of Colombia’s conflict deserve justice.
Fourthly, we are encouraged by Colombia’s effort to
broaden democratic political participation. We should

23-011987/19

S/PV.9240

Colombia

not lose sight of how significant it is to see former
combatants participating in the political process.
But while those four developments are cause for
optimism, there is still work to be done. Illicit drug
production continues to fuel violence in conflictaffected areas, and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime reported record levels of coca cultivation in
2021. Let us be clear, all acts of violence — whether
they are attacks against Colombian security forces,
indigenous and Afro-Colombian communities, former
combatants or human rights and environmental
defenders — impede progress and peace. Authorities
must act to combat illicit drug production, reduce
violence and ensure illegal armed groups are
held accountable.
The Security Council can play a meaningful
role in addressing that work, and the United States
welcomes today’s action by the Council to approve
the Secretary-General’s important recommendation
for the Verification Mission. Resolution 2673 (2023)
will help us to better monitor the implementation of
comprehensive rural reform and the ethnic chapter of
the peace accord. We must all continue to stand with
Colombia in its efforts to consolidate lasting peace
after decades of conflict.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I have the
honour to make this statement on behalf of the three
African members of the Security Council (A3), namely,
Ghana, Mozambique and my country, Gabon.
The A3 wishes to congratulate the members of
the Council for unanimously adopting resolution 2673
(2023), which mandates the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia to monitor the implementation of
the comprehensive rural reform and the ethnic chapter
of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and
Building a Stable and Lasting Peace in Colombia. The
resolution’s swift and unified adoption underscores the
Council’s commitment to supporting the Colombian
people in their search for a lasting peace.
We also welcome the participation in this meeting
of the Vice-President of Colombia, Her Excellency
Ms. Francia Márquez Mina, and thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Carlos
Ruiz Massieu, and Mr. Armando Wouriyu Valbuena for
their informative briefings.
The A3 is horrified by the attempted assassination
via explosive device of Vice-President Francia Márquez
8/19

11/01/2023

Mina. Yesterday’s attack was the second such attack,
following one in 2019. We condemn in the strongest
possible terms this cowardly and despicable attack on
Vice-President Márquez Mina — no doubt because
of her political commitment and certainly because of
her origins and the historic symbolism she embodies.
The Colombia that we support is one in which all
citizens, regardless of their gender, origin or skin
colour, participate equally in the political and social
life of the country, without fearing for their lives. This
attempt on her life underlines once again the urgency of
strengthening the implementation of the ethnic chapter
of the Final Agreement.
The first steps taken by President Petro Urrego and
the new Government in the framework of his vision for
the concept of “total peace” are very encouraging and
a source of hope for the further implementation of the
Final Agreement. After six years of implementation,
and taking into account the gains made thus far, we are
encouraged by the strong commitment to correcting
historical inequalities, with particular emphasis on
rural reforms, the ethnic chapter and the protection of
women’s interests and rights.
The enactment of the law allowing for the
continuation of dialogue with the Ejército de Liberación
(ELN) and the other armed groups in order to put an
end to the violence is an encouraging signal for the
future. The layered structure of that process, which
includes citizen participation in the design of the
national development plan for the period 2022–2026,
is a guarantee of inclusiveness. The ELN’s decision
to analyse the Government’s proposals and to accept
the talks on the ceasefire are positive signs for the
conclusion of a peace agreement. We hope that the
second round of negotiations, scheduled for February,
will be a step forward in that direction. Nevertheless,
the established contacts should be maintained, and the
commitment of all parties should be renewed, in order
to bring the negotiations to a successful conclusion as
soon as possible. Without all the parties on board, there
can be no lasting peace. In that connection, we welcome
the commitment of the guarantor countries to ensuring
the continuation and outcomes of those talks.
With regard to the participation of women, the A3
emphasizes the importance of ensuring that women have
the platform they deserve as agents of peace. We also
welcome the developments recorded in the promotion
and participation of women in the implementation of
the agreement, whether through their participation in
23-01198

11/01/2023

Colombia

designing the national development plan; the creation of
the Ministry of Equality; the adoption of laws on gender
parity on electoral lists; awareness-raising activities
aimed at strengthening consideration of the specific
needs of women ex-combatants; and the appointment
of several women to positions of responsibility. We also
welcome the Government’s announcement that it will
increase funding for initiatives and programmes that
combat sexual and gender-based violence. Such crimes
must be fought and punished with the utmost firmness.
The Government’s commitment in that regard, via
the adoption of a road map for the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), is a decisive step in the
right direction.
The sustainable reintegration of ex-combatants
depends on effective land reform. To that end, the A3
welcomed the adoption of relevant measures, whose
implementation is crucial to the establishment of lasting
peace in Colombia. We are also observing with interest
the implementation of the 16 national rural reform plans.
The A3 welcomes the signing of an agreement between
the Colombian Federation of Cattle Ranchers and the
Government for the purchase of 3 million hectares of
land to be distributed to landless peasants.
The situation in the communities of Cauca, Putumayo
and Antioquia, which are plagued by insecurity, is in
urgent need of resolution. We welcome the housing
construction projects that are under way in several of
those areas. Those efforts should be strengthened so
as to improve the reintegration of all 13,000 accredited
former combatants. In that regard, the A3 is pleased
with the reactivation of the National Reintegration
Council in order to improve the implementation of that
crucial component of the agreement.
We welcome the Colombian Government’s
commitment to continuing to implement its territorial
development programmes — again, on a basis of
inclusiveness and with a view to creating greater
synergy at the regional and national levels. It is essential
that peace efforts be supported by concrete actions
aimed at combating the root causes of poverty. We hope
that the discussions under way in Congress to enact
legislation on the creation of an agrarian jurisdiction
and to constitutionalize the rights of peasants will be
successful. The rehabilitation of ex-combatants must,
of course, incorporate their economic reintegration.
We deplore the resurgence of illicit crops in conflictaffected areas, which thrives on a bedrock of poverty
combined with a weak State presence. We encourage

S/PV.9240

the authorities to redouble their efforts to approve new
projects, and we urge the Colombian Government to
strengthen measures aimed at empowering women
to lead development projects. In that regard, the
inclusion in the national development plan of a national
reintegration system and a comprehensive reintegration
programme aimed at building the capacity of former
combatants is most welcome.
With respect to the Comprehensive System for
Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition, the
A3 is pleased to note that significant progress has
been made, especially in Case 01, which concerns
hostage-taking, other severe deprivations of liberty
and concomitant crimes committed by the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del
Pueblo, and Case 03, which concerns murders and
forced disappearances presented as combat casualties
by State agents. The A3 welcomes the establishment of
a mechanism for dialogue and a system for monitoring
the implementation of the recommendations of the
Truth Commission. That system of restorative justice
based on the active participation of victims is an
essential pillar of the peace process in Colombia and
an exemplary model. We are also pleased with the
measures introduced to care for child survivors and the
families of former combatants. Action in the interests
of children contributes to the prevention of conflicts
and the construction of a sustainable peace.
However, we remain concerned about the persistence
of violence against reintegrated ex-combatants outside
former training and reintegration territorial areas. That
violence continues to undermine the implementation
of the peace agreement in conflict-affected localities.
The total number of ex-combatants assassinated,
including the 50 killed in 2022, now stands at 355,
with a majority of the victims from Afro-Colombian
and indigenous communities. Attacks on social leaders,
human rights promoters and members of political
parties are particularly worrisome. The A3 reiterates
its position that a peaceful Colombian society cannot
be envisioned for the long term without correcting
the historical injustices done to Afro-Colombians and
indigenous peoples.
The efforts already undertaken by Colombia
require the continued support of its regional as
well as international partners. In that regard, the
A3 welcomes the reopening of the border and the
warming of diplomatic relations between Colombia
and Venezuela, which began with the visit of President

23-011989/19

S/PV.9240

Colombia

Petro Urrego to Caracas on 1 November 2022. We also
welcome Venezuela’s commitment as a guarantor of the
negotiations between the Colombian Government and
the ELN guerrillas. We hope that an agreement can
be reached with the ELN on a ceasefire and a bilateral
truce. We urge the leaders of the ELN and other
armed groups that are not yet signatories to the Final
Agreement to renounce violence and to demonstrate
flexibility and a commitment to ending years of deadly
guerrilla warfare in Colombia.
Finally, the A3 reiterates its support for the
mission of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and expresses its continued support for the
Colombian Government.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I welcome
Vice-President Francia Márquez Mina of Colombia to
this meeting. I thank Special Representative Carlos
Ruiz Massieu for his briefing, and I listened carefully
to the statement by Mr. Wouriyu Valbuena.
Over the past year the people of Colombia have
made welcome progress in the political dialogue and in
nation-building through their united efforts, ushering in
a new chapter of peace, development and reconciliation.
As the Secretary-General said in his latest report, the
peace process in Colombia is in a dynamic new phase
(S/2022/1004). I am very pleased that the Council has just
unanimously adopted resolution 2673 (2023), extending
the mandate of the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia. We hope that the international community
will seize and build on that momentum and continue
to provide the necessary support to the peace process
in order to achieve further concrete results. In that
connection, I want to make the following points.
First, we must continue to push for the
implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace.
The new Colombian Government, under President
Gustavo Petro Urrego and other stakeholders, has been
fully engaged in implementing the relevant clauses of
the agreement. Practical measures have been taken,
especially in terms of rural reform, land distribution and
the elimination of violence. In particular, the National
Reintegration Council has recently restarted its work,
which should enable former combatants to have access
to land and participate in productive projects as an
effective way to sustain their integration. While those
measures and the progress made deserve recognition,
it should also be pointed out that the implementation
10/19

11/01/2023

of the peace agreement is a long-term and systematic
undertaking that requires continued efforts towards
its full implementation by all stakeholders, including
civil society. Meanwhile, the international community
should continue to pay close attention to the situation
and provide sustained political support.
Secondly, differences must be resolved through
dialogue and negotiations. Colombia ended the conflict
through dialogue and started peacebuilding through
negotiations, setting a good example for the political
settlement of disputes. Last month, the Government
concluded its first round of negotiations with the
Ejército de Liberación Nacional and reached a sixmonth ceasefire agreement with the four armed groups.
The decision was also jointly made to carry out an
emergency humanitarian operation. We welcome all
those developments. We hope that the country will
continue to make unwavering efforts on the path of
dialogue and negotiations and that the parties will reach
a lasting ceasefire and political settlement through
negotiations. We will continue to support the United
Nations and countries and organizations of the region
in playing a constructive role in encouraging peace and
achieving peace through negotiations.
Thirdly, great emphasis must be placed on
promoting peace. Lasting peace achieved through
sustainable and inclusive development shared by
all is a fundamental approach to eradicating the
root causes of conflict. We are happy to see that the
Government has taken a series of initiatives to tackle
uneven development, including massive financial flows
dedicated to rural reform, which will help narrow
the gap between urban and rural areas and break the
bottlenecks to development. We have taken note that
the Government is engaging in dialogue with different
sectors of society on the national development plan
for the period 2022 to 2026. That will help combine
national development with the implementation of the
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building
a Stable and Lasting Peace, which will be critical to
achieving lasting peace and sustainable development in
Colombia. China commends the governance approach
adopted by the Government, which places emphasis
on achieving peace through development, and hopes
that the United Nations and international partners will
strengthen coordination and work in synergy so as to
provide further support for Colombia to develop its
economy and improve its people’s livelihoods.
23-01198

11/01/2023

Colombia

Fourthly, the security situation must continue to
be improved. Currently, certain areas in the country
continue to suffer from instability. Armed groups
continue to run rampant in former-conf lict areas and
remote regions. We support the Government in shoring
up development in areas where national security
remains fragile and welcome the Government’s
adoption of public policy to dismantle illegal armed
groups and criminal organizations and take effective
measures to protect civilians, including women,
children and Afro-Colombians
According to the report of the Secretary-General,
Colombia remains one of the countries most affected
by the presence of explosive ordnance, including
landmines. Last year alone, there were 100 casualties.
In that regard, the United Nations Mine Action Service
can leverage its expertise and provide technical support
to the relevant entities in the country in order to
strengthen their demining capacity and eliminate the
hidden danger posed by mines.
Lastly, I would like to reiterate that China
commends the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia for the important contribution it has made
to the peace process in Colombia and supports the
Mission in continuing to play an active role in moving
forward the peace process on the basis of full respect
for Colombia’s ownership.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
welcome the participation of Her Excellency Ms. Francia
Márquez Mina, Vice-President of Colombia. Her
presence attests to Colombia’s commitment to achieving
lasting peace and valued cooperation with the Security
Council. It was with deep concern that we learned of the
assassination attempt on her life yesterday. We express
our sympathy to her and unequivocally condemn all acts
of violence. Let me also thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Carlos Ruiz Massieu for his
invaluable briefing. Our thanks also go to Mr. Wouriyu
Valbuena for his informative briefing.
Switzerland’s
long-standing
commitment
in Colombia is aimed at contributing to the full
implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace.
In particular, Switzerland has supported the political
participation component of the agreement. It has also
committed itself to supporting the Comprehensive
System for Truth, Justice, Reparations and
Non-Repetition, together with the Colombian women

S/PV.9240

and men who have spared no effort on behalf of the
victims of the armed conflict. Our contribution has
prioritized a holistic, victim-centred approach, based
on respect for the law. Switzerland takes pleasure in
pursuing its support for building a lasting peace, as a
member of the Council.
I would like to highlight three points in that regard.
First, Switzerland welcomes the important efforts
of the Colombian Government to advance the full
and effective implementation of the peace agreement.
The resumption of negotiations with the Ejército de
Liberación Nacional (ELN) and the pursuit to continue
the dialogue with the other armed groups, including in
view of achieving a ceasefire, are most encouraging.
The positive communication between the Colombian
authorities and the Comunes party is also a meaningful
gesture and a clear commitment to peace. We welcome
the work of the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia and its ability to adapt so as to be able to
support Colombia on the path leading to peace.
Secondly, Switzerland welcomes the unity of the
Council shown by its unanimous adoption of resolution
2673 (2022), on broadening the Mission’s mandate
to cover monitoring the implementation of the rural
reform and the ethnic chapters in the peace agreement.
Those chapters are vital. The achievement of the
objectives set out will make it possible to work on the
root causes of the armed conflict and the historical
inequalities. While the Colombian Government’s recent
efforts to combat criminal activity are commendable,
we remain concerned about the level of violence
faced by members of political parties, social leaders,
human rights defenders, former combatants and
indigenous and Afro-Colombian communities. As the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2022/1004) notes,
violence against women is an obstacle to their ultimate
participation in the peace process. Ensuring the proper
functioning of the National Commission on Security
Guarantees is critical to their protection and must be
a priority. Indigenous children are disproportionately
affected by serious acts of violence. In that regard, my
country welcomes the recent signing by Colombia of the
Safe Schools Declaration, which is an imperative step
towards the implementation of preventive measures to
ensure the protection of the most vulnerable.
Thirdly, in line with its commitment to peace
and sustainable social development in Colombia,
Switzerland has responded to the call of the parties to

23-0119811/19

S/PV.9240

Colombia

the conflict and will support the peace negotiations
under way with the ELN. Having been chosen once
again as one of the supporting States in the negotiations
represents a great responsibility for us whose scope we
fully realize. We particularly welcome the meaningful
representation of women in the process.
Colombia has successfully adopted a victimcentred approach for healing the wounds of decades of
violence. Colombia can serve as an example to other
countries affected by conflict. Colombia’s continued
engagement in the Peacebuilding Commission attests
to that potential.
Let me conclude with the words of Father
Francisco de Roux Rengifo, former President of the
Truth Commission,
(spoke in Spanish)
“We can no longer postpone the day when peace
becomes a duty and a basic right. Colombia has
become inured to peace means, and it will not give
it up.”
(spoke in English)
Switzerland encourages the international community
and the Council to redouble their efforts to support
Colombia in achieving lasting peace and stands ready
to promote and support all dialogue.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Carlos Ruiz Massieu and the representative of
the High-level Forum of Ethnic Peoples of Colombia,
Mr. Wouriyu Valbuena, for their briefings. I also
welcome the Vice-President of Colombia, Ms. Francia
Márquez Mina, at this meeting and join my colleagues
in condemning in the strongest terms the attempt on her
life yesterday.
France welcomes the clear commitment and recent
initiatives taken by the Colombian authorities through
the adoption of their “total peace” policy to fully
implement the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict
and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace. Colombia is
on the right track.
Let me return to a few specific points.
First, the search for peace through dialogue is
imperative. We are very encouraged by the negotiations
under way with the Ejército de Liberación Nacional and
the armed groups. We hope that they will be pursued
12/19

11/01/2023

and lead to a lasting ceasefire that the international
community will be able support when the time comes.
Secondly, France welcomes the Government’s
clear commitment to land access and rural reform. The
increased budget for it and the agreement reached with
the agrarian sector are positive. The authorities’ new
approach to the provision of substitutions for illicit
crops is also welcome. We encourage the Government
to continue along that path in order to offer viable new
socioeconomic opportunities to those who suffered
in the conflict. It is a vital factor in achieving a
lasting peace.
Thirdly, France welcomes the consistent progress
made by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, whose
issuance of resolutions has paved the way for
restorative sentencing and a new chapter on the road
to reconciliation. All the parties to the conflict must
participate in those efforts for justice and truth, which
are an indispensable step in ensuring the restoration of
lasting peace in the country.
Finally, we must also be clear-sighted as we look at
the road ahead. France remains very concerned about
the high level of violence in many parts of Colombia.
The security guarantees for former combatants, human
rights defenders and social leaders are still inadequate.
The roll-out of the emergency protection plan, based on
an increased presence of the State at the local level, is a
positive step forward, but if it is to be effective, it must
also increase the State presence in the areas historically
neglected by the Agreement.
By extending the mandate of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia, which is doing
outstanding work on the ground, the Security Council
has once again demonstrated its strong support for
the peace process in Colombia. In a world marked by
conflict and divisions, Colombia remains an example
of peace for the international community. France
encourages it to continue along that path, and we stand
ready to offer our full support.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia, and Mr. Armando
Wouriyu Valbuena, of the High-level Forum of Ethnic
Peoples of Colombia, for their briefings. I also thank
the Secretary-General for his most recent report on
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia
(S/2022/1004). In welcoming Vice-President Francia
23-01198

11/01/2023

Colombia

S/PV.9240

Márquez Mina of Colombia to the Security Council for
the first time, I would like to express Ecuador’s concern
and echo the Vice-President’s condemnation of the
attempted attack on her. I stand with her in solidarity.
I also welcome the presence of the Minister of Foreign
Affairs of Colombia, Mr. Álvaro Leyva Durán, at
today’s meeting.

Ecuador attaches particular importance to its
relationship with Colombia, with our historical
framework of brotherhood and bilateral cooperation
in facing the challenges on our shared border and in
combating transnational organized crime in all its
manifestations, especially drug and arms trafficking,
given their impact on peace and security.

The United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia plays an important role in supporting the
full implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace.
In that regard, the Council’s unanimous adoption of
resolution 2655 (2022) on 27 October 2022 demonstrated
its commitment to the peace process in the country
and, especially, to the implementation of the Final
Agreement. Resolution 2673 (2023), which we have
just adopted today, is an additional show of support to
the Government of Colombia through the Verification
Mission’s monitoring of the implementation of the rural
reforms and the ethnic chapter of the Final Agreement.
I appreciate the input and recommendations in the
letter dated 9 December 2022 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/2022/940) on how the verification of those
matters will be carried out. That is especially relevant,
as the Government has said that land reform and access
to land are particularly important for a peaceful and
prosperous Colombia. The recent agreement between
the Colombian Federation of Cattle Ranchers and the
Government for the purchase of 3 million hectares of
land to be distributed to landless peasants constitutes
an achievement in that regard. Regarding the ethnic
chapter, it has been emphasized in the Council that a
lasting peace cannot be achieved without justice and
equality for the entire country, including its Afrodescendant and indigenous peoples.

In conclusion, Ecuador reiterates its full support for
the peace process in Colombia and the comprehensive
implementation of the Final Agreement.

One of Ecuador’s priorities for its 2023–2024
term on the Security Council is the promotion of
the women and peace and security agenda. We are
therefore pleased that Colombia has been considering
ensuring the increased participation of women,
especially indigenous and Afro-descendant women, in
the dialogue mechanisms and in all processes aimed
at the establishment of peace in general. The Council
sees the peace process in Colombia as successful and
as a benchmark for such processes in other regions.
In that regard, I would like to highlight the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace as a key element in the application
of transitional justice in the country.

Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Ruiz Massieu for his
briefing and important work with the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia. I would also like to
thank Mr. Wouriyu Valbuena for his insightful briefing
and to recognize the participation of Vice-President
Francia Márquez Mina in a meeting of the Security
Council for the first time, as well as the presence here
today of Mr. Rutley of the United Kingdom.
The three months covered in the SecretaryGeneral’s most recent report (S/2022/1004) have seen
significant movement in paving the path towards
sustainable peace. The Government of Colombia has
made it clear that a comprehensive implementation
of the 2016 Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict
and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace is at the
core of its ambitions. Malta was pleased to see peace
negotiations resumed between the Government of
Colombia and the Ejército de Liberación Nacional in
Caracas last month. The reports from those talks are
encouraging, and we are looking forward to following
the next round of negotiations in Mexico this month. I
also congratulate the Government of Colombia on its
progress and commend the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on his role of providing political
accompaniment to those negotiations. We support the
Government of Colombia’s efforts for a comprehensive
and prolonged ceasefire with combatants and call on
all the armed groups to lay down their weapons and
engage in dialogue.
Violence continues to be the existential threat
to Colombia’s peace process. Though 2022 was a
year of great progress, it also saw hundreds killed,
including children, in large-scale killings, clashes
between dissident groups and by explosive ordnance.
Threats against former combatants also remain acute,
highlighted by the increase in emergency relocations.
Violence towards civilians, journalists and social

23-0119813/19

S/PV.9240

Colombia

leaders also remains a great concern, with at least 89
human rights defenders being killed last year. According
to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, indigenous and Afro-Colombians
are among the most targeted leaders. Reports detailing
a plotted attempt on the life of Vice-President Márquez
Mina are concerning, and they reflect the need to
remain cautious and recognize that situations can
easily deteriorate.
Conflict-related sexual violence also continues
to be used to displace communities and as a tactic of
territorial control. We call for the implementation
of the Comprehensive Programme for Safeguards
for Women Leaders and Human Rights Defenders
and the action plan for the security of women former
combatants under the reintegration policy. There must
be full accountability for such crimes if there is to be
sustainable and long-term peace. We also encourage
the Colombian Government to strengthen mechanisms
to protect the victims of, and witnesses to, conflictrelated violence.
Malta is encouraged by the determination of the
Colombian Government in its endeavours towards
comprehensive rural reform. That commitment can be
clearly seen in the increase in resources for the agrarian
sector in the 2023 budget and the unprecedented
agreement to purchase 3 million hectares of land to be
distributed through the Land Fund.
We also wish to highlight the recent issuance of
concluding resolutions by the Special Jurisdiction
for Peace as a clear example of the victim-centred
process that is at the core of Colombia’s cutting-edge
transitional justice system. We also welcome the recent
reactivation of the National Reintegration Council and
the designation by the Government of a new head of the
Agency for Reintegration and Normalization. Those are
clear steps towards furthering the reintegration process
across the country.
The Security Council must equip the Colombian
Government with the resources that it needs to
continue its progress towards peace. That is why
Malta fully supports the request by the Colombian
Foreign Minister to expand the mandate of the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia to include
the peace agreement’s comprehensive rural reform
and the ethnic chapters, and we voted in favour of
resolution 2673 (2023). To echo the Secretary-General,
such sections of the 2016 Final Agreement are critical
14/19

11/01/2023

to consolidating peace by addressing the deep-rooted
patterns of inequality, including gender inequality, and
the exclusion of rural regions and ethnic peoples. I am
encouraged that today the Security Council showed a
united front in supporting the resolution.
Progress on Colombia’s peace process is growing in
leaps and bounds and support by the Security Council
and the international community is as important
as ever. Malta stands with the Colombian people,
committed to their peaceful and prosperous future. A
new year brings new opportunities. I am confident that
the Security Council can remain united in supporting
Colombia’s future.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia,
Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, for his efforts and the update
on the developments in the country. I also thank
Mr. Wouriyu Valbuena for his important insights. We
welcome the presence of Vice-President Francia Márquez
Mina and Foreign Minister Álvaro Leyva Durán,
important actors for peace in Colombia, at this meeting,
which shows the importance of cooperation with the
Security Council for the Colombian Government.
We commend the Government of Colombia and
President Petro Urrego for their vision, resolve and hard
work in promoting the concept of “total peace”. They
have continued on the path of work for peace chartered
by the previous Administration, thereby confirming the
desire and resolve of the Colombian people to put an
end to the long and painful history of conflict.
The 2016 Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace
is the cornerstone of the peace process in Colombia,
and we are encouraged by the efforts of the parties
to implement it in full, as well as the readiness to
engage in dialogue with non-signatory groups. We
welcome the New Year’s Eve agreement with several
large armed groups operating in the country as part
of President Petro Urrego’s endeavours for a national
ceasefire and lasting peace through inclusive dialogue
and reconciliation. We are further encouraged by the
process of dialogue between the authorities and the
Ejército de Liberación Nacional in an effort to maximize
the contribution to the new prospects for Colombia and
better cohabitation among the population and to help
guarantee lasting peace.
23-01198

11/01/2023

Colombia

The Government and the people of Colombia need
the continued support of the international community
as they make strides towards lasting peace and fully
exploit in full the vast potential for progress during this
year. We welcome the expanded mandate of the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia contained in
resolution 2673 (2023), adopted today, to monitor the
implementation of the rural reforms and ethnic chapters
of the peace agreement. Those are two critical aspects to
ensure the full implementation of the Final Agreement.
We join the Secretary-General’s assessment that
the peace process in Colombia has entered a dynamic
new phase that deserves strong international support.
Colombia, its leaders and its people enjoy Albania’s
full sympathy and support for their noble efforts to
consolidate peace. Colombia is a shining success
story for peace, which needs to fully materialize for
the benefit of all, without anyone left behind. In that
respect, we trust that the authorities will continue to
do what is needed to reduce the violence. Colombia
and Colombians have long seen enough — and too
much — violence. They are best placed to know the dire
consequences of reckless violence, to the detriment of
life, rights and peace, just like the attempt on the life
of the Vice-President, which we firmly condemn, and
which only aims to derail the process.
(spoke in Spanish)
What Colombia needs now is peace, total peace,
through dialogue and justice. We stand resolutely with
them on that path.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I thank Mr. Ruiz Massieu for
his valuable briefing and for his tireless efforts towards
supporting the goals of the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia, namely, establishing peace in the
country. I welcome the participation of Her Excellency
Ms. Francia Márquez Mina, Vice-President of Colombia,
and join other Council members in condemning the
recent attempts to endanger her life. We also appreciate
the participation of Mr. Armando Wouriyu Valbuena.
In the context of today’s discussion, I would like to
focus on three main points.
First, we welcome the continued progress in key
implementation mechanisms of the Final Agreement
for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and
Lasting Peace, including the National Commission
on Security Guarantees, the National Reintegration

S/PV.9240

Council and the Commission for the Follow-up,
Promotion and Verification of the Implementation of
the Final Agreement, as well as the important measures
taken by the Government prioritizing the essential
elements of the Final Agreement, including the ethnic
and gender provisions and rural reform. A particularly
encouraging development is the Government’s initiative
to develop Colombia’s first national action plan for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). That can be
a fundamental tool in achieving gender equality and the
empowerment of women and girls, which contributes to
building peace in the country.
Secondly, we remain concerned about the
persisting threats and violence against civilians,
former combatants and political and community
leaders. That includes yesterday’s reports on finding
a bomb near the Vice-President’s house. Such acts
reaffirm the continued need to preserve any progress
made towards establishing peace and security in the
country. We believe that dedicated efforts, such as
further coordination between the national Government
and local authorities, as well as the increased number
of police personnel and public security forces working
in areas of reintegration and conflict, can minimize
the risks that threaten their safety and security. Those
developments must be sustained, as such risks threaten
the implementation of the Final Agreement in a
comprehensive manner.
Thirdly, the recent progress in the dialogue among
the parties concerned is a positive step that must be built
upon, as it should significantly contribute to reducing
intercommunal violence in Colombia, including
possible future ceasefire agreements. We recognize the
role that the guarantor and other supporter countries
have played in that regard, including their continued
efforts for supporting peace as negotiations continue.
We believe that the real guarantee of the success of such
talks requires the parties to fulfil their commitment to
implementing the key provisions of the Agreement,
including successful reintegration and disarmament
processes, security guarantees and an end to violence.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates reaffirms
its full support for the Government and the people
of Colombia in their efforts to achieve sustainable
peace, as well as for the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia. We welcome the expansion of its
mandate through resolution 2673 (2023), adopted today,
as that will further support efforts for the full and
comprehensive implementation of the Final Agreement.

23-0119815/19

S/PV.9240

Colombia

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome Colombia’s Vice-President
Francia Márquez Mina and Minister for Foreign Affairs
Álvaro Leyva Durán to today’s meeting. We thank the
Head of the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia, Carlos Ruiz Massieu, for his briefing on the
situation in the country and for his assessment. We also
thank Mr. Armando Wouriyu Valbuena.
At the request of the Colombian authorities, the
Security Council today unanimously extended the
monitoring functions of the Verification Mission to
two additional chapters of the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace — agrarian reform and ethnic issues. We hope
that the involvement of United Nations experts and
observers in those two areas as an independent party will
be an additional factor in ensuring the implementation
of the historic agreement of 2016 in good faith.
We welcome the decisive commitment of President
Petro Urrego’s Administration to the comprehensive
implementation of the Final Agreement. The new
Colombian authorities have done more in six months
for reconciliation in the country than the previous
Administration did in four years. We note the
progress in the implementation of agrarian reform,
the reintegration of former combatants and the
advancement of important legislative initiatives that
provide legal support to the peacebuilding processes.
The reactivation of the Commission for the FollowUp, Promotion and Verification of the Implementation
of the Final Agreement has been very significant in
coordinating the efforts to implement the Agreement.
But as Colombians themselves recognize, there is still
a lot of work to be done. Particular attention should be
paid to ensuring the security of human rights defenders
and former combatants of the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo, as
well as implementing crop-substitution programmes
and strengthening State authority at the local level.
Colombia’s relations with Venezuela have been
enormously important historically to ensuring peace
and sustainable socioeconomic development, and we
welcome the re-establishment of relations between those
neighbouring States, which was reinforced by President
Petro Urrego’s recent visit to Caracas. History has
shown the futility of previous Colombian Governments’
mistaken, short-sighted attempts to shut out and turn
away from their brothers in Venezuela. We are certain
that the normalization of Colombian-Venezuelan
16/19

11/01/2023

relations will help to regulate the migration situation
in the region, strengthen border controls and counter
transnational organized crime and drug trafficking.
The international community’s support and
endorsement will help Bogotá in its efforts to establish
peace with armed groups with the noble aim of
ending the violence and suffering among the civilian
population. We note the bilateral ceasefire with four
illegal armed groups. It will be important to implement
effective mechanisms for the bilateral monitoring and
verification of the truce and to ensure effective State
control in areas where the presence of the armed forces
is limited as well as where warring armed groups
are active.
An essential factor for peace in the country is the
achievement of agreements between Bogotá and the
Ejército de Liberación Nacional armed group. We are
following the development of contacts between the
sides and hope that they will be able to reach mutually
acceptable agreements that can put an end to the
decades-long armed confrontation. Should Colombia
turn to the Security Council for support, we are ready
to consider various options for international assistance
in arriving at a possible agreement. In the meantime,
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia
will continue to work in accordance with its mandate
to verify the implementation of various provisions of
the Final Agreement. As a permanent member of the
Security Council, Russia intends to continue to provide
comprehensive support to the Colombian peace process
and the Verification Mission under the leadership of
Mr. Ruiz Massieu.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Japan.
I thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Ruiz Massieu for his detailed briefing and
insights. I also thank Mr. Wouriyu Valbuena for his
inspiring testimony, based on his own experience. I
extend a particularly warm welcome to Vice-President
Francia Márquez Mina and Foreign Minister Álvaro
Leyva Durán and join other colleagues in expressing
our solidarity with the Vice-President, whose life was
threatened yesterday. I also thank the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) for its written advice.
Japan commends President Petro Urrego’s
commitment to the comprehensive implementation
of the 2016 Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict
and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace as a core
23-01198

11/01/2023

S/PV.9240

Colombia

element of his Government’s “total peace” policy.
That commitment is manifested in the joint request for
United Nations support by President Petro Urrego’s
Administration and the former Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo in
order to implement the rural reform and ethnic chapters
of the Agreement. In that context, Japan welcomes
the unanimous adoption of resolution 2673 (2023)
authorizing additional mandates for the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia on comprehensive
rural reform and ethnic perspectives. It enables the
Mission to further contribute to the consolidation of
the peace process. It is an excellent example of the
whole Security Council continuing to act in unison
to promote peace and security in Colombia. Japan
appreciates and continues to support the role of the
Special Representative and the Mission.

human rights defenders and community leaders. Japan
welcomes the Colombian Government’s efforts to
achieve total peace, including the recent ceasefire with
various armed groups that have not yet signed peace
agreements with the Government. We expect continued
efforts towards a permanent and comprehensive
ceasefire to achieve total peace. Japan fully intends to
contribute to discussing how the Security Council can
best support those efforts.

We strongly hope that the ethnic chapter
will be further implemented in a systematic and
institutionalized way. Japan welcomes the passage of
a bill to establish the Ministry of Equality and Equity
as a concrete milestone in realizing social justice for
all Colombians, including ethnic minorities, as well as
other vulnerable populations, such as women and young
people. We would like to congratulate Vice-President
Márquez Mina on her appointment as Minister of
Equality and Equity. She has been a great social leader
in defending the rights of ethnic minority groups, and
I hope her efforts will lead to even greater advances in
that regard.

Ms. Márquez Mina (Colombia) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to start by thanking the Security
Council, its permanent and elected members and
the international community for their constant and
resolute work in support of the initiatives and actions
that the Colombian State has undertaken in the area
of peace and security, which is clearly reflected in the
voting on resolution 2673 (2023), whose adoption we
just witnessed. This unanimous vote demonstrates the
Agreement’s importance for the world.

The Colombian Government has also taken concrete
steps to implement comprehensive rural reform. We
hope that the ongoing dialogues with rural populations
will accelerate tangible progress in ensuring equitable
access to land in rural areas. We echo the PBC’s
welcome of the progress made in promoting women’s
participation in the dialogues, which will help to
address the root causes of the conflict and create a
foundation for sustainable peace.
Japan acknowledges Colombia’s tireless efforts to
advance the peace process in an institutionalized and
inclusive manner. The core institutions and systems
of the process, such as the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace and the Truth Commission, have involved both
former combatants and victims in achieving progress.
We believe that such an institutionalized, inclusive
approach based on the rule of law will eventually
discourage violence and protect people in vulnerable
situations, such as women, minority ethnic groups,

In conclusion, as a new member of the Security
Council, Japan remains committed to supporting
Colombia’s efforts throughout its peacebuilding process.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I call on the Vice-President of Colombia.

Secondly, I would like to express my gratitude for
the expressions of solidarity in relation to the acts of
violence that we are still facing in our country and
which seek to undermine our efforts for peace, social
justice and the deepening of democracy in Colombia.
I welcome the Government of Japan’s assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council this month,
and I thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s
meeting. I salute Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, Head of
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia,
for all his efforts and support over the years to make
peace in Colombia a reality. I would also like to greet
the Secretary of the High-level Forum of Ethnic
Peoples of Colombia, Mr. Armando Wouriyu Valbuena,
representative of civil society, who is with us today and
with whom we have worked for many years for peace,
dignity and social justice for the ethnic peoples of
Colombia and for the country itself. I would especially
like to acknowledge the excellent work of the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, the Mission’s
presence on our territory and its actions in favour of
victims, civil society, ethnic peoples, women and the

23-0119817/19

S/PV.9240

Colombia

former combatants who signed the peace agreement.
The assistance from the international community
and the Security Council in political, technical and
financial matters has allowed the commitments of the
Agreement to be supported and promoted even at times
when political will was insufficient or scarce.
I address the Council as a daughter of ancestral
lands and as a spokesperson for the Colombian people
and representative of a Government that has come to
change the history of my country. Today the democratic
will to confront violence, social injustices and structural
inequalities is calling on our Government of Change
to craft policies for people that will make Colombia a
world Power in favour of life. We propose alternatives
that have deep roots in the earth because we come from
diverse places where the inclemency of war and the
politics of death have been the rule. Our ears and our
hearts are connected to those places, attentive to their
desperate cries of pain and to their forms of resistance
amid a crisis that continues to weigh on us.
That is why we support the initiatives of
the communities that clamour for humanitarian
agreements today and why we insist on the ceasefire
and all scenarios of dialogue and political agreement
that demand that we build a safe and peaceful country.
Our central commitment is to safeguarding the lives
of the entire Colombian population, to care for those
who have taken up the defence of human rights as their
main cause, and to protect communities caught in the
crossfire. But none of this is possible without respecting
those who have committed to and upheld their will
for peace without de-escalating armed conflict and
ensuring the dismantling of the criminal structures that
perpetuate violence.
Inequality in access to land for rural folk, as well
as their being abandoned in general, has been one of the
main drivers of the war in Colombia. Our Government
has set out a clear policy of democratization and
distribution of 3 million hectares of productive land
for the agricultural, agro-industrial and economic
development of the country, with a view to recovery
and the building of food sovereignty, in order to
stop children from continuing to die of hunger and
malnutrition in our country. These hectares will
serve to guarantee access to land for the displaced,
victims of discrimination, including people of African
descent, ethnic indigenous peoples, and the Raizal and
Palenquero communities, as well as women, youth and
rural folk in general. Our Government recognizes rural
18/19

11/01/2023

folk as holders of rights. With the support of Congress,
we have been able to introduce a draft bill — and
obtain approval in half of the debates on it — that seeks
to have rural folk recognized as entitled to special
constitutional protection.
With the support of President Petro Urrego, on
4 January 2023 we adopted the law creating the Ministry
of Equality and Equity. Through this new institutional
tool, we are now committed to reducing the gaps in
equality and equity gaps that exist in the country. Our
objective is to give special consideration for women in
all their diversity, children and youth, the LGBTIQ+
population, people of African descent, Black, Raizal,
Palanquero and other indigenous ethnic groups, Rom
people, rural folk, families and households living in
poverty and extreme poverty, people with disabilities,
the homeless, the elderly and migrant populations.
Many of these populations live in historically excluded
and marginalized territories, which are also the most
vulnerable to the impacts of the environmental crisis and
the humanitarian crisis caused by the armed conflict.
We are making structural changes that will serve as
a foundation for “total peace”, with the total peace being
understood as the implementation of the agreements
already signed between the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia and the Colombian State,
on the one hand, and as the progress made in dialogues
with different groups that continue to disrupt life in the
territories, on the other hand. Total peace will result
from closing the inequity and inequality gaps in which
our nation had been submerged.
We, the Vice-Presidency of the Republic
of Colombia, are in charge of coordinating
inter-institutional and intersectoral coordination for the
development and implementation of the commitments
derived from the ethnic chapter for peace. As a result of
this coordination mission, we have identified the lack
of clear indicators to measure in concrete terms the
progress achieved in the implementation of this chapter.
One of our main challenges is to design indices that will
help to develop actions towards historical reparation
for ethnic communities, including indigenous, Raizal
and Palenquero communities and people of African
descent, who have all disproportionately experienced
the effects of the armed conflict and structural racism
in Colombia.
The national Government, and in particular the
Vice-Presidency has been designing racial justice
23-01198

11/01/2023

S/PV.9240

Colombia

policies that make it possible to close the gaps in equity
and equality that the communities have experienced
since the re-establishment of their territorial ethnic
rights. We cannot overlook the fact that these
communities’ disproportionate treatment is the result
of racial-profiling policies in the context of the armed
conflict, which is also manifest in and reflected by
the drug policy designed to fight the drug-trafficking
phenomenon in Colombia.
A new drug policy should have a focus on racial
and gender justice that makes it possible to recognize
and overcome the differentiated treatment of the
populations and place respect for life, the elimination
of violence against women, the strengthening of
their economic autonomy and empowerment of their
political participation at the centre of efforts to build
peace and security. On this point, we urge the General
Assembly to support the Colombian Government in
finding a way forward, a new approach that will allow
these peoples, communities, youth and women, in all
their diversity, to live in peace and dignity, and not to
live in fear in the territories.
We ask the United Nations to open its doors
to sincere dialogue, a new path that allows us to
structurally resolve the systematic violation of human
rights in the country. I call for progress not only in
political dialogue, but also in terms of urban peace
and equality, bringing about structural advances for
Colombian society.
Armed violence has affected our entire society.
Nearly 10 million people, one fifth of the current
population, are direct victims of the war. In every
home in my country there are wounds and scars from
what happened. Fear, hatred and revenge have been
passed down from generation to generation. Ethnic
peoples, rural communities, politics, institutions, arts
and culture have been weaned by the experience of
violence, provoked or suffered.

That is an undeniable reality that led us to
understand that this total war required a broad vision
of peace, which in our Government we have called total
peace. This total peace seeks to overcome fragmentary
peace by recognizing the achievements and progress of
previous agreements, including the peace agreement.
Total peace is the means that will allow us to reach
historically excluded and marginalized territories in
order to develop actions for social justice, material
equality — actions that allow us to care for the territory
as a living space and to combat climate change. Our
ability to advance total peace will depend on our
commitment to equality, equity, social justice, gender
justice and, in general, the entrenching of democracy.
We thank the Security Council for unanimously
extending the mandate of the Verification Mission
on rural reform and the ethnic chapter, which is
an international endorsement of our commitment.
However, we urge the United Nations to continue
supporting the Government’s dialogue efforts with
other actors in order to achieve total peace.
Finally, I would like to propose and invite the
Council to hold a meeting in Colombia in order to
support peace from the territories and to learn on the
ground about the challenges we face on a daily basis. It is
those challenges that encourage us to continue working
for the real, lasting and sustainable peace that will lead
all Colombians to live with love and joy. Together we
will make dignity a habit, because we deserve to live
a good life, and we wish to make Colombia a global
leader of life.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 4.55 p.m.

23-0119819/19
