United Nations

S/PV.6080

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6080th meeting
Monday, 9 February 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Takasu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Kafando
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Ms. Villalobos
Mr. Skračić
Mr. Lacroix
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Heller
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. İlkin
Mr. Rugunda
Ms. Pierce
Ms. Rice
Mr. Le Luong Minh

Agenda
The situation in Sierra Leone
First report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (S/2009/59)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-23183 (E)

*0923183*

S/PV.6080

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Sierra Leone
First report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Sierra Leone (S/2009/59)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Sierra Leone, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Touray
(Sierra Leone) took a seat at the Council table.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the course of the Council’s
prior consultations, I shall take it that the Security
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of
its procedural rules of procedure to Mr. Michael von
der Schulenburg of Germany, Executive Representative
of the Secretary-General for the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. von der Schulenburg to take a seat at
the Council table.
In accordance with the understanding also
reached in the course of the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Council agrees to
extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure to His Excellency Mr. Frank Majoor,
Chairman of the Sierra Leone configuration of the of
the Netherlands.
It is so decided.
I invite Ambassador Majoor to take a seat at the
Council table.

2

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/59, which contains the First Report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone. At
this meeting, the Security Council will hear briefings
by Mr. Michael von der Schulenburg, Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General for the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra
Leone, and Ambassador Frank Majoor, Chairman of
the Sierra Leone configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission.
I now give the floor to Mr. Michael von der
Schulenburg.
Mr. von der Schulenburg: Mr. President, I am
grateful for the opportunity to present to you the First
Report of the Secretary-General on the recently
established United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Sierra Leone (S/2009/59). As we meet here
today, Sierra Leone is entering its eighth year of peace.
It was in January 2002 that the then President Ahmad
Tejan Kabbah declared an end to the 11 years of an
often brutal war.
Since then, Sierra Leone has made great strides.
Today, there are no longer any armed opposition
groups in Sierra Leone and the use of arms in political
or ethnic disputes has almost completely disappeared.
Over the last seven years, we have seen a number of
democratic elections and the peaceful transition from
one elected Government to another. There have also
been two important and peaceful local Government
elections and a number of by-elections since 2004, the
most recent election having taken place in July of last
year. Also
promising
are
the
signs
that
non-governmental associations are increasingly
engaging in free and fair elections to select or replace
their leaders.
Sierra Leone has also made considerable progress
in rebuilding key national institutions. The
performance of the National Electoral Commission and
the Sierra Leone Police during the recent elections has
been very professional. Sierra Leone now has a
working Human Rights Commission and the first steps
have been taken towards a decentralization of power
towards the provinces.

09-23183

S/PV.6080

Although exact statistics are hard to come by,
there is a general agreement among experts that
poverty levels in Sierra Leone have dropped since the
year 2003. Furthermore, a recent health survey would
indicate that child mortality rates have declined
considerably, providing an example of how focused
Government intervention, together with decisive
support from international development partners, can
produce results.
Despite these encouraging achievements, much
remains to be done, and Sierra Leone’s young
democracy continues to face daunting challenges.
Sierra Leone remains one of the poorest countries in
the world and is at the bottom of Human Development
Index created by the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP). Despite all the progress that has
been made, many Sierra Leoneans do not yet fully
benefit from any peace dividend; that is especially the
case for many rural poor and the country’s youth.
Almost a year and a half into the tenure of the
new Government, expectations among many Sierra
Leoneans remain high that the new Government will
deliver on the promises it made during the elections.
For the Government, it is now very important not to
lose momentum, to stay the course and implement the
many reforms and plans it has committed itself to put
into place. The President’s Agenda for Change
provides an excellent policy document to lead and
focus the work of the Government over the coming
years.
In addition, we, the international development
partners for Sierra Leone, should stay the course and
fulfil our commitments, even in the difficult times of a
global financial crisis. In a region that is beset with
social, political and economic problems, it is important
that we all work together with the Government to make
Sierra Leone a success story and turn it into a beacon
for democracy, stability and economic progress. That
job has not yet been done; it will require continued
Government efforts and sustained international
cooperation.
Many donors have come to the support of Sierra
Leone. In addition to international organizations, such
as the United Nations family, the World Bank, the
International Monetary Fund and the African
Development Bank, I would like to applaud in
particular the sustained support that Sierra Leone has
been receiving over the years from the British

09-23183

Government and the European Commission, as well as
from its regional partners, in particular Nigeria. In
addition, other countries such as China, Ireland,
Germany, the United States, Japan and Italy have
proven valuable and reliable partners to Sierra Leone. I
would also like to welcome Sweden, Norway, the
Netherlands and India — States that have now joined
in supporting Sierra Leone. Nonetheless, we will have
to continue making all efforts to even further expand
the donor base for the country.
Coming out of a conflict and trying to consolidate
peace will never be an easy task, and as we travel down
the road towards greater stability and economic
progress, we must be fully aware of the risks that lie
ahead. Only then can we deal with them effectively.
Therefore, I believe it is of the utmost importance that
President Koroma in his Agenda for Change has clearly
reiterated his Government’s determination to combat
the three most imminent threats on Sierra Leone’s road
to peace and prosperity — corruption, illicit drug
trafficking and youth unemployment.
Let me be more specific. The Government has
made considerable progress on stamping out
corruption. The newly structured Anti-Corruption
Commission has made a credible start, and a recently
approved anti-corruption law provides the legal basis
for decisive action. However, old habits die slowly, and
time and perseverance are required for them to be
overcome. However, I remain confident that the
Government is determined to ensure that any real or
perceived administrative mismanagement or corruption
will not derail the strong commitments it has made to
the people of Sierra Leone and its international
development partners to deal with the problem.
The United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL) and the United
Nations country team stand ready to continue to work
with of the Anti-Corruption Commission. In this
context, I also welcome the work of the UNDP together
with other development partners in supporting the
Government’s civil service reforms with the aim of
creating a more transparent and effective Government. I
also welcome the recently established presidential
committee to review all mining contracts of the country,
which were a source of so much conflict in the past.
With respect to illicit drugs, the trafficking of
illicit drugs from Latin America through West Africa en
route to European markets has created immense

3

S/PV.6080

political and socio-economic challenges in large parts
of the subregion. This threat has now reached the
shores of Sierra Leone. Thankfully, Sierra Leone is still
in the prevention stage; illicit drugs have not yet
penetrated its society and undermined its institutions.
The fight against illicit drug trafficking can be won, and
the decisive actions taken by President Koroma
following the seizure of the plane loaded with illicit
drugs in July of last year are particularly commendable.
The financial and logistical power of
international drug cartels greatly surpasses the
resources that are available to countries such as Sierra
Leone; the street value of the recently seized cocaine is
estimated to exceed the Government’s entire budget for
this year. Sierra Leone will therefore need strong and
reliable international support. In this context, I would
like to thank the British Government, the United States
as well as the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime for their prompt action in support of Sierra
Leone’s law enforcement services. I would also like to
thank the Netherlands for considering funding a
sizeable assistance programme to strengthen Sierra
Leone’s law enforcement agencies. Further, I welcome
plans by Venezuela and Colombia to strengthen their
cooperation with law enforcement authorities in West
Africa and stand ready to facilitate any cooperation
that they would also like to extend to Sierra Leone.
With regard to youth unemployment, one of the
most disheartening aspects of many post-conflict
societies is that young people, instead of being a
country’s most productive resource and a symbol of its
future, may indeed be perceived as a potential threat to
peace and stability. We estimate that in Sierra Leone
approximately 1 million young people are either
underemployed or simply unemployed. Despite the
magnitude of the problem, attempts to find solutions to
youth unemployment have remained modest.
In order to deal with that problem, the
Government is in the process of setting up a National
Youth Commission. It is now important that that be
followed up with a number of concrete programmes
designed to make a difference in the lives of tens of
thousands of young men and women. All of this will
require a focused and well coordinated approach on the
part of the Government and its international
development partners.
Allow me to add a few words on our own behalf.
As required by the Council, we have now established a

4

new United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Sierra Leone. The essential groundwork has been laid,
but more work still needs to be done if the Office is
become fully functional.
We see the new United Nations Office as a vehicle
for the partnership between the United Nations —
including the Peacebuilding Commission and, indeed,
the Security Council — and the democratically elected
Government of Sierra Leone. It will be our primary
task to assist the country and its Government through
the difficult process of consolidating peace.
In that spirit, we see ourselves at the forefront of
the development and testing of a new and, above all,
practical concept of effective peacebuilding. Compared
with the previous mission, our new Office is much
smaller but, at the same time, much more substantive,
enabling us to deal professionally with the many
important mandates that the Council has given us.
More important, we have been able to develop a
stronger, integrated approach combining the political
mandate given to UNIPSIL with the development and
humanitarian mandates given to our sister United
Nations agencies.
The result of that new approach is the Joint
Vision of the United Nations Family for Sierra Leone,
a document that has recently received the endorsement
of the Peacebuilding Commission. Let me take this
opportunity to thank all my colleagues in the United
Nations country team for their exceptional readiness to
work together for the good of Sierra Leone, as well as
for their great spirit of mutual support.
Peacebuilding in Sierra Leone needs sustained
political and financial support from the international
community. Here, we will continue to rely on the vital
support that we have received from the Peacebuilding
Commission. In particular, the personal commitment,
support and leadership that His Excellency
Ambassador Frank Majoor has extended to the United
Nations family, my team and myself over the critical
period of the transition from a peacekeeping to a
peacebuilding mission is highly appreciated.
We intend to further strengthen this important
relationship between the Peacebuilding Commission in
New York and the Peacebuilding Office in Freetown.
Ambassador Majoor and I have been discussing the
possibility of holding, together with the Government, a
special session of the Peacebuilding Commission either
here in New York or in Freetown to rally international

09-23183

S/PV.6080

support behind the President’s Agenda for Change and
the United Nations Joint Vision.

the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL) in Freetown.

Peacebuilding will not be achieved overnight.
There will be no clear benchmarks to tell us if and
when we have succeeded. We need patience, and we
need to avoid succumbing to undue rush.
Peacebuilding must be nurtured, and that requires time.

On 15 December, the Commission and the
Government of Sierra Leone undertook a review of the
implementation of the Peacebuilding Cooperation
Framework. Drawing on a comprehensive progress
report prepared with the support of UNIPSIL and the
Peacebuilding Support Office, the review meeting
resulted in concrete recommendations for all relevant
stakeholders, including the Security Council.

At the same time, however, peacebuilding brings
with it a sense of urgency. After a conflict,
expectations are high and many of the underlying
problems that once led to the civil conflict need to be
urgently addressed. Together with the Government, we
will therefore have to find the right balance between
patience and perseverance, on the one hand, and the
need to act urgently, on the other. Finding the right
balance may largely determine our success in
peacebuilding.
Finally, let me reassure members of the
commitment and determination of all my United
Nations colleagues in UNIPSIL and our sister agencies
to make peacebuilding in Sierra Leone a success. As
the first of the new type of fully integrated United
Nations peacebuilding offices, we all hope that, with
the Council’s help, we will also be able to make Sierra
Leone an example for other countries that may choose
a similar path out of conflict.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for the confidence invested in me and to thank
Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, and Kamal Dervis, United Nations Development
Programme Administrator, for their support. In addition,
I wish to thank the Government of Sierra Leone and, in
particular, President Koroma for the warm and cordial
welcome that I have received in their country.
The President: I thank Mr. von den Schulenburg
for his very comprehensive briefing. We are delighted
to have him here this morning.
I now give the floor to Mr. Majoor.
Mr. Majoor (Netherlands): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to participate in
today’s meeting on Sierra Leone in my capacity as
Chair of the Sierra Leone country-specific
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission. I very
much welcome this opportunity to brief the Council on
the activities of the Peacebuilding Commission in
partnership with the Government of Sierra Leone and

09-23183

As noted in the review meeting, significant
progress has been made in further consolidating peace
in Sierra Leone. However, impressive achievements in
the areas of peace and security have not yet resulted in
concrete peace dividends for the population. The
country continues to face difficult socio-economic
challenges, and the legacies of the decade-long civil
war remain largely unaddressed.
Youth unemployment and marginalization
represent one of the greatest threats to Sierra Leone’s
stability. The lack of progress in that area is
particularly worrying in light of the increased use of
Sierra Leone as a transit point for drug trafficking. An
indolent youth population with few opportunities for
advancement and gainful employment is vulnerable to
becoming foot soldiers for and victims of a drug
culture. Furthermore, the global food and financial
crises risk undermining the Government’s efforts to
meet the high expectations of the population and to
provide the much-awaited peace dividends.
The Government of Sierra Leone is aware of
those challenges and emerging threats and is taking
steps to address them. The President’s Agenda for
Change, which was welcomed by the Peacebuilding
Commission at its review meeting, represents a
comprehensive policy statement and a road map for
reform. It also establishes key priorities and assistance
modalities for the country.
Having charted a clear path towards reform, the
Government must now show the resolve to act and
deliver on its promises. In order to do so, it will need
sustained support from its national and international
partners. The Peacebuilding Commission has called on
all stakeholders to rally behind the priorities and
objectives of the President’s Agenda for Change and to
provide adequate support for its implementation.

5

S/PV.6080

The United Nations has played and must continue
to play an important role in supporting Sierra Leone’s
efforts for peace consolidation. The creation of the first
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra
Leone is a groundbreaking innovation for the United
Nations system. Under the leadership of Mr. Michael
von der Schulenburg, Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General, the United Nations family in Sierra
Leone is taking critical steps in creating a truly
integrated vision and approach with regard to
peacebuilding. The Joint Vision for the United Nations
Family in Sierra Leone, which was welcomed by the
Peacebuilding Commission, is a critical achievement in
its own right and must be well resourced and
implemented. In order to do so effectively, UNIPSIL
must be fully staffed and work in close partnership
with other bilateral and multilateral partners. Support
from the United Nations is especially needed in the
areas of youth employment and empowerment,
addressing drug trafficking and organized crime and
further good governance reforms, including support for
the constitutional review process and the work of the
Anti-Corruption Commission.
In the current global financial environment, there
may be pressures to shift limited resources from a
relatively stable country such as Sierra Leone to other
regions in the world where urgent crises occur.
However, we must bear in mind that the peace
consolidation agenda in Sierra Leone is not yet
finished. There is a continuing need to maintain, and
even expand, existing levels of donor support.
Otherwise, we risk reversing the gains made to date
and impacting not only the stability of Sierra Leone but
the whole subregion. As a result, the Peacebuilding
Commission will redouble its efforts to mobilize
additional resources for peacebuilding in Sierra Leone,
especially through broadening the donor base and
strengthening partnerships with the private sector. We
are considering ways to ensure that in the months
ahead, as Mr. von der Schulenburg indicated.
In conclusion, allow me to commend the
Government of Sierra Leone and all the national
stakeholders for their constructive engagement with the
Peacebuilding Commission. Let me also use this
occasion to thank UNIPSIL for assisting the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Government of
Sierra Leone in that regard. The integrated structure of
UNIPSIL and the strategic leadership by the Executive
Representative will continue to be extraordinarily

6

important for effective United Nations support of
peacebuilding in Sierra Leone.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sierra Leone.
Mr. Touray (Sierra Leone): Let me start by
registering my delegation’s sincere appreciation, Sir, for
your having organized this debate, which in our view is
a clear manifestation of the Council’s commitment to
monitoring and sustaining the momentum of the
peacebuilding efforts in Sierra Leone. My warmest
felicitations go to you on your assumption of the
presidency for the month of February 2009. It is a
pleasant coincidence to see you directing the affairs of
the Council on a topic of this nature, given that you
were the immediate outgoing Chair of the
Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission. I assure you of my delegation’s fullest
support and cooperation during your tenure.
I would like to pay special tribute to the
Permanent Representative of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands to the United Nations, Ambassador Frank
Majoor, and his dedicated team for their untiring
efforts and sustained commitment to implementing the
Sierra Leone Peacebuilding Cooperation Framework,
particularly, during the two challenging formative
years of the Peacebuilding Commission’s engagement
with Sierra Leone.
My appreciation also goes to the SecretaryGeneral for his very comprehensive report and
observations on the implementation of the mandate of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL), contained in document
S/2009/59.
I also wish to thank the Executive Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Michael von der
Schulenburg, for the statement he has just delivered
and to re-echo his call for a steady hand, patience and
the need to avoid an undue rush, as peacebuilding
needs to be nurtured and needs time. Sierra Leone is
entering its eighth year of peace and stability and, by
any yardstick, has been a success story of United
Nations peacebuilding efforts. Despite that, there are
still serious challenges to grapple with. We cannot
afford to sacrifice the gains we have scored over the
last eight years of peace in Sierra Leone out of inertia
and self-satisfaction.

09-23183

S/PV.6080

The adoption of Security Council resolution 1829
(2008) establishing UNIPSIL was another significant
step in the United Nations peacebuilding engagement
in Sierra Leone. UNIPSIL is effectively the fourthgeneration phase of United Nations presence in Sierra
Leone, which is a clear manifestation of the
Government’s cooperation and determination to make
meaningful change and move the country forward from
its dark recent past.
The second biannual review of progress in the
implementation of the Cooperation Framework was
conducted on 15 December 2008, a few months after
the operationalization of the integrated peacebuilding
mission, UNIPSIL, in October. That review
acknowledged the strides Sierra Leone has made since
the end of the war in 2002. We have witnessed two
highly acclaimed democratic electoral processes at both
the national and local government levels, unparalleled
in any post-conflict setting. Except for the all
important issue of reparations, other key aspects of the
Truth and Reconciliation Commission recommendations
are being implemented. The Human Rights
Commission is fully operational in all four provincial
headquarters, and its first report has been presented to
parliament for consideration. The most important phase
of the constitutional review process, namely,
identifying the pitfalls and shortcomings of the 1991
constitution, has been completed, and steps are under
way for the next stage of national consultation and
possible amendments. However, we must not forget that
addressing the political concerns of the populace and
their basic socio-economic needs are inextricably
linked and need to go hand in hand.
A number of gender-related laws have been
enacted to address problems of gender-based violence
and exclusions or disparities based on gender. The
judiciary, police and military have all undergone
significant reforms, which are currently paying
beneficial dividends. Security and stability in the
country have improved considerably. The climate is
now conducive to investment, both in terms of the
security situation and the improved conditions for
doing business in the country. Stringent laws have been
enacted to tackle corruption and the emerging threat of
narcotics and drug trafficking in the subregion. More
importantly, in addition to the important prosecutorial
independence of the Anti-Corruption Commission, the
Commission has demonstrated sufficient commitment

09-23183

and determination in the ongoing implementation of
the National Anti-Corruption Strategy.
We have not been alone in the process. Without
partnership with the United Nations, our multilateral
and bilateral partners, including the international
financial institutions, such progress would not have
been achieved.
Despite the progress made thus far, the challenges
facing the Government are daunting. Though internal
revenue generation is improving, the Government’s
capacity to address the commitments contained in the
Framework, including tackling other programmes
aimed at achieving internationally agreed development
goals and the Millennium Development Goals, remains
grossly inadequate. The much-needed budget support
to Government is waning. Such a situation exacerbates
the risk of heightening the threats associated with
increasing youth unemployment and the new wave of
drug trafficking in the subregion.
With the recent developments in the neighbouring
sister countries and the members of the Mano River
Union, security in the subregion is a cause for concern.
More than ever, Sierra Leone, like other members of
the Union, requires greater international attention if the
Mano River basin is to attain peace, security and
stability, as well as meaningful growth and
development. For our part, His Excellency President
Ernest Bai Koroma has, through his Agenda for
Change, clearly and succinctly articulated his strategic
vision for turning the country around. Furthermore, the
Government, together with the Peacebuilding
Commission, also endorses the supporting role of
UNIPSIL on the ground and of the Joint Vision of the
United Nations Family for Sierra Leone, formulated
under the leadership of the Executive Representative of
the Secretary-General.
My
delegation
urges
the
Peacebuilding
Commission and all international and bilateral partners,
including our traditional and non-traditional donors, to
rally support behind the Agenda for Change and the
United Nations Joint Vision. The Government is fully
cognizant of the fact that the responsibility for
consolidating the peace and bailing our people out of
poverty lies primarily with it. Indeed, it is committed
to the full implementation of the Peacebuilding
Cooperation Framework as a necessary requirement for
the promotion of peace, stability and sustainable
development in the country, as well as the attainment

7

S/PV.6080

of the internationally agreed development goals,
including the Millennium Development Goals.
The biannual review of the Peacebuilding
Commission in December 2008 reaffirmed the need for
all parties — the Government of Sierra Leone, the
Peacebuilding Commission, the United Nations,
bilateral and multilateral partners and other relevant
stakeholders — to remain focused and as dedicated as
ever and to be promptly forthcoming in addressing
their respective commitments.
I should like to conclude by noting that, building
on the meaningful gains already achieved, it is the
avowed pledge of the Government of Sierra Leone to
continue to work in collaboration with all our
development partners to sustain the momentum by
moving forward the Agenda for Change, together with
the Joint Vision of the United Nations Family. My
Government supports the holding of the proposed
special session of the Peacebuilding Commission,
either in Freetown or in New York, in order to rally
international support for the Agenda for Change and
the United Nations Joint Vision.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke
in Arabic): Since this is the first time that I am
speaking in an open debate under your leadership,
Mr. President, I am pleased to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. I am fully confident that you will guide our
work towards the best possible results.
I would like to commend the excellent manner in
which Ambassador Ripert, Permanent Representative
of France, and the delegation of France conducted the
work of the Council during the month of January. I
should also like to extend my thanks to Mr. Michael
von der Schulenburg, Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his comprehensive briefing on
the situation in Sierra Leone and the activities of
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL). I should also like to thank
Ambassador Frank Majoor, Permanent Representative
of the Netherlands and Chairman of the Sierra Leone
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, and
Ambassador Shekou Touray, Permanent Representative
of Sierra Leone, for their valuable contributions.
The report of the Secretary-General under
consideration today (S/2009/59) and the briefing given
by Mr. von der Schulenburg have clearly shown that
Sierra Leone is on the verge of becoming the latest

8

success story from West Africa. Great achievements
have been made in all areas and the political and
security situation seems to be stable in general. This
progress encourages the ongoing joint efforts of the
United Nations and the Government of Sierra Leone to
build and promote peace and establish stable and
democratic State institutions with a view to
overcoming the impact of civil strife and conflict and
to beginning the process of development and the
consolidation of a peaceful society throughout Sierra
Leone.
We are well aware that the Government still faces
many challenges despite the great achievements
accomplished to date. We also know that a climate of
mistrust and suspicion still prevails between the two
principal political parties in Sierra Leone. However,
the cordial interaction that is developing between those
parties, with the encouragement of UNIPSIL, is a
source of deep satisfaction and optimism for us.
Despite the encouraging economic performance
of Sierra Leone in 2008, certain issues are a cause for
concern, such declining export revenues and
remittances from abroad, as well as the possible
reduction of official development assistance to Sierra
Leone in 2009 and its potential adverse impact on
financing for the social sector. We therefore support the
proposal to hold a special session of the Peacebuilding
Commission to consider stepping up donations and
assistance through voluntary contributions to Sierra
Leone.
Libya considers the Agenda for Change of
President Koroma and the Joint Vision of the United
Nations Family for Sierra Leone to be two very
important instruments for accelerating the peacebuilding
process. President Koroma’s Agenda focuses on
combining economic growth and human resource
development. It determines priorities and emphasizes
that the continued corruption, escalating illegal drug
trafficking and youth unemployment are the principal
threats to peace and stability in Sierra Leone. We agree
with President Koroma in this regard.
The Joint Vision of the United Nations Family in
Sierra Leone aims to assist the Government in
consolidating peace. It identifies four principal
programmatic priorities: the economic integration of
rural areas in Sierra Leone, the engagement of
unemployed youth, equitable access to health care, and
the enhancement of good governance. We hope that

09-23183

S/PV.6080

United Nations bodies and donors will provide
generous support to implement both the Agenda for
Change and the Joint Vision.
The use and exploitation of Sierra Leone as a
transit area for illicit drug trafficking and the presence
of organized crime are problems of concern and must
be confronted as priority matters before they escalate
and create an even more dangerous situation. There is
no doubt that promoting security and cooperation with
the countries of the region will help us to better
address those two problems, but it will also require the
support of UNIPSIL and donors to achieve those goals.
In that connection, we commend the initiative of
UNIPSIL in developing an action plan to address illicit
drug trafficking and organized crime in Sierra Leone,
based on the Regional Action Plan adopted in Cape
Verde.
Libya agrees with the report of the SecretaryGeneral that one of the cornerstones of post-conflict
peacebuilding is dealing with the tragedies and
injustices of the civil war. My delegation therefore
believes that it is important to implement the priorities
and recommendations of the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission and to implement a reparations
programme for victims of the civil war as soon as
possible. Libya calls upon donors to provide funding
for the proposed multi-donor trust fund for that
purpose. We also believe that the constitutional review
process must occur quickly and we welcome the
readiness of UNIPSIL to provide technical and
advisory assistance for that process.
Libya, within its capacities, has provided
assistance to the Government of Sierra Leone in the
form of grants and investment projects and has urged
the financial institutions of which it is a member also
to provide assistance to that end. My country intends to
continue its assistance.
In conclusion, we commend the efforts of
UNIPSIL, in particular in calling upon the Sierra
Leone parties to establish dialogue and enhance
national cohesion and unity, in promoting the
capacities of civil society, and in providing
parliamentary assistance through support for capacitybuilding in addressing illicit drug trafficking and
human rights. We also commend the efforts of the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding
Fund for their support to the Government of Sierra
Leone in the basic areas of peacebuilding.

09-23183

Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I join my Libyan
colleague in congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of February.
Uganda would like to thank Mr. Michael von der
Schulenburg, Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone
(UNIPSIL); the Permanent Representative of the
Netherlands, Ambassador Frank Majoor, in his capacity
as Chairman of the country-specific configuration on
Sierra Leone of the Peacebuilding Commission; and
our colleague the Permanent Representative of Sierra
Leone, Ambassador Shekou Touray, for their
statements to the Council.
We are pleased to note that the reports provide a
positive assessment of the political and economic
situation in Sierra Leone and the role of UNIPSIL
through the Joint Vision of the United Nations Family
for Sierra Leone. In particular, we commend the
Government and the people of Sierra Leone on the
ongoing consolidation of stability and security in
Sierra Leone following the peaceful transfer of power
to President Ernest Bai Koroma through the general
elections of 2007, as well as on their successfully
holding local elections in July 2008.
It is encouraging to further note that Sierra Leone
was able to achieve a gross domestic product (GDP)
growth rate of 6 per cent in 2008, underpinned by the
expansion of the agricultural, construction and service
sectors, although the rate of growth is slightly lower
than the 7 per cent that was attained earlier. That is
significant for a country that experienced a GDP
decline of 17.5 per cent in 1997. As pointed out in the
report, the country still faces a number of
socio-economic challenges that require a holistic
approach. President Koroma’s Agenda for Change
significantly lays out the basic policies and key
priorities of the Government for the next three years in
such critical areas as economic growth, delivery of
social services and infrastructure development.
Uganda appreciates the commitment of the
Government and the development partners to raise
$1.2 billion out of the total $2.1 billion required in the
medium term to achieve the objectives of the
President’s Agenda for Change. We note that there is a
funding gap of $1 billion to ensure the full
implementation of the Agenda.

9

S/PV.6080

Given the critical importance of having sufficient
funding for this programme, my delegation would like
to know what progress has been made so far with
regard to the establishment of the multi-donor trust
fund and the mobilization of resources to be
administered by the United Nations Development
Programme. We call upon UNIPSIL to work with all
stakeholders to mobilize the requisite funds.
In spite of the current global financial and
economic crisis, we request the development partners
to ensure timely disbursement of the pledged funds,
which are critical to the sustainability of the
peacebuilding efforts. It is also a responsibility shared
between the Government and the development partners
to ensure that the funds are utilized on core activities
and projects that spur economic growth, create
employment opportunities and improve the standard of
living of the people of Sierra Leone.
The implementation of the decentralization and
devolution of authority process needs to be expedited
because it will enhance service delivery. We urge the
Government of Sierra Leone and UNIPSIL to continue
strengthening the capacity of national institutions to
address such challenges as the fight against corruption
and the fight against the increasing cases of drug and
human trafficking, as well as piracy.
In conclusion, peacebuilding is a fundamental
component of the three pillars which form the mandate
of the United Nations: peace and security, development
and human rights. It requires reinforcing contributions
from a wide range of sectors and a wide range of
actors. The progress made so far in Sierra Leone is a
good example of what can be achieved through an
integrated and collaborative approach among the
Government, United Nations agencies and the
development partners.
Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): As this is the
first open meeting of the Council in February, I join
others in extending to you, Sir, and the Japanese
delegation our congratulations on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for this month.
I would also like to extend to Ambassador Ripert
and the French delegation our sincere appreciation for
their effective leadership of the work of the Council
last month.
I thank the Secretary-General for his first report on
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in

10

Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL). I also thank Michael von der
Schulenburg, head of the Office, for his detailed
presentation of the report. I further thank Ambassador
Frank Majoor of the Netherlands for his statement in his
capacity as the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission’s
country-specific configuration on Sierra Leone.
I welcome Ambassador Shekou Touray of Sierra
Leone and thank him for his statement.
My delegation notes with pleasure that Sierra
Leone continues to achieve progress in implementing
its agenda for peace consolidation and socio-economic
reconstruction, partially reflected in its overall stable
political and security situation, its enhanced dialogue
with countries of the Mano River Union aimed at
resolving issues of mutual interest, its successful
conduct of the local council polls in July 2008, and the
determination of its Government to tackle the country’s
challenges in a peaceful manner. We also note with
satisfaction the continued cooperation between Sierra
Leone and the United Nations country team, the
Peacebuilding Commission and other development
partners to strengthen areas of focus and principles of
national ownership, mutual accountability and
sustained engagement, as contained in the
Peacebuilding Cooperation Framework and the Joint
Vision of the United Nations Family for Sierra Leone.
On another note, while we realize that the
situation remains of concern, we commend the
Government for its determination and initial success in
the fight against corruption. At the same time, we share
the Secretary-General’s concerns about the unresolved
political tension along ethnic and regional lines; the
emerging threat of piracy, illicit drug trafficking and
illegal trade in natural resources; the marginalization
and disempowerment of rural and certain urban
communities; the high numbers of unemployed youth;
as well as poor economic and social conditions
exacerbated by the rising price of food and fuel, which,
in our assessment, if not carefully managed have the
potential of derailing the peace consolidation process.
We commend the efforts of UNIPSIL in taking
over the responsibilities of the United Nations
Integrated Office in Sierra Leone as planned, and in
proceeding with its new mandate stipulated in Security
Council resolution 1829 (2008). At this critical
juncture of peacebuilding in Sierra Leone, we believe
that coordination among United Nations agencies,
regional organizations and international donors

09-23183

S/PV.6080

remains essential so as to ensure maximal use of
resources, avoid duplication of work and help serve the
best interests of Sierra Leone in each particular phase
of development.
Finally, let me reaffirm that Viet Nam will
continue to support the efforts of Sierra Leone to
assume leadership and achieve more concrete progress
in sustaining peace and stability, addressing the root
causes
of
the
conflict,
promoting
national
reconciliation and unity, accelerating progress towards
achieving the Millennium Development Goals, and
strengthening its international integration process. We
call upon the United Nations, the Peacebuilding
Commission, the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States and the
international community at large to continue to assist
the Government of Sierra Leone in these efforts.
Mr. İlkin (Turkey): At the outset, I would like to
thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2009/59),
introduced
by
his
Executive
Representative,
Mr. Michael von der Schulenburg, and our two
colleagues, Ambassadors Frank Majoor and Shekou
Touray, for their presentations. It is good to see
Mr. Von der Schulenburg again in New York.
Over the past two decades, African nations have
seen their fair share of political turmoil, armed conflict
and economic difficulties. Sierra Leone was certainly
no exception, but today Sierra Leone stands as a
shining example of how nations can change their
destiny and take charge of their future. Turkey
welcomes the fact that there is now sustained peace
and stability where, not long ago, there was conflict
and strife. We are indeed encouraged by the positive
developments reflected in the Secretary-General’s
report. We applaud the people of Sierra Leone for
having the courage, wisdom and vision to move
beyond past grievances.
To be sure, Sierra Leone still also faces important
challenges, and there is much work to be done. The
task of concurrently fighting corruption, drug
trafficking and youth unemployment cannot be taken
lightly, but with the support of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone
(UNIPSIL) and the international community, we
believe that the Agenda for Change in Sierra Leone can
be successful. What we are witnessing in Sierra Leone
is the fact that multilateralism does indeed work and
that the United Nations and the international

09-23183

community can bring about meaningful change for the
better, even in the most difficult circumstances.
There is no doubt that the people of Sierra Leone
deserve the most credit for achieving peace and
stability, but we must also congratulate the United
Nations and all its agencies, as well as Sierra Leone’s
international partners, on providing the support that has
been crucial to the success we observe today. In
moving forward, we have every confidence that the
Executive Representative and UNIPSIL will contribute
substantially to the further consolidation of peace,
reconciliation and prosperity in Sierra Leone.
Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
At the outset, allow me to thank you, Sir, for calling
for this debate on the situation in Sierra Leone, and
Mr. Michael von der Schulenberg and Ambassador
Frank Majoor for their very comprehensive statements.
We also welcome the presence here of our new
colleague from Sierra Leone, Ambassador Shekou
Touray, whose statement we greatly appreciated.
In considering the prevailing situation in Sierra
Leone and the information provided in the various
briefings, we have no doubt that strenuous efforts have
been made and that tangible progress has been
achieved towards that country’s recovery. We welcome
first the positive evolution in the political and security
situations in Sierra Leone, which have been marked not
only by the commitment of the actors to engaging in
constructive relations, but also by the evident resolve
of the Government of Sierra Leone to promote true
national reconciliation and ensure solid political and
economic governance. The holding of peaceful and
transparent local elections in July 2008 further
confirmed that vision and, above all, the country’s
determination to build genuine peace and security.
In that context, we cannot but welcome the
establishment in October 2008 of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone,
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1829 (2008),
and its dynamic efforts, along with all other
stakeholders, to support the peacebuilding efforts of
the Government of Sierra Leone.
Nevertheless, there are still many challenges to
overcome, in particular with regard to the vulnerability
of the socio-economic fabric, which has been
exacerbated by the current international financial
crisis. Those challenges also include the rise in the cost
of basic goods, the level of unemployment among

11

S/PV.6080

young people and the increase in drug trafficking and
transnational organized crime. The Agenda for Change
developed by the Government explicitly recognizes
that the ongoing scourge of corruption, the emergence
of drug trafficking and the high level of unemployment
among young people pose the principal risks to peace
and stability. In that regard, we welcome the holding
Mano River Union summit on 10 December 2008,
which provided an opportunity for the heads of State of
the Union to share their experiences with regard to
security.
With regard to peacebuilding, we have already
acknowledged how much has been done, in particular
in connection with the contributions of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra
Leone (UNIPSIL), the Peacebuilding Commission and
bilateral and multilateral partners. In that connection,
we welcome the holding of the second biannual review
of the Peacebuilding Cooperation Framework for
Sierra Leone, which took place in New York on
15 December
2008,
and,
in
particular,
the
recommendations provided to the Government of
Sierra Leone. We encourage the Government to
continue to work closely with the Peacebuilding
Commission, and we urge the Commission to support
the implementation of the Agenda for Change. We must
also continue to encourage all stakeholders to support
the strengthening of political and economic governance
and the rule of law, in particular the reform of the
public, justice and security sectors.
The Peacebuilding Fund’s support is especially
welcome, for it has allowed, among other things, for
the implementation of electoral assistance projects, the
strengthening of the capacity of the police and armed
forces and the provision of support for the judicial
system. We call on the Fund to continue its support and
urge all other financial partners to continue to provide
support to the authorities of Sierra Leone, despite the
international financial crisis.
Against that backdrop, we welcome and support
the establishment of the Agenda for Change and the
Joint Vision of the United Nations Family for Sierra
Leone. We endorse those two programmes, which aim
at linking economic growth to sustainable human
development. We hope that, as underscored in
paragraph 62 of the report (S/2009/59) of the
Secretary-General, the Joint Vision can bring together
the political mandate of UNIPSIL with the activities of
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes.

12

We of course support the desire of Sierra Leone’s
officials to hold a special session of the Peacebuilding
Commission and UNIPSIL with a view to mobilizing
the necessary resources to support the Government’s
Agenda for Change and the Joint Vision of the United
Nations Family for Sierra Leone. It is essential to
emphasize the importance of greater efficiency in the
activities to support the people of Sierra Leone, as well
as to ensure close cooperation between UNIPSIL, the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the Mano River Union and international
partners and other United Nations missions in the
region.
Special attention must, in particular, be paid to
supporting
economic
recovery
programmes;
strengthening the capacity of institutions responsible
for security and combating drug trafficking and
organized crime; implementing the recommendations
of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, in
particular by providing ongoing support for the victim
compensation programme; and supporting programmes
on good governance and the strengthening of
democratic institutions.
At this important stage in the peacebuilding
process in Sierra Leone, the international community
and the Security Council must continue to remain
committed to that country and to provide steadfast
support to its Government, which bears the primary
responsibility for the establishment of appropriate
conditions for peacebuilding and sustainable
development. For their part and in line with the means
at their disposal, ECOWAS and the African Union will
continue to support that country, which today, thanks to
the will and political courage of its people and leaders,
has been able to establish conditions for peace,
reconciliation and socio-economic recovery.
Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): On
behalf of the delegation of France, I would first like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council. I also wish to
thank delegations for their kind words about our
presidency. I would also like to thank Mr. Michael von
der Schulenburg, Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ambassador Majoor and the
Permanent Representative of Sierra Leone for their
statements.
The statements we have just heard confirm that
the situation in Sierra Leone is improving, but that

09-23183

S/PV.6080

difficulties also continue. Like the Secretary-General in
his report (S/2009/59), we too welcome the significant
progress that has been made to consolidate peace in
Sierra Leone. As the Security Council has emphasized,
the proper conduct of general elections in July 2008
illustrated the commitment of the people of Sierra
Leone to peace and democracy. However, the country
continues to face difficulties, in particular in the socioeconomic area. Those difficulties have worsened as a
result of the successive crises that have affected the
global economy.

We believe that the adoption of the Joint Vision
of the United Nations Family for Sierra Leone, which
sets out the way in which United Nations agencies and
programmes will work in concert with UNIPSIL and
integrates political and developmental initiatives, is an
excellent step. Such integration is necessary to
supporting hard-won peace and stability in Sierra
Leone, to contributing to sustainable socio-economic
development and to supporting the Government’s
poverty-reduction strategy. We call on UNIPSIL to
continue down that path as it carries out its mandate.

We are also very concerned about the growth of
the drug trade in the subregion and its destabilizing
impact on the most fragile States. In that connection,
France welcomes the holding in Cape Verde, under the
auspices of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), of a ministerial conference on that
subject from 28 to 29 October 2008, which produced a
draft political statement and a three-year plan of action
to combat drugs in West Africa that were adopted at the
ECOWAS heads of State and Government conference
last December. We hope that that will lead to the
strengthening of regional cooperation in that regard.
France is prepared to support United Nations efforts in
that area, which could benefit from the expertise and
assistance to be provided by the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime to combat drugs in West Africa.

Ms. Rice (United States of America):
Congratulations, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the leadership of the Security Council. We would also
like again to thank our colleagues from France for their
very able leadership of the Council last month.

The implementation of the Peacebuilding
Cooperation Framework for Sierra Leone must
continue. We are pleased at the productive cooperation
between the Government of Sierra Leone and the
Peacebuilding Commission, as illustrated by the
Government’s adoption of the Framework in January
2008. We also encourage the Government of Sierra
Leone to continue to implement the Framework. We
would also like to recall the conclusions issued by the
Peacebuilding Commission at the end of the second
biannual review last December.
Moreover, France welcomes the good pace with
which the operations of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL) have
begun. We supported replacing the United Nations
Integrated Office in Sierra Leone with an integrated
United Nations political office responsible for
following up on support for the peacebuilding process,
including welcome support for the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

09-23183

The United States welcomes the appointment of
Mr. Michael von der Schulenburg as the Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General, and we thank
him for his briefing on the new United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone
(UNIPSIL). We also wish to thank Ambassador Frank
Majoor for his update and leadership in the
Peacebuilding Commission, and Ambassador Touray,
the Permanent Representative of Sierra Leone, for his
very comprehensive and helpful presentation.
We commend UNIPSIL for the support it has
provided the Government and people of Sierra Leone
in making their transition from conflict to durable
peace. We further applaud President Koroma for his
effective leadership, for his Agenda for Change, for his
actions, including appointing a new strong head of the
Sierra Leone Anti-Corruption Commission, and for
undertaking reform of the justice system, enhancing
respect for human rights and strengthening the rule of
law. We note the important role that UNIPSIL will play
in supporting these promising developments and
helping Sierra Leone to tackle the underlying causes of
instability.
We have come a long way in the ability of the
United Nations to help countries and regions resolve,
recover from and rebuild after conflict. The type of
office that UNIPSIL represents is new instrument for
the United Nations to assist post-conflict countries as
they make the critical transition from insecurity and
violence to lasting peace. It is an innovation that we
have added to the toolkit of mechanisms that we can
deploy in post-conflict situations. We will need to

13

S/PV.6080

follow its progress, both to ensure that as Member
States we give the necessary support to help its efforts
to succeed and to ensure that this new office has the
impact that we all seek.

poverty, reminds us not only that peace is hard-won,
but also that we need to continue to work together
within and beyond the United Nations community to
effectively confront the challenges that remain.

We are encouraged by the progress that has been
made in Sierra Leone. We see real value added from
the presence of an integrated office such as UNIPSIL
and we hope that UNIPSIL will quickly validate the
worth of this integrated approach to peacebuilding. In
that regard, we welcome the Joint Vision initiative as
an important further step in seeing the United Nations
family pull together on behalf of a common strategy to
assist Sierra Leone’s post-conflict transition.

Sierra Leone reminds us not only of the
difficulties of post-conflict transitions, but also of the
promise of the United Nations and the broader
international community to assist a country and its
people to build a better future. The United States fully
supports UNIPSIL and will remain steadfast in
assisting Sierra Leone to put conflict in its past and
move towards a future of lasting development and
democracy.

However, we are concerned that UNIPSIL is not
yet at full strength owing to staffing shortages, which
underscores the importance of a smooth transition
when United Nations missions hand over authority, so
that we do not risk losing critical momentum. As a
supporter of the Peacebuilding Commission, the United
States is encouraged to see that the Commission has
facilitated national dialogue on important issues. We
also note the contribution that Peacebuilding Fundsupported projects are making to tackle the
peacebuilding priorities outlined by the Government of
Sierra Leone in conjunction with the Commission.

Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are also grateful to the Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. von der
Schulenburg, for his assessment of the work of the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL) and on the situation in Sierra
Leone. We are also grateful for the briefings by the
Chairman of the country configuration for Sierra
Leone, Mr. Majoor, and by the Permanent
Representative of Sierra Leone, Mr. Touray.

The United States also applauds the work of
United Nations Radio, which has reached out to the
people of Sierra Leone from Freetown to rural
communities across the country to provide vital
information about elections, women’s rights, health
concerns and many other crucial issues. We support
transfer of this service to the Sierra Leone Broadcast
Corporation, as well as the use of unallocated
peacebuilding funds for the further development of the
national public broadcasting service.
We continue to be concerned about the increased
use of Sierra Leone as a trans-shipment point for drugs
trafficked from South America to Europe. We welcome
UNIPSIL’s collaboration with the Sierra Leone Joint
Drug Interdiction Task Force and will continue to offer
our assistance in addressing this threat to Sierra
Leone’s national security and, indeed, to the security of
the region. At the same time, we encourage a regional
approach to addressing these issues, in particular
narco-trafficking and piracy. The fact that Sierra
Leone, despite its impressive progress, remains
vulnerable to instability from drugs and crime, youth
unemployment of over 60 per cent and persistent

14

We are pleased to note that the preservation of
political stability is allowing Sierra Leone to move
steadily forward on the path of post-conflict
reconstruction. It is important that the security
situation, both inside the country and on the borders
with neighbouring States, is remaining generally calm.
There is no doubt that to a large extent that was
possible thanks to a competent policy aimed at solving
acute problems conducted by the leadership of the
country and its President, Mr. Koroma, and thanks to
the constructive interaction of the main political forces
of the country.
In spite of positive developments in the country,
Sierra Leone nevertheless continues to face tremendous
transitional challenges, the successful handling of which
will greatly determine its long-term stability. First and
foremost, we would make reference to the cluster of
socio-economic issues mentioned by the Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General. Today, their
resolution is unfortunately complicated by new
challenges, such as the global financial and food crises.
Considerable threats to security are ongoing.
Among the most severe, we would mention the
problem of transnational organized crime. Of particular
concern is the growing threat of the use of the territory

09-23183

S/PV.6080

of Sierra Leone as a trans-shipment point for the illicit
narcotics trade, noted in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2009/59). It is necessary to note that this
problem is inherent not only to Sierra Leone but the
entire region of West Africa. The most vulnerable
countries in the subregion are becoming a springboard
for trade in illicit drugs and trafficking in people and
small arms and light weapons.
In order to confront this challenge, we need not
only national efforts to strengthen the relevant State
institutions, first and foremost, security institutions and
the judiciary, but also the active participation in a
common regional approach, in particular, by
implementing the relevant plan of action of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) that was adopted at the Abuja summit on
19 December 2008.
We are also very concerned by reports on the
more frequent instances of piracy off the shores of
Sierra Leone. The ongoing complex challenges in
strengthening peace in Sierra Leone confirm the need
for further support to this country by the international
community. Of great significance is the coordinating
work to be done by UNIPSIL. In countering the
emerging challenges to security, it is important,
especially in the cross-border dimension, to maintain a
regular useful interaction between UNIPSIL in Sierra
Leone and the United Nations Office for West Africa.
We deeply appreciate the results of the initial
period of the work of UNIPSIL and look forward to its
maintaining its initial momentum, focusing on
implementing the joint United Nations system concept
for Sierra Leone to help implement the leadership’s
three-year reform programme. We welcome the work
of the Peacebuilding Commission in Sierra Leone, the
holding of the first semi-annual review of the
peacebuilding strategy last December, which confirmed
the urgency of interaction between the Government of
Sierra Leone and the Peacebuilding Commission in the
priority areas of peacebuilding. We are also pleased to
note progress in implementing peacebuilding projects
financed by the Peacebuilding Fund.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First of all, the Chinese delegation wishes to
congratulate Japan on its assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council. We also wish to thank the
French delegation for its contribution to the work of
the Council. In addition, the Chinese delegation would

09-23183

like to thank Mr. Michael von der Schulenburg,
Executive Representative of the Secretary-General, and
Ambassador Frank Majoor for their briefings, and we
welcome the statement made by the Permanent
Representative of Sierra Leone.
Over the past year, the political situation in Sierra
Leone has remained generally stable. The security
situation is moving in a direction favourable to the
peacebuilding process, and some progress has also
been made in social and economic recovery and
development. That is a result of the joint efforts of the
Government, the political parties and the people of
Sierra Leone, and we welcome it.
On 1 December last year, President Koroma
issued his Agenda for Change, which identified priority
areas for the Government of Sierra Leone in its
economic development efforts. The SecretaryGeneral’s Executive Representative, working together
with the Government and other relevant actors, also
formulated a Joint Vision of the United Nations Family
for Sierra Leone, which set out priorities for the next
phase of the international community’s assistance to
the country. That indicates that the policy framework
and guidelines for peacebuilding in Sierra Leone have
been established. The next phase of work will focus on
ensuring that their implementation achieves the
expected results.
Sierra Leone has experienced many years of civil
war, which has taken a heavy toll on its economy and
society and inflicted severe suffering on its people. The
peace and stability of Sierra Leone are hard-won
results. The Government of Sierra Leone and other
relevant actors should make full use of the country’s
current stability, work hard to achieve consensus and
devote themselves to national development. At the
same time, the international community should
continue its assistance to Sierra Leone.
The establishment of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL)
indicates that the peacebuilding process in Sierra
Leone has entered a new phase. UNIPSIL’s mandate
incorporates the relevant political, development and
human rights mandates of the United Nations agencies
in Sierra Leone. That will help the mission to support
the Government in its efforts to maintain peace and
stability and promote social and economic development.
We wish to express our support for the work of the
mission and hope that it will achieve effective results.

15

S/PV.6080

The impact of the global financial and food crises
must not be overlooked. Accordingly, the peacebuilding
process in Sierra Leone also faces a number of new
challenges in that regard. The report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2009/59) refers to issues such as the fight
against corruption and piracy, which must receive the
full attention of all relevant actors.

We would like to use this occasion to urge the
Government to reinvigorate coordination with its
development partners, particularly in order to realize
President Koroma’s Agenda for Change. The United
Nations has an important role to play here, and the
Government of Sierra Leone should feel able to make
full use of UNIPSIL in that regard.

In combating drug trafficking, we should draw
upon the good lessons learned by other countries and
recognize that prevention is the key. Our efforts in that
area should be part and parcel of our efforts to restore
the rule of law and develop the economy in order to
improve the country’s capacity to suppress drug
trafficking activities.

Some very good work has been done by UNIPSIL
over the past few months. It has begun to work with
the Political Parties Registration Commission and has
made very good use of the election basket fund, and its
work to help with the biannual review of the
Peacebuilding Cooperation Framework has been very
important for Sierra Leone’s continued journey towards
effective development.

China calls upon the international community, in
particular the international financial institutions, to
continue to assist Sierra Leone in order to further
consolidate the peacebuilding process there and make
further progress possible. For its part, China will make
its own contribution to the peacebuilding process in
Sierra Leone.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I wish to join my
colleagues in congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
February and the French mission on its excellent
stewardship of the Council last month. It is a great
honour to welcome Mr. von der Schulenburg back to the
Council in his new capacity as head of a very important
integrated mission, the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL), which
is something of an experiment. Therefore, not only do
we wish it well, but it is only natural that we should also
follow its progress with great interest. In addition, I
would like to thank Ambassador Majoor and
Ambassador Touray for their briefings.
We have heard a lot from previous speakers
today. Much of what I wanted to say has been said by
others, so I will be brief this morning. However, I do
not want my brevity to be taken as any indication of a
lack of interest in what is happening in Sierra Leone.
On the contrary, Sierra Leone is an important partner
for my Government and for the United Kingdom
generally. There is great interest and support within the
United Kingdom for Sierra Leone and its people, and
the peaceful transition that has been made to President
Koroma is to be welcomed. It was very good to be able
to hear from Ambassador Touray about the prospects
for constitutional change.

16

Along with others, we hope that UNIPSIL will
engage in further high-level advocacy on countering
the threat of narcotics, on conflict prevention and
resolution and on ensuring that the Anti-Corruption
Commission actually delivers. Unless those three
critical areas of work are taken forward, it will be
impossible for UNIPSIL to deliver on its other targets.
I have three questions that, I hope, the Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General might be able
to address in his later remarks.
With regard to the assessment of peacebuilding so
far and the objectives for this year, what other
indicators of success does he think we should be
following, and what other objectives, if any, would he
like to see added for 2009?
Secondly, we would be interested to hear a little
bit more about the military coup in Guinea. What is its
impact on Sierra Leone and on the work of UNIPSIL?
Finally, I wish to make two process points. First, I
would be grateful for an assurance that in the next
report, there will be some agreed outputs and indicators
of success. As I said at the beginning of my statement,
it is important that this new, experimental integrated
mission be properly evaluated to see if it can be used as
a model in other areas. We obviously hope that it can.
But, as I said, proper monitoring will be key to that.
Lastly, I would just like to place on record our
disappointment that, although UNIPSIL has finally
deployed, it took such a long time to reach that stage.
We recognize that the appointment of the Executive
Representative also took a long time to be confirmed
and that some positions in UNIPSIL are still not filled.

09-23183

S/PV.6080

We do not believe that, in a small mission such as
UNIPSIL and in a country such as Sierra Leone —
which still has its fragilities — that is a tenable way to
proceed. Thus, either now or at some later point, we
would be very interested to hear how the United
Nations might change its processes to improve the way
in which it carries out this sort of thing in future.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I should
like at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and to thank the delegation of France for its efforts
during a very complex month for the work of the
Council.
Mexico welcomes the first report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL)
(S/2009/59) and wishes Mr. Michael von der
Schulenburg every success in his efforts as head of that
Office. We are also grateful for the participation of our
colleague Ambassador Majoor of the Netherlands,
Chairman of the Sierra Leone country-specific
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, and
Ambassador Shekou Touray, Permanent Representative
of Sierra Leone, who informed us about his
Government’s ongoing efforts. We would like to
emphasize the positive situation in Sierra Leone after
years of conflict, which is reflected in the absence of
armed groups and the progress achieved in political
stabilization and peacebuilding.
In Sierra Leone, the United Nations has
encouraged efforts towards political, legal, economic
and administrative reform so as to further promote
development. Now, it is essential to start training local
human resources and avoid long-term dependence. To
that end, the Security Council and other United Nations
bodies must not try to work alone. On the contrary,
they must encourage and support the initiatives of
countries in the region that have a better understanding
of local realities and are in a better position to promote
cooperation and development. Sierra Leone is now in a
post-conflict reconstruction phase, which compels the
Organization to provide its support and planning
capacities.
We recognize the progress that the United
Nations presence has generated in fundamental areas,
including the promotion of dialogue among the primary
national actors to avoid new tribal conflicts; support
for the strengthening of the rule of law and the

09-23183

consolidation of institutions; political support and
technical advice to strengthen the national Human
Rights Commission; and the training of security forces,
among others. Promoting the consolidation of those
efforts in the medium term is a priority task for
UNIPSIL.
In the area of human rights, we recognize as a
major step forward the enactment of the Child Rights
Act and the plan for a law on gender justice. We also
welcome the work of the Special Court for Sierra
Leone and support the efforts to achieve transitional
justice to promote the rule of law and strengthen peace
and national reconciliation.
Despite all this progress, Mexico is concerned by
the information contained in the report of the
Secretary-General, which points out that, in the context
of international organized crime, Sierra Leone is
increasingly being used as a route for the trafficking of
drugs and arms, acts of piracy have occurred along the
coastline of that country, potentially destabilizing tribal
disputes continue, and the economic situation is
deteriorating, with particular impact on the cost of
food.
Mexico therefore believes it critical for UNIPSIL
to assist the Government of Sierra Leone in promoting
dialogue and coordination in a context of shared
responsibility with countries in the region, in particular
Liberia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau and Côte d’Ivoire, in
order to jointly combat the trafficking of drugs and
arms that are threatening the security and stability of
the country and the region and that cannot be
successfully tackled without the support of the
international community.
Mexico also recognizes the work undertaken by
the Peacebuilding Commission in Sierra Leone through
the country-specific meeting, to which a number of
representatives have referred. The mobilization of
resources facilitated by the Commission to support the
implementation of development projects in the country
has been essential to further consolidate the peace
process. Similarly, the Commission’s work to promote
understanding and dialogue between the Government
and other actors involved in the political process is
encouraging.
We support the efforts of the Commission to
broaden the donor base, which will give the country
the necessary financial resources for the population to
benefit from the dividends of peace and reconciliation

17

S/PV.6080

as soon as possible. That is particularly relevant in the
current global financial climate, in which the flow of
international development assistance may be reduced.

development and actively contributing to the greater
integration of Sierra Leone into international
processes.

It is essential to ensure a solid United Nations
presence in Sierra Leone with sufficient capacity to
continue supporting the work of the Government, the
Commission and all national, regional and international
partners through a joint vision that supports the socioeconomic development of the country. The Agenda for
Change, to which Sierra Leone’s Ambassador to the
United Nations referred today, deserves our solid
support. We continue to support all UNIPSIL activities
to date that have allowed it to maximize its resources
and meet its objectives.

However, we must be quite clear that, if they are
to achieve their crucial role, building institutions and
strengthening the rule of law require tackling
corruption head on, which includes greater
transparency in public management and accountability
and strengthening a culture that fights impunity. In that
regard, we recognize the work of the Anti-Corruption
Commission and its efforts to involve civil society and
other national interested parties in monitoring the
implementation of a national strategy to combat
corruption. We also recognize the support provided by
UNIPSIL and the Peacebuilding Commission to assist
the Government in that fight.

Ms. Villalobos (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Like previous speakers, Sir, I would like to
congratulate you on assuming the presidency of the
Council for the month of February, and to thank the
delegation of France for its presidency in January. We
would also like to thank the Executive Representative
of the Secretary-General and head of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra
Leone (UNIPSIL), Mr. Von der Schulenberg, and the
Permanent Representative of the Netherlands,
Ambassador Frank Majoor, Chairman of the countryspecific meeting on Sierra Leone within the
Peacebuilding Commission, for their briefings and, in
particular, the work they have undertaken to fulfil their
mandates. We also thank Ambassador Touray, who
spoke on behalf of the Government of Sierra Leone, for
his statement.
My
delegation
believes
that
national
reconciliation and unity in Sierra Leone are of the
highest priority and require the participation and active
commitment of all sectors of society. The ethnic and
regional divisions in Sierra Leone should continue to
be addressed — a task in which the multiparty
Parliament of Sierra Leone has an important role.
Another fundamental component in the national
reconciliation process is the implementation of the
recommendations of the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission, in particular the reparations programme
for victims of the conflict, which still needs greater
international support.
Equally urgent is the review of institution
building. A system with stable institutions that
strengthens rights and the rule of law is absolutely
essential
to
consolidating
peace,
promoting

18

This Council must pay particular attention to the
growing threat to security in Sierra Leone posed by
drug trafficking, a problem that affects other countries
in the region and requires a resolute response.
Otherwise, all efforts made in other areas may be
undermined and ultimately prove futile. That is why we
believe it important for the Government and UNIPSIL
to work together in implementing the Plan Action
against Drug Trafficking and Related Organized Crime,
based on the Regional Action Plan adopted by member
States of the Economic Community of West African
States. Clearly, we are dealing with a regional issue
and it is therefore necessary to support and strengthen
the capacity of regional bodies to address those and
other issues, such as piracy, with a regional approach.
The Government of Sierra Leone is facing
challenges that we all know in its efforts to consolidate
economic and social development, support a
democratic Government, reform the security and
justice sectors and integrate the country’s youth into its
economic and social structures.
In that context, the support of the international
community cannot be overlooked. The joint work of
the Government and UNIPSIL in implementing
President Koroma’s Agenda for Change strategy is a
step in the right direction. However, further
complementary efforts are needed, as indicated in the
strategic framework of the Joint Vision of the United
Nations Family for Sierra Leone and in the Sierra
Leone Peacebuilding Cooperation Framework.
I should like to conclude by urging the
Government of Sierra Leone to redouble its efforts. We

09-23183

S/PV.6080

reiterate our support for UNIPSIL and the work of the
Sierra Leone configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, and call for greater support from the
international community for the processes under way
in Sierra Leone.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): First of all,
Mr. President, I should like to congratulate you formally
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council. I
should also like to thank France for its chairmanship
during the month of January.
I should like to thank the Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Michael
von der Schulenburg, for his briefing. We have a longstanding and positive experience of cooperating with
him, and we are impressed by the leadership that he
has provided for the comprehensive and innovative
approach the United Nations has chosen for its
presence in Sierra Leone.
Like others, we believe that the progressive
movement of a peacekeeping effort towards a
comprehensive peacebuilding and reconstruction effort
can serve as a model for United Nations operations
elsewhere. Bringing together various branches of the
United Nations family under one roof has very many
advantages. Given the challenges that Sierra Leone
faces in areas such as corruption and organized crime,
we welcome in particular the direct inclusion of the
expertise of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) and we hope that the UNODC’s
contribution can be further enhanced.
At the same time, cooperation with the work of
the country-specific configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission on Sierra Leone, under the able leadership
of Ambassador Frank Majoor of the Netherlands, is
essential. Though peacebuilding as such has not yet
been completed, we believe that the success achieved
so far can again serve as an example for efforts of this
kind in other countries of the region. Nonetheless, a
number of challenges remain to be faced by Sierra
Leone, the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL) and the donor
community. I would focus on three.
First, if the strategy of the international donor
community is to succeed, it is essential that the World
Bank and the International Monetary Fund gradually
put more emphasis on poverty reduction. Sierra
Leone’s Agenda for Change reflects the major
challenges in this regard, but good progress in

09-23183

economic performance could be jeopardized by the
high level of youth unemployment. It is against this
background that initiatives like the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO) project
addressing youth unemployment in the Mano River
region are of particular importance and need to be
strengthened.
In this context, I should also like to mention that
the fight against youth unemployment was a major
component of the resolution adopted at the end of the
2007 Ouagadougou Conference on Peace and Security
in West Africa, organized by Burkina Faso and Austria.
We continue to support the aforementioned UNIDO
effort.
Secondly, organized crime and related challenges
such as drug trafficking, corruption and the proliferation
of small arms must remain high on our agenda. As
these problems have cross-border implications, as the
representative of Costa Rica has just stated, we believe
that they should be addressed through regional
approaches. In this context, I should first of all like to
commend Sierra Leone for having already ratified the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) Convention on Small Arms and Light
Weapons. We believe that it is very important for this
ratification process to continue and to be concluded
successfully. I should also like to mention, as other
speakers have done, the ECOWAS Action Plan against
Drug Trafficking, which is another excellent example
of successful regional cooperation. UNODC’s input to
the United Nations Joint Vision document forms a
sound basis for a long-term, comprehensive and
coordinated response to illicit drug trafficking and the
serious threat that drug abuse poses to the economic
and social integration of youth in Sierra Leone.
Thirdly, we believe that two activities are crucial
with regard to reconciliation: the follow-up to the
recommendations of the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission and the proceedings of the Special Court
for Sierra Leone. The report of the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission contains not only an
impartial historical record of the conflict in the
country, but also far-reaching and comprehensive
recommendations for addressing the root causes of the
conflict and promoting reconciliation. The Truth and
Reconciliation Commission, as some speakers have
already mentioned, also proposed a reparations
programme, with particular emphasis on the needs of
amputees, war-wounded and the victims of sexual

19

S/PV.6080

violence. We call on the Government of Sierra Leone
to intensify its efforts to systematically follow up and
implement these very important recommendations.
The Special Court made important progress in
2008 and plans to complete its activities by 2010.
Besides its importance as a symbol of justice and
accountability, it has also provided capacity-building
opportunities to national professionals, who have
gained skills in the field of the rule of law. From our
point of view, it would be important to preserve and
use those skills in Sierra Leone. To that end, incentives
should be created to avoid a brain drain.
I should like to conclude by noting that Austria is
encouraged by the consistent trend towards respect for
civil and political rights in Sierra Leone and by the
initiatives of the Sierra Leone Government in favour of
the promotion of the rights of women.
Mr. Skračić (Croatia): At the outset, I should like
to thank Mr. Michael von der Schulenburg for
presenting the first report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL) (S/2009/59), as well as for his
useful comments and remarks. My delegation should
also like to thank Ambassador Frank Majoor, Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission country-specific
configuration for Sierra Leone, and Ambassador
Shekou Touray, Permanent Representative of Sierra
Leone, for their interventions.
Croatia is pleased to note the successful transition
from the United Nations Integrated Office for Sierra
Leone to UNIPSIL, which brings together the whole
United Nations family, its programmes, activities and
funds in Sierra Leone. We are of the opinion that the
current UNIPSIL model has already started to bear fruit
and produce further positive results. We would like to
commend two major political parties, the All Peoples’
Congress and the Sierra Leone People’s Party, for their
continuing interaction, which has been both constructive
and, as we have been informed by the SecretaryGeneral, cordial. This new climate contributes greatly to
the stability of the country and the prevention of further
conflict. However, it is a fact that Sierra Leone is still
divided along ethnic and geographic lines and that there
is an urgent need for further dialogue and cooperation
among all relevant stakeholders.
Croatia commends the Government of Sierra
Leone for having “made the fight against corruption a
key element of its reform platform”. We welcome the

20

decentralization of the work of the Anti-Corruption
Commission and the opening of its offices in the
northern and eastern regions of the country. We find
particularly important the development of an action
plan whose main aim is to address the growing threats
from rising illicit drug trafficking and organized crime,
based on the Action Plan adopted at the Ministerial
Conference on Drug Trafficking held by the Economic
Community of West African States last year. It brings
various security agencies together under standard
operating procedures, with a clear division of work and
responsibilities. This is an approach that we fully
support.
We welcome the first report on the state of human
rights produced by the newly operational national
Human Rights Commission, as well as the programmes
and activities of the Commission. At the same time, we
encourage the Government to continue to implement
the recommendations of the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission, including the reparations programmes for
victims of the civil conflict.
Croatia strongly supports security sector reform
in Sierra Leone since it is precisely the security
institutions that are the major guarantors of peace
consolidation and democratic governance. We
commend UNIPSIL for its substantial input into the
development of policing standards in the country and
for its efforts to strengthen partnership between the
police and local communities. On the other hand, it is
evident that, despite the progress reported, much
remains to be done. The main challenges facing the
authorities of Sierra Leone — be they immediate or
short-term, like rising food and fuel prices, drug
trafficking and piracy, or medium- and long-term, like
underdevelopment or youth unemployment — all pose
serious threats to the gains achieved to date. The
degree of success achieved by the Government of
Sierra Leone in confronting these challenges will
largely define the future of the country.
In that regard, we welcome President Koroma’s
Agenda for Change, which aims at a fundamental
transformation of the economy through economic
growth and human development. At the same time, it
clearly identifies the main priorities and proposes
avenues of action. It represents a major change in
attitude from aid dependence and recovery to growth
and development through the creation of an
environment conducive to private sector development
and a stronger inclusion of the diaspora.

09-23183

S/PV.6080

There is no doubt that firm political leadership
and continued international support will be required to
implement that ambitious agenda. We also welcome the
development of the Joint Vision of the United Nations
Family for Sierra Leone, which reflects a strategic
framework outlining United Nations priorities in Sierra
Leone and effectively channels all available resources.
We hope that those mutually reinforcing documents
will significantly accelerate the socio-economic
recovery of the country and ensure permanent
stabilization of its peace and security.
Finally, we commend the Peacebuilding
Commission for the crucial role it is playing in Sierra
Leone in attracting continuous donor support to the
country. We welcome the second progress report on the
implementation of the commitments contained in the
Peacebuilding Cooperation Framework, as well as the
recommendations contained therein on the required
next steps.
The President: I shall now take the floor in my
capacity as the representative of Japan.
First, I express my appreciation for the kind
words addressed to the presidency of February. It is
important that the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL)
swiftly reach its full operational capacity under the
new leadership of the Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Michael von der Schulenburg.
We are encouraged by the increasing stability of Sierra
Leone as well as by the successful elections in July
2008 and the by-elections of last month. Such progress
indicates that a democratic culture is now taking
further root in Sierra Leone.
Sierra Leone represents a model of the transition
from
peacekeeping
to
peacebuilding.
Major
peacebuilding challenges remain, however, in good
governance and creating development opportunities for
the public. We believe the following areas should
receive priority attention focused on the human
security perspective: first, strengthening good
governance, core democratic institutions, dialogue for
national cohesion and reconciliation and accountability
in public services. We support the efforts by President
Koroma to fight corruption and to change the attitude
of those working in the public sector.
Secondly, drug trafficking and piracy in Sierra
Leone’s coastal waters must be controlled. The
concerted efforts of the Government of Sierra Leone

09-23183

and international partners must be accelerated.
Regional
cooperation
through
the
Economic
Community of West African States is important in
addressing those emerging threats. Thirdly, measures
must be taken to improve the livelihood of the people.
Urgent support needs to be extended to create job
opportunities for young people. We also need to
support the Government’s efforts to reduce its high
dependency on food imports and to achieve selfsufficiency by 2010, putting to use the valuable human
resource of young people in rural areas. Electricity
supply and basic transportation infrastructure are
essential as well.
Those priority areas are all reflected in President
Koroma’s Agenda for Change, the Peacebuilding
Cooperation Framework and the Joint Vision of the
United Nations Family for Sierra Leone. I hope that
synergy among those frameworks can be achieved. I
particularly appreciate the initiative of the Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General in formulating
the United Nations Joint Vision. It represents a
conscious effort to address priority areas in a fully
coordinated and integrated manner by stakeholders on
the ground: the United Nations system, the World
Bank, the International Monetary Fund and the African
Development Bank. We believe that such an approach
could provide a good model for other peacebuilding
efforts. What matters most is not the strategy itself, but
its implementation.
The international community should strengthen
political, economical and technical support. We must
keep up the momentum. Together with traditional
partners, efforts are needed to attract new partners and
broaden the donor base. We welcome the many new
partners now joining. Japan has extended assistance in
the energy sector and for youth employment and is now
considering assistance for rice production through the
framework of the Coalition for African Rice
Development.
We commend the good work done by the
Peacebuilding Commission and believe that the
Council should endorse the conclusions and
recommendations of the second biannual review of the
Peacebuilding Cooperation Framework. It may also be
appropriate to examine the frequency of reporting as
the situation warrants.
I now resume the functions of the presidency.
Since there were some questions and comments raised,

21

S/PV.6080

I invite the Executive Representative to take the floor
again.
Mr. von der Schulenburg: Let me first thank all
of the members of the Security Council for the kind
words of support for the work of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone
(UNIPSIL), our United Nations country team and to
myself. The support is very encouraging to me and will
be of assistance when I go back to Sierra Leone and to
the work being done there.
Let me try to answer a few of the questions. Of
course members have asked me the most difficult
questions — about benchmarks. But before answering,
let me put that in context. I think that a peacebuilding
mission is a new type of mission. Not everyone may be
aware that a peacebuilding mission raises a lot of
conceptual issues. We have tried in the first three
months to respond to most of them. The first one is to
what degree is an executive representative to the
Secretary-General required, rather than a resident
coordinator? I think we must all be frank about that
question. Does it add value or simply an extra layer? If
an extra layer, then what is that extra layer? We have
had extensive discussions with our United Nations
agency colleagues and I think we may be on the right
track in one area in that we receive so much support
from United Nations agencies that could potentially see
us as an additional layer blocking some of the sunshine.
The other issue is — what actually makes an
executive representative credible, since we no longer
have armed forces on the ground and we usually do not
have funding, as do other agencies. In that situation,
what makes one credible? I think that is a question that
we must all answer very clearly. I have given some of
our responses to that question to the Peacebuilding
Commission, as well as what I think must be done.
The third issue is the relationship between a
peacebuilding mission on the ground and the
Peacebuilding Commission here in New York. Since
we are probably the first one — at least in a fully
integrated sense — I think that this is a necessary
discussion, and I hope to continue my discussion with
Ambassador Majoor on how I see that relationship. I
personally think that the Peacebuilding Commission is
of extreme importance to us because, although all of
the United Nations agencies have executive boards to
report back to and they get feedback from the Member
States that support the agencies, the integrated

22

peacebuilding mission actually has no one to play that
role, unless the Peacebuilding Commission takes over
the function of endorsing our efforts, so we can
negotiate with Member States.
The final issue here is: how do we integrate a
political mandate with a development mandate,
assuming that in a post-conflict situation politics
actually is largely development — creating jobs,
providing services and so forth. That is exactly why we
did not choose the traditional format of the United
Nations Development Assistance Framework, but
instead chose the Joint Vision document, in order to be
able to combine those two areas into one Joint Vision,
which is now supported by 15 United Nations agencies
that have signed on. That is very encouraging. Having
said that, the seven pages of the Joint Vision only
describe the directions.
We have what we call one plus four objectives, or
priority areas. One is mainly a political area, in which I
invite United Nations agencies to participate. The
others are more development priority areas. We are
now in the process of detailing the steps to be taken
under the five objectives. I think the process will be
completed by March 2009.
There has been considerable progress made on
those, especially on some tricky issues like youth
employment. We have recently agreed not only among
the United Nations agencies but with all major donors
to provide the President with a five-page advisory note
on what could be done in the area of youth
employment — one of the major risk areas of the
country. When I go back that is a discussion that will
have to be continued and it must be followed up by the
creation of a youth commission.
We have also given to the President, also in
agreement with the others, an advisory note on the
issue of illicit drug trafficking, in particular on coastal
security and finding different approaches to resolving
that issue. One of our roles is to try to get not only the
United Nations community behind us, but also our
main development partners. We have a similar concept
now on health care, and we will do this also for the
other issues.
What I had hoped in particular — and this is the
reason for having a special session of the
Peacebuilding Commission as discussed with
Ambassador Majoor with the support of the
Government of Sierra Leone — was to be able to move

09-23183

S/PV.6080

from the stage of defining general directions, to
establishing programmatic areas where we could think
of establishing concrete benchmarks. I think I would
also ask for patience in this instance. This is the first
time, and I think it will be very well consolidated.
In that context, I would also like to respond to the
question from the representative of Uganda about the
multi-donor trust fund. One of the things we have
agreed on among our United Nations colleagues is that
we would learn from the experience of the
Peacebuilding Fund, when we got the money and then
tried to find projects on which to spend it. This time,
we would like to have the development framework and
present to the Peacebuilding Commission not only the
general policies, but, for each of the objectives, the
programmes which we want to support. It is a long
consultative process; only when it is complete would
we open the multi-donor trust fund, because the
funding should actually follow from concrete things.
We do not want to have an open-ended fund because
that has created some of the problems we have
experienced with the implementation of the
Peacebuilding Fund.
Let me also respond briefly to the question of
Guinea. Guinea is a concern, and we have heard from
the representative of Sierra Leone that his Government
is very concerned. I can confirm that, too, from my
discussions with the President. Guinea is a country that
has a very long border with Sierra Leone. As I

mentioned, certain parts of the border — such as at
Yenga — are still in dispute. There are a lot of cultural
and ethnic relationships on both sides. According to the
Government, the largest expatriate community of
Guineans lives in Sierra Leone, so whatever happens
there will have an impact on Guinea.
From our side, there are two more immediate
things we are trying to monitor. With the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, we
have agreed to monitor the border, together with the
newly established refugee office, to see if there is any
unusual movement and to predict if there will be any
movement from Guinea into Sierra Leone. For the time
being, there are no movements which we can detect,
but we will keep on monitoring.
The other aspect is, of course, international
criminal activity. One of the worries we have —
although I make no accusations in this regard — is, of
course, that neighbouring countries that experience a
crisis very easily become the point of flight for
criminals in Sierra Leone, as we saw with the seizure
of the plane and the new problem of piracy, which
many believe comes from areas in the neighbourhood
that are less stable than Sierra Leone.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

09-23183

23
