S/2020/1023

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
21 October 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 16 October 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of a briefing provided by
Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, as well as the statements
delivered by the representatives of Belgium, China, the Dominican Republic, Estonia,
France, Germany, the Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (on
behalf of the Niger, South Africa, Tunisia and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines),
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of
America and Viet Nam (on behalf of Indonesia and Viet Nam) in connection with the
video-teleconference on “Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the Permanent
Representative of Colombia to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
and the President of the Security Council (S/2016/53)”, convened on Wednesday,
14 October 2020. A statement was also delivered by Ms. Claudia Blum de Barberi,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives
of the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in light of
the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, that
briefing and those statements will be issued as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Vassily Nebenzia
President of the Security Council

20-13941 (E) 211020 071220

*2013941*

S/2020/1023

Annex I
Statement by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia,
Carlos Ruiz Massieu
I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity to present the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral on Colombia (S/2020/943). It is a pleasure to do so in the company of Foreign
Minister Claudia Blum de Barberi.
Almost four years after the conclusion of the negotiations that led to the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace, it is
important to recall the main objective of that Agreement — ending more than five
decades of confrontation between the Colombian State and the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP), as well as the opening
of a long and complex phase of building lasting peace. This peace would be based
on fundamental processes provided for in the agreement, some of which are already
complete and irreversible, such as the laying down of arms by the FARC-EP and its
transition into a political party; and others that are still under construction, including:
the effective reintegration of FARC-EP members into civilian life; the search for
truth, reparations and restorative justice for victims; and the transformation of rural
Colombia. There have been historic and undeniable achievements along the way, but
enormous challenges still remain. A continued commitment by the parties to the
implementation of the Agreement is required, as well as the active participation of
Colombian State entities and civil society to ensure that the achievements are built
upon and truly sustainable.
Despite continued attacks and stigmatization against them, the vast majority
of those who laid down their weapons remain engaged in the reintegration process,
with nearly one third of them having received funding for productive projects through
mechanisms created by the peace agreement. Former combatants are currently
working alongside their families and local communities to withstand the health and
economic effects of the pandemic. I would like to highlight the recent approval of the
first reintegration road map with an ethnic approach, in the indigenous community
of Mayasquer, of the Pastos indigenous peoples, in Nariño department. Thanks to
this agreement, the indigenous authorities agreed to support the formal reintegration
process of 114 former combatants, mostly of indigenous origin, within the
community and in accordance with their traditions. This development demonstrates
the importance of ensuring an ethnic perspective to the reintegration process.
The issue of land continues to be one of the most pressing matters for the
reintegration process. I welcome the recent purchase of land for the former territorial
area for training and reintegration in Icononzo, and I trust that this will be followed
by others so that the Government can fulfil its objective of purchasing plots of
land for nine former territorial areas by the end of the year. As the consolidation of
these areas advances, I once again draw attention to the needs of over 9,000 former
combatants who are living outside of them. I trust that the Government and the
Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Común (FARC) will soon agree to a joint
approach to provide adequate support for these new reintegration areas, whose
security challenges and other vulnerabilities the Secretary-General has highlighted
in several of his reports.
The transitional justice process is building momentum, as the three components
of the Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition take
forward their crucial work. The Unit for the Search for Persons Deemed as Missing
continues its important task of determining the whereabouts of victims of the conflict
for their families and loved ones. The Truth Commission has brought victims and
2/26

20-13941

S/2020/1023

actors involved in the conflict together in meaningful dialogue on reconciliation and
non-repetition, and the Special Jurisdiction for Peace continues making progress
in cases covering crimes committed within the armed conflict. Over the last few
weeks, several top FARC party leaders have admitted responsibility for their role
in various crimes committed during the conflict, powerfully demonstrating that the
peace process is beginning to deliver on its promise to shed light on the horrors
of the past, which is an essential building block to help heal Colombian society.
To continue paving the way towards reconciliation, support for the work of the
Comprehensive System remains fundamental, including through full respect for its
autonomy and independence; cooperation from all actors; and active and authentic
participation from those who took part in the conflict.
The decision by what was the largest armed group in the country to lay down
its weapons voluntarily has contributed significantly to the overall reduction of
violence since the signing of the peace agreement. Unfortunately, some of the areas
that suffered immensely during the conflict continue to be besieged by violence from
other actors, who continue attacking social leaders, human rights defenders, former
combatants and entire communities. Recent massacres in various departments have
served as a painful reminder of how innocent civilians, including young people, are
falling victim to the actions of these groups.
Finding ways to curb this violence is imperative to deliver on the promise of
the peace agreement. To that end, it remains necessary to finalize and implement
public policy to dismantle illegal armed groups, criminal organizations and their
support networks. The work of the technical committees and regional sessions of
the National Commission on Security Guarantees over the last two years should
now translate into the prompt finalization of this crucial public policy and, more
importantly, its swift implementation. Similarly, timely responses to address the
risks identified by the early warnings of the Office of the Ombudsman can be
decisive in reducing violence.
I also take the opportunity to reiterate the Secretary-General’s call, supported
by the Security Council, for a global ceasefire to allow for all efforts to focus on
relief from the pandemic. Reducing violence in conflict-affected areas is all the
more important in the context of this public-health crisis.
Working jointly with the communities is also essential to devise effective
security measures tailored to local contexts. I am encouraged by the joint work
between civil society actors and Government entities in the framework of the
technical committees of the comprehensive security and protection programme for
communities, pursuant to Decree 660. It is now necessary to move forward to make
this operational on the ground, including through the various pilot initiatives, so that
we can report concrete progress over the coming months.
It is equally important to make headway on improving protection for former
combatants, who continue to be killed in alarming numbers, and fighting impunity
for these crimes, including by bringing intellectual authors to justice. Priority should
be given to staffing and resources for the National Protection Unit to clear the backlog
of pending requests for protection for former combatants. I trust that recent progress
in investigations of crimes against former combatants by the Special Investigation
Unit of the Office of the Attorney General will be sustained, particularly through
cooperation by other State entities, including security forces at the regional level.
One of the objectives of the peace agreement that I mentioned earlier is to
achieve a profound transformation of rural Colombia. The consequences of the
pandemic have highlighted the urgency of taking on the historic challenge of bringing
development, security and opportunities to rural areas in Colombia. In this regard,
20-139413/26

S/2020/1023

I would like to reiterate the Secretary-General’s call on all actors in Colombia to
view the implementation of the peace agreement as an essential part of the recovery
from the effects of the pandemic, and to take advantage of the agreement’s tools to
address the challenges associated with recovery. For example, the necessary public
health investments in rural areas can be guided by the elements on rural health in
the first section of the agreement. Economic recovery in conflict-affected areas can
be enhanced by strengthening productive projects that benefit former combatants
and communities. Similarly, the development programmes with a territorial focus
continue to be a valuable mechanism for bringing investments and State presence to
the 170 municipalities most affected by conflict and poverty.
Given the financial constraints imposed by the pandemic, I applaud the efforts
to diversify funding for implementing these programmes, including the recent
approval by Congress of additional funds from mineral royalties, and resources
from the private sector through the Work for Taxes programme. It is important to
ensure that development programmes with a territorial focus are implemented in
collaboration with regional and local authorities, and with the participation of local
communities, as well as to ensure that they are articulated with other programmes
set out by the peace agreement, including the reintegration process and the National
Comprehensive Programme for the Substitution of Illicit Crops.
Ultimately, peacebuilding and pandemic recovery efforts should be
complementary, focusing on the fundamental objective of strengthening integrated
State presence in the areas that have for decades needed it most.
In two weeks, the Council will commemorate the twentieth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security. Few peace
agreements in history have addressed gender issues as comprehensively as the final
peace agreement in Colombia. The Colombian peace process demonstrates the value
of ensuring the meaningful participation of women and the importance of taking into
account both how women have been affected by conflict and, even more importantly,
how they can contribute to conflict resolution. Challenges still remain in terms of
improving security for women social leaders and human rights defenders, ensuring
more robust participation of women former combatants in reintegration efforts,
and addressing the scourge of sexual and gender-based violence, which has seen an
upsurge during the pandemic. I encourage all actors, including the Government and
the FARC party, to draw inspiration from the anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000)
to redouble their efforts to fully implement the gender provisions of the agreement,
together with the leadership of women’s organizations at the national and local levels.
Let me conclude by paying tribute to the strength and courage of Colombia’s
countless women peacebuilders: the leaders and members of women’s organizations
I have met in travels around the country; the women social leaders who are too
often under threat in their communities; the victims who are participating actively
in reconciliation efforts; and the women leaders of ethnic organizations who strive
to protect their culture and ensure the rights of their communities. We owe it to these
brave women, and to the generations that will succeed them, to ensure that peace in
Colombia continues to take root through the continued implementation of the final
peace agreement.

4/26

20-13941

S/2020/1023

Annex II

Statement by the Deputy Political Coordinator of Belgium to the
United Nations, Delphine Delieux
I thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Ruiz Massieu for his
presentation. I welcome the participation of Minister Blum de Barberi to this meeting.
Belgium reiterates its full support for the peace process in Colombia
and we once again welcome the continued commitment of the parties to the full
implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a
Stable and Lasting Peace. We welcome the recent unanimous renewal of the mandate
of the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia.
Belgium remains deeply concerned by the continued threats, attacks and
killings against human rights defenders, community and social leaders and
ex-combatants. Violence in conflict-affected communities has increased. Violence
against women, in particular, poses a challenge to women’s active participation in the
implementation of the peace agreement. Stronger measures to prevent and combat
sexual and gender-based violence are needed. It is also necessary to make full use of
the mechanisms for security guarantees, including early warning systems, individual
and collective protection and the National Commission on Security Guarantees. The
perpetrators of violence must be brought to justice. We also call on all parties to
reach an agreement on the location of anti-personnel mines.
Belgium pays specific attention to the situation of children. The Security
Council unanimously adopted conclusions on the situation of children in
armed conflict in Colombia. We look forward to progress in implementing its
recommendations. Two important topics require special attention: child-friendly
spaces in former concentration areas and the convening of the technical working
group on children of the National Reintegration Council.
The joint efforts of the Government and the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria
del Común to ensure the sustainability of reintegration projects must continue. Access
to land for the productive projects of ex-combatants remains an urgent necessity.
We reaffirm our full support for transitional justice institutions in their
mission to guarantee truth and restorative justice. We look forward to working with
the Colombian authorities to broaden the mandate of the Verification Mission to
play a role in verifying compliance with the sentences of the Special Jurisdiction
for Peace. We hope that this can be formalized as soon as possible. We note the
increase in the budget for components related to transitional justice and call on the
Government to allocate sufficient resources for the implementation of all parts of the
peace agreement.
I reiterate our hope that the Secretary-General and Security Council call for
a global ceasefire in response to the coronavirus disease pandemic will lead all
parties in Colombia to take steps to end the violence, allow humanitarian access and
work towards peace. We urge all armed groups to end the violence and to seize this
opportunity for peace.
Today is the last time that my country will speak on the situation in Colombia
during our present term on the Security Council. To Minister Blum de Barberi, I
would say that her country serves as an inspiration all around the world. Regions
affected by conflict see it as a model to overcome the past and choose a peaceful
future. But peace in Colombia has been hard to obtain and cannot be taken for
granted. I want to congratulate her and the Colombian people for the courageous
decisions they have taken, and to call for those efforts to continue, with the parties
to the Agreement, towards the comprehensive implementation of the final peace
agreement. She can count on the support of Belgium.

20-139415/26

S/2020/1023

Annex III
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Geng Shuang
China welcomes the participation of Foreign Minister Claudia Blum de
Barberi in today’s meeting. I thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Massieu for his briefing.
The Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and
Lasting Peace will soon mark its fourth anniversary. Over the past four years,
the Colombia peace process has achieved significant progress. The disarmament
and reintegration process continues to move forward, and the peace dividends are
bringing increasing benefits to the Colombian people. Thanks to the efforts made
in the context of “Peace with legality” by the Government of Colombia, sustainable
peace is taking root and building momentum.
The Colombia peace process sets a good example of conflict resolution through
the joint efforts of the international community. The United Nations and the parties
concerned have been committed to facilitating peace talks since the early stages of
the process, and the Security Council has provided strong support and timely help
by deploying the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia to monitor the
implementation of the peace agreement.
Just last month the Council, by unanimously adopting resolution 2545
(2020), extending the mandate of the Mission for another year, once again showed
its unrelenting support. At the same time, the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2020/943) and Special Representative of the Secretary-General Massieu’s briefing
pointed out that there are still challenges facing the peace process.
The international community and the Security Council should step up their
endeavours to help Colombia ensure a comprehensive, effective and sustainable
implementation of the peace agreement, and China is fully behind all such efforts.
I would like to emphasize three points.
It is imperative to improve the security situation. Security is a priority for
human rights and a prerequisite for the enjoyment of other rights. The report of
the Secretary-General notes that violence and criminal activity are still taking
place in some areas. We hope that State institutions and the security presence
could be strengthened in high-risk areas. The policy on the dismantling of criminal
organizations should be finalized and implemented in 2021.
The sustainable reintegration of ex-combatants is key to the peace
process. China commends the efforts of the Colombian Government to relocate
former territorial areas for training and reintegration. There are still more than
9,000 ex-combatants living outside the areas. For them, more help is needed to push
forward their political, economic, social and educational reintegration.
Inclusive development should be promoted in order to eradicate the root
causes of conflict. China supports Colombia’s strategy to overcome the effects of
the pandemic as well as the five pillars of the strategy. We hope that the Colombian
Government will continue to implement the development programmes with a
territorial focus and step up its efforts towards equitable, inclusive and sustainable
development. The development of infrastructure for transportation, irrigation and
electricity should be prioritized and strengthened in conflict-affected areas, and
basic public services such as education, health care and housing should be provided
in order to minimize the disparities between urban and rural areas and between
various regions.
6/26

20-13941

S/2020/1023

China supports the work of Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Massieu and the Verification Mission. We encourage the Verification Mission
and the United Nations country team in Colombia to strengthen coordination and
collaboration, and to play a greater role in supporting the Colombia peace process,
with a synergetic effect. China will enhance its cooperation with Colombia through
both bilateral and multilateral channels so as to support sustainable peace and
development in Colombia.

20-139417/26

S/2020/1023

Annex IV
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Dominican Republic to
the United Nations
We thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu for his informative presentation and the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, Ms. Claudia Blum de Barberi, for joining
us today. It is an honour.
Let me start by acknowledging the progress reported during this period
under review despite the difficulties posed by the coronavirus disease pandemic.
Likewise, I would like to highlight the efforts that have been made to mitigate
the repercussions of the pandemic, while at the same time encouraging continued
progress in the implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and
Building a Stable and Lasting Peace Agreement.
We support the recommendation made by the Secretary-General in his report
dated 26 March 2020 (S/2020/239), which lists three priorities for the comprehensive
implementation of the final peace agreement for this year.
Regarding the priority related to the situation of social leaders, human rights
defenders and former combatants, we continue to be concerned about the violence
that women leaders face in particular. In view of the commemoration of the twentieth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), we encourage the Government of Colombia to
redouble its efforts towards the implementation of the gender provisions contained
in the peace agreement, as well as to ensure that women, mainly indigenous women,
Afro-descendants and those in rural areas, are included in transitional justice and
reconstruction measures, including the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, and that the
barriers that limit their inclusion in those processes are addressed.
Likewise, we share the concern raised in the Secretary-General’s report
regarding the recent massacres perpetrated against youth and children. That level of
violence coincides with a marked increase in the recruitment and use of children by
armed groups, putting them in even greater danger.
In areas such as Cali, Samaniego and Nariño, we are seeing a resurgence of
the violence and massacres that we thought had been relegated to the past. That
should definitely be a wake-up call. We trust that the Colombian Government will
duly investigate those crimes and bring the perpetrators to justice.
Many young people are advocating and fighting for peace in Colombia;
therefore dialogues with Colombian youth must continue and their protection needs
must be prioritized, as well as their civic space.
In the priority area related to the long-term sustainability of the reintegration
process, we understand that there is room to undertake actions that allow for more
significant advances in the implementation of related programmes and in the road
map for reintegration.
In that regard, we would like to echo the Secretary-General’s call to strengthen
the presence of the Special Investigation Unit of the Office of the Attorney General
in regions where there are a high number of attacks against ex-combatants, and we
encourage the National Commission on Security Guarantees to finalize its public
policy with a view to its implementation in 2021.
On the priority relative to support for conflict-affected communities, we
believe that the victims must be at the centre of all peacebuilding efforts. The work
of the Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice, Reparations and Non-Repetition in
that regard is vital, which is why we encourage the parties to continue to contribute
to the quest for truth and the attribution of responsibilities.
8/26

20-13941

S/2020/1023

On another point, we take note of the intention expressed by the Ejército
de Liberación Nacional to establish a bilateral ceasefire, and we stress that it is
imperative to release all kidnapped persons and put an end to all illegal activities as
a gesture of goodwill demonstrating its genuine desire for peace.
Finally, we want to highlight the work of the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia for the dedication with which it is fulfilling its mandate. This
being our last intervention in the Security Council on this issue, we would like to say
that we are deeply proud of the fact that Colombia has become a source of inspiration
and an important reference for peace not only for the region but also for the world.
Colombia has our determined support inside and outside the Security Council.

20-139419/26

S/2020/1023

Annex V
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Estonia to the United Nations
I would like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Carlos
Ruiz Massieu for his briefing, and I would also like to express Estonia’s strong
support for the work of the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia.
We warmly welcome Ms. Claudia Blum de Barberi, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Colombia.
We support the continued commitment of the Government of Colombia to
implementing the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and
Lasting Peace. We welcome the progress made in these challenging times, especially
in the field of justice. The public apology issued by the former Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP) secretariat marks a
positive step forward. We also recognize the achievements registered by the Special
Investigation Unit of the Office of the Attorney General. Lasting peace cannot be
achieved without justice.
Meanwhile, the continued killings of civilians, human rights defenders,
social leaders and former FARC-EP combatants remain alarming and must end. We
reiterate the urgent need to protect these and other vulnerable groups. It is important
to investigate and prosecute those responsible for the violations committed. In
that regard, the work of the components of the Comprehensive System of Truth,
Justice, Reparations and Non-Repetition is essential. We also encourage the National
Commission on Security Guarantees to proceed with its work on public policy in
order to dismantle criminal organizations and their support networks.
The situation of children is particularly concerning. Children are at risk
of forced labour, sexual exploitation and recruitment into armed groups. Childprotection measures must be strengthened.
Despite the Government’s commitment to bringing peace, security and
development to rural Colombia, such areas are suffering from the absence of
State authorities. Wider structural issues need to be addressed in order to better
tackle those challenges. It is vital to ensure the sustainability of the reintegration
process and address all pending issues, including access to land for former FARCEP combatants. We encourage all parties to redouble their efforts and continue
cooperation in a constructive spirit to achieve lasting peace.
Finally, we remain hopeful that meaningful progress can be made. We would
like to assert Estonia’s strong support for the comprehensive implementation of the
final peace agreement.

10/26

20-13941

S/2020/1023

Annex VI
Statement by the Political Coordinator at the Permanent Mission of
France to the United Nations, Sheraz Gasri
[Original: French]
I thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Carlos Ruiz Massieu
for his enlightening presentation. I welcome the presence of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Colombia.
It has been almost four years since the Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace was reached. Much has been
achieved thanks to the efforts of the Colombian Government and people, and we
must welcome this. We must also clearly recognize that, with regard to the ambitions
of 2016, a number of provisions of the agreement remain insufficiently implemented.
The peace agreement is a package whose various components are inseparable. I will
come back to four specific issues.
First, we regret the continuing violence in Colombia. We condemn the multiple
assassinations that have taken place in recent months, including those of children
and young people, as well as those of former combatants, civil-society leaders and
human rights defenders. Such crimes must stop and those responsible brought to
justice. As the Secretary-General’s report (S/2020/943) points out, simple measures
can be taken quickly. Better use must be made of the early-warning system under
the Office of the Ombudsman. The National Commission on Security Guarantees
should be encouraged to finalize a public policy for the dismantling of criminal
organizations. In the long term, it is imperative to strengthen the State’s presence
throughout the country, including in the most remote areas.
Secondly, France wishes to recognize the efforts that have been made in
recent months to reintegrate former combatants despite the pandemic and the impact
of confinement on productive projects. Those efforts must continue, with a focus
on ex-combatants residing outside the former territorial areas for training and
reintegration. It is also important to resolve the long-standing issue of access to land.
Thirdly, the Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice, Reparations and
Non-Repetition is a cornerstone of the peace agreement, as we have regularly
stressed in the Council. We would like the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia to contribute to the verification of the implementation of the sanctions of
the Special Jurisdiction for Peace. We stand ready to entrust it with that role when
the Colombians request it.
Finally, another area in which further progress is expected is the National
Comprehensive Programme for the Substitution of Illicit Crops, which represents an
immense source of hope for thousands of families. It is crucial that that programme
obtain the necessary resources, especially to finance alternative productive projects,
which are a prerequisite for its long-term success. The chapters of the agreement
dealing with ethnic and gender issues must also receive special attention.
The peace process in Colombia faces challenges that we cannot ignore. France,
in its national capacity, will continue, within the Security Council and the European
Union, to give its full support to all those in Colombia who are mobilized daily to
meet these challenges.

20-1394111/26

S/2020/1023

Annex VII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Germany to the
United Nations, Christoph Heusgen
Let me start by thanking Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Carlos Ruiz Massieu for his dedication and work. I particularly extend my gratitude
to the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, which is doing a magnificent
job, sometimes under difficult circumstances. Germany welcomes the unanimous
extension of the Mission’s mandate. We look forward to the discussions with all
Colombian stakeholders about the future role of the United Nations Mission in
verifying compliance with the Special Jurisdiction for Peace sanctions.
I would like also to welcome Claudia Blum de Barberi. Her presence here
signals that she supports the Security Council’s role and engagement in the process
and the importance of the Mission.
We have seen unanimity on Colombia, so I think that is very encouraging.
Let me also make the point, as most members have done, that we are alarmed about
the illegal armed groups and the criminal organizations that have taken advantage
of the coronavirus disease to strengthen their presence. They have attacked public
security forces. The targeted killing of human rights defenders, social leaders and
former members continues. Extending the presence of State institutions in remote
areas and ending impunity is necessary. We support the various institutions of the
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace.
I remember that when we visited Colombia last year, we were all very impressed by
the dedication of the people involved in those institutions.
Regarding the reintegration of former members of the the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia – Ejército del Pueblo, I want to concentrate on the role
of women. There is an urgent need to accelerate the implementation of the gender
provisions of the agreement. A lot has been done, but we need to continue to work
on this. We need to strengthen the participation and the leadership of women former
combatants in economic reintegration activities and decision-making. We have to
fight the ongoing sexual and gender-based violence. We have to recognize the women
social leaders and the women ethnic leaders, who do a tremendous job. I recall when
we were back in Colombia visiting a territorial area for training and reintegration,
we met with some women who were really incredible.
This is the last time that Germany will be participating in a discussion on
Colombia during our Security Council membership. Germany remains confident that
the Colombians can succeed in consolidating the peace that they have begun to build,
especially if they are able to overcome the distrust and increasingly work together
with a comprehensive vision of the peace agreement. The international community
and Germany will continue to assist Colombians to realize their aspirations to a
more peaceful future.

12/26

20-13941

S/2020/1023

Annex VIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Vassily Nebenzia
We thank Carlos Ruiz Massieu, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the presentation of Secretary-General’s report (S/2020/943) on the
work of the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia. We welcome the
participation in this meeting of Ms. Claudia Blum de Barberi, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Colombia.
We share the Secretary-General’s growing concern with regard to the
continuing killings and violence perpetrated against participants of the peace
process, community leaders, social activists and members of ethnic minorities.
Ensuring the safety and security of the civilian population must be the top priority.
In order to effectively carry out that task, it is essential to address the vacuum
of State presence in remote areas, whose residents do not feel safe, and therefore often
have to leave their homes to escape the violence of organized criminal groups that
produce and deal in drugs. The result is thousands of internally displaced persons.
Equally important, the peace process should be driven by the reintegration
of former combatants. Comprehensive land reform remains critical for Colombia,
including such aspects as land allocation and the proper implementation of cropsubstitution programmes. Until that is addressed, it is hard to speak of promoting
socioeconomic reintegration.
We hope that future reports of the Secretary-General contain more information
on the political reintegration of peace process participants. Are there any major
difficulties, or is everything proceeding smoothly?
With regard to other problems highlighted in the report, we cannot fail
to mention a noticeable build-up of a repressive component in the actions of the
authorities. That is reflected in particular in the use of force against civilians during
the recent protests, as indicated in the report.
We would like to draw attention to the fact that the figures of victims among
the protesters in Colombia are comparable to, or even surpass, the respective numbers
in other countries that receive the vibrant attention of our colleagues in the Security
Council and become the focus of the Secretariat and the statements of the SecretaryGeneral’s Press Secretary. We expect the Secretariat and our colleagues to use the
same standards in their reactions to all disturbing events around the globe.
Decades of internal conflict in Colombia have shown that violence can never
lead to lasting solutions. That is why the Secretary-General’s call for a universal
ceasefire amid the pandemic is so relevant for the country. In that context, we note
the unilateral ceasefire initiatives. Regrettably, they have not found any support
within the Government. We call on Colombian actors not to miss this opportunity
to resume dialogue. After all, sustainable peace is hardly possible unless the entire
range of opinions is considered.
We also must address another highlight of the Secretary-General’s report —
the reduced financing of State institutions in charge of the implementation of the
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace.
Instead, there is a 10 per cent increase for bodies investigating the events dating back
to the time of the internal conflict.
As we learned from the report, there has been some progress, particularly with
regard to confessions by former members of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo. It must be noted that, according to the final peace
20-1394113/26

S/2020/1023

agreement, such confessions are to be heard by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace,
which must be fully independent. Any interference with its competencies or attempts
to move particular cases outside of its jurisdiction are unacceptable. Good-faith
compliance by the participants of the peace process with their responsibilities under
the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace
should not be used to neutralize political opponents. We would like to receive more
information from the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia on similar
confessions by State participants in the conflict.
We hope to see new tasks added to the Mission’s mandate in order to monitor
the implementation of the sentences of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace. That will
enhance the efficiency of that body.
As a general remark, we would like to point out that an investigation of the
events of the conflict is, by all means, important, but the genuine success of the
peace process depends on the work ahead, not on the grievances of the past.
In that regard, we take note of the report by Colombia’s Prosecutor General,
which cites some irregularities in post-conflict planning — including that 60 per cent
of the funding has been allocated to only 5 per cent of the projects. As pointed out by
the country’s Comptroller General, under those circumstances, the implementation
of the final peace agreement would take at least 25 years, as opposed to the initial
plan of 15 years. Such estimates are not at all encouraging.
We followed carefully the 16 September address of Colombia’s leadership to
the international community with regard to progress made in the implementation of
the “Peace with legality” policy.
Although we do not wish to diminish the importance of a number of
achievements, we emphasize that the final peace agreement is the cornerstone of
the Colombian peace process, as this document envisages the responsibilities of
the various Colombian actors. It is important to remain committed to that historic
document, which enjoys the support of the Security Council, the Secretary-General
and the international community. We hope to learn more about the implementation
of the final peace agreement from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia.
We reiterate our firm support for the work of the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia under the leadership of Carlos Ruiz Massieu.
Finally, we believe that the Council should review its practice of considering
reports of the Secretary-General right after adopting resolutions that extend mission
mandates. The order should be the opposite. We note that the most recent report,
issued on 25 September, quite adequately reflects the developments in the country.
Russia and all other members of the Security Council, as well as all the
members of the international community, should continue contributing to the
Colombian peace process in order to ensure its sustainable and lasting nature.

14/26

20-13941

S/2020/1023

Annex IX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines to the United Nations, Inga Rhonda King
It is a privilege for me to deliver this statement on behalf of the Niger, Tunisia,
South Africa and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (A3+1).
At the outset, the A3+1 extends its sincerest condolences to the families of the
victims who have lost their lives to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
We thank Special Representative Carlos Ruiz Massieu for his detailed briefing. We
also acknowledge the presence of Her Excellency Ms. Claudia Blum de Barberi,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, and thank her for consistently making
time to participate in Security Council meetings.
The peace process in Colombia is at a very crucial stage. While it is concerning
that the COVID-19 pandemic, alongside a plethora of other challenges, has delayed
progress on the implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and
Building a Stable and Lasting Peace, we welcome the positive developments, as
outlined in the Secretary General’s most recent report (S/2020/943).
In that regard, Colombians must continue to forge ahead with the
comprehensive implementation of the 2016 final peace agreement. The position
of the A3+1 is informed by its principled stance that the only viable, sustainable
solution for conflict remains the implementation of the peace agreement and an
inclusive political settlement led by, and in the interests of, the people of Colombia.
The Security Council has reaffirmed its steadfast support for the peace process
and will continue to accompany Colombia in its efforts to fulfil the veritable goals
of peace, stability and prosperity, as evidenced in the recent unanimous adoption of
resolution 2545 (2020). The A3+1 therefore encourages all Colombian stakeholders
to consolidate the gains achieved thus far and redouble their efforts to overcome
lingering impediments.
We also offer the following observations.
First, on the issue of security, we remain deeply disturbed by, and condemn
in the strongest terms, the meaningless killings of former Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP) combatants, human
rights defenders, indigenous people, women, children and Afro-Colombian
leaders. The main drivers of those atrocities need to be identified and addressed
and the perpetrators must be held accountable. The protection of those particularly
vulnerable groups will be an important yardstick for the effectiveness of the security
measures in general. In that context, we appreciate the decision in July by the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace to adopt protective measures in accordance with section 3.4
of the peace agreement. Additionally, we commend the steady progress made by the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace despite the impediments created by the pandemic.
Furthermore, we urge the Government to bolster the State’s security machinery
in the departments worst affected by violence, such as Cauca, Antioquia, Norte de
Santander and Nariño, and encourage the authorities to convene regular meetings of
the National Commission on Security Guarantees.
Robustly dismantling illegal armed groups and crime syndicates is also pivotal
to ensuring the safety and protection of the Colombian citizenry — especially the
most vulnerable groups, including women and children, who continue to be victims
of sexual and gender-based violence. To that end, the National Commission on
Security Guarantees ought to work assiduously alongside civil society to finalize
public policies to disrupt and apprehend criminal organizations and their networks.
20-1394115/26

S/2020/1023

The A3+1 notes the progress made on the demobilization and reintegration
process of members of the FARC-EP, which should be commended, but is also
concerned about the limited progress — due to the spread of the pandemic — on
productive initiatives for former combatants. In that regard, we echo the SecretaryGeneral’s call to strengthen efforts towards longer-term reintegration, with
reintegration benefits for all former combatants. That will ultimately determine the
long-term sustainability of peace in Colombia.
We urge the authorities to improve the implementation of the Comprehensive
Programme of Safeguards for Women Leaders and Human Rights Defenders. Women
and children have a fundamental role to play in ushering in peace in Colombia and
must always be protected.
In addition, the A3+1 reiterates its call for the cessation of hostilities, in strict
compliance with resolution 2532 (2020). We remain hopeful that the Government
and the Ejército de Liberación Nacional will fully capitalize on this peacebuilding
opportunity and engage in constructive dialogue in a spirit of cooperation in order
to achieve stable and lasting peace in Colombia.
Secondly, on the socioeconomic track, we recognize the Government’s
laudable efforts in authorizing peace-related funds from mineral royalties to
facilitate the implementation of the development programmes with a territorial
focus. We are, however, aware of reports that those funds are inadequate and that
there is a possibility that the investment budgets of certain entities that are essential
for the implementation of the final peace agreement — the National Land Agency,
the Agency for Territorial Renewal and the Agency for Rural Development — might
be cut. In that vein, we encourage all stakeholders to strengthen their engagement
and consolidate their efforts to resolve the financial difficulties in order to guarantee
the full and timely implementation of the final agreement.
The A3+1 applauds the continued implementation of the programme for
the substitution of illicit crops despite the challenges posed by the pandemic. This
agricultural reform programme remains critical to dissuading former FARC-EP
combatants from re-entering the illegal economy and also plays a role in assisting
former combatants to generate income to sustain their livelihoods and contribute to
the formal economy.
At the same time, we are mindful that some aspects of comprehensive rural
reform that are inextricably linked to the illicit crop substitution programme, need
to be effectively addressed. Accordingly, the A3+1 encourages all parties to further
rectify the situation relating to fair access to lands and address the challenges
facing former combatants residing outside of the territorial areas for training and
reintegration. These long-standing issues are integral to the full reintegration of
former FARC-EP combatants.
Thirdly, the A3+1 welcomes and commends the progress made in the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace, especially the decision of some former FARC-EP members
to recognize and accept responsibility for their transgressions. Acknowledging
wrongdoings during this peacebuilding stage, in compliance with the final agreement,
paves the way for forgiveness and lays the foundation for justice, reconciliation and
the full integration of former FARC-EP members into the Colombian society. The
A3+1 emphasizes the fundamental importance of the reconciliation process, as
many Member States have benefited from the positive aspects of such processes.
Furthermore, we also continue to support the full implementation of all aspects
of the Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition,
specifically aimed at ensuring that communities and victims affected by the conflict
are priorities in the peace process.
16/26

20-13941

S/2020/1023

We also endorse the Secretary-General’s views that parties should endeavour
to overcome their differences by maximizing the use of the Commission for the
Follow-up, Promotion and Verification of the Implementation of the Final Agreement
to resolve disputes. To that effect, we encourage the Commission and the High-level
Forum of Ethnic Peoples to meet regularly to address the implementation of the
Ethnic Chapter of the peace agreement.
The signing of the 2016 final peace agreement has shown us that, when
dialogue is constructive and results-oriented, and when convictions are strong and
the objective worthwhile, the impossible becomes possible. It is time for Colombia to
be transformed through this peacebuilding agreement and to fulfil its true potential.
The A3+1 stands in solidarity with the Government and the people of Colombia
in their pursuit of lasting peace, as well as with the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia and country team in the comprehensive implementation of
the final peace agreement, as their efforts continue to be invaluable in supporting
its implementation.

20-1394117/26

S/2020/1023

Annex X
Statement by the Chargé d’affaires of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations, Jonathan Allen
Let me begin by thanking the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for his briefing. I want to say how grateful the United Kingdom is for the hard work
of the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia. I am very pleased that the
Council has extended its mandate for a further year to continue its valuable work. I
am also delighted to see Foreign Minister Blum de Barberi and welcome her today.
We were very encouraged to hear of President Duque Márquez’s new
commitment to Colombia in order to combat the serious impact of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic. I want to say to him that all of our countries are
struggling from the social and economic effects of the virus. We must seize this
opportunity to build back better and create fairer, greener and more sustainable
economies and societies. In Colombia, I think that will be impossible without the
full and comprehensive implementation of the peace process. Minister Blum de
Barberi is among friends and has our support today.
We believe it is important to highlight some of the positive developments since
our last discussion (see S/PV.8749). Let me start with what might seem an unusual
one: the recent apology of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de ColombiaEjército del Pueblo for the thousands of kidnappings the group carried out and the
suffering it caused, combined with its claiming responsibility for the death of Álvaro
Gómez Hurtado. This was long overdue. It caused new pain as well as suffering, but
it was also a vindication of the very purpose of Colombia’s post-conflict transitional
justice institutions. Truth and the acknowledgment of past crimes, however long ago
they were committed, play a powerful role in a country’s ability to heal and, I am
sure, in Colombia’s ongoing peacebuilding process as well.
More generally, we were pleased to see the continued progress made by those
institutions of transitional justice despite the challenge of COVID-19. We look
forward to hearing from Foreign Minister Blum de Barberi’s Government regarding
a future role for the Verification Mission in supporting Colombia in monitoring
compliance with the sanctions of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace.
We also welcome the significant increase in the approval of protection measures
taken by the National Protection Unit. This will bring some relief to the human rights
defenders and social leaders facing constant threats, although additional resources
are urgently required to continue this progress and to clear the backlog of requests.
These social leaders cannot afford to wait. We remain very concerned by the high
rate of killings of community leaders, human rights defenders and other activists,
as well as the worrisome rise in multiple killings of civilians in recent months. It
goes without saying that we condemn such violence, and we condemn the armed
groups responsible.
A powerful deterrent to such killings is the bringing to justice of those who
ordered them and of those who carried them out. We echo the call for all relevant
Colombian institutions to support the Special Investigations Unit in the Office of the
Attorney General to ensure that those responsible for this violence are put on trial.
More broadly, as we have emphasized in previous statements before the
Security Council, the establishment of a public policy to dismantle illegal armed
groups is vital for bringing lasting peace across Colombia. It is encouraging that
the National Commission on Security Guarantees met during the reporting period.
This should now be followed by concrete and realistic proposals for action to be
implemented as soon as possible.
18/26

20-13941

S/2020/1023

The United Kingdom also welcomes the recent approval by the Colombian
Congress of the use of additional funds from mineral royalties to implement the
development programmes with a territorial approach, as well as the progress being
made in this area. It is imperative for the remaining road maps to be finalized and for
the development programmes to be implemented in order to bring peace and stability
to relevant regions. The State needs to increase and strengthen its presence in these
rural areas to allow peace and prosperity fully to take hold.
In this anniversary month of resolution 1325 (2000), let me echo the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. As we recall, the Colombian peace process
was notable for the importance it placed on the involvement of women and the
mainstreaming of gender in the Final Agreement. In fact, I would go so far as to say
that it is an example for others in terms of peace processes. All that we know is that
an inclusive peace process is far more likely to be a sustained, lasting and successful
peace process. We encourage all the parties in Colombia not to lose sight of this and
to ensure the full implementation of the Comprehensive Programme for Safeguards
for Women Leaders and Human Rights Defenders.
Let me conclude by saying that we applaud the Colombian Government and
the Verification Mission for the progress that they have continued to achieve despite
a global pandemic. While many significant challenges remain, the need for a lasting
and sustainable peace is clear, and the United Kingdom will continue to support
Colombia on this journey.

20-1394119/26

S/2020/1023

Annex XI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations, Kelly Craft
I thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu for his briefing and for the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2020/943). Colombia is closer to finding a lasting peace, thanks
to him and the efforts of the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia. We
also welcome Foreign Minister Blum de Barberi to today’s briefing; it is great to
see her.
We want to applaud the United Nations team, the Government of Colombia
and all Colombians for their joint work in continuing to implement the peace accord
during the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. We praise the Government
of Colombia’s commitment to pressing forward with peace accord implementation
while also responding to this urgent public-health challenge.
The United States continues to stand with Colombia as we confront COVID-19.
The Trump Administration has provided more than $23.6 million in assistance for
Colombia’s response to the disease. The United States is helping Colombians prevent
the spread of the virus, deliver water and sanitation supplies, care for COVID-19
cases and provide emergency food assistance.
We also express our solidarity with the 1.8 million Venezuelan refugees and
migrants in Colombia, who are among the most vulnerable to the pandemic’s health
and economic effects. As Secretary Pompeo affirmed during his September visit
to Bogotá, we commend Colombia’s inspiring generosity to so many of the most
vulnerable, which I saw first-hand during my time in the country in November
2019. The Colombian Government’s support of interim President Juan Guaidó and
a democratic transition for Venezuela provides the foundation for Venezuelans to
return home voluntarily and with the promise of prosperity and security.
We echo the report’s strong condemnation of the multiple killings that have
taken place in Colombia in recent months, including those of children and young
people. Once again, we must reiterate the urgent need to protect Colombia’s human
rights defenders, including those who work on land and environmental issues, social
leaders, former combatants, individuals in rural communities and members of
indigenous, Afro-Colombian, lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex and
other vulnerable populations that have been most affected by the ongoing violence.
We urge the Colombian authorities to take appropriate action, including by holding
those responsible for these killings accountable.
While we acknowledge progress by the Government of Colombia, particularly
the National Protection Unit’s recent approval of 94 urgent protection measures for
former combatants, more must be done in order to ensure safety, particularly in the
areas formerly controlled by the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de ColombiaEjército del Pueblo. We welcome Colombia’s continued progress in counter-narcotics
efforts and reiterate our commitment to continued partnership with the Duque Márquez
Administration to combat the destructive illegal drug trade. As Secretary Pompeo
noted in Bogotá last month, Colombian law enforcement, even in these difficult
times, has stepped up cocaine interdiction and eradication, manually clearing 57 per
cent more coca fields in 2019 than it did in 2018. The United States remains fully
engaged with the Government of Colombia to reduce coca cultivation and cocaine
production, extend State presence and promote integrated rural development that
enables Colombian citizens to pursue legitimate economic activities.
The commitment has been consistent since the establishment of Plan Colombia
20 years ago. Through the new United States-Colombia Growth Initiative, our
20/26

20-13941

S/2020/1023

Governments are working to build on State Department and United States Agency
for International Development long-term investments in the country to continue
improving security and bring even more private sector investment into rural
areas. On that note, we echo the call to encourage the parties to continue working
together to develop economic opportunities and provide effective security for the
new reintegration areas. Technical assistance, access to markets, greater attention
to monitoring and evaluation and increased assistance to former combatants’
cooperatives can all play important roles in economic development.
We continue to support implementation of the Final Peace Agreement and its
transitional justice efforts, including those undertaken by the Special Jurisdiction
for Peace. We also note the Council’s readiness to consider a potential role for the
Mission in its connection with the verification of the sentences handed down by the
Special Jurisdiction.
We are conscious of the significant challenges that remain. The need to
protect the lives of social leaders, strengthen citizen security and provide economic
opportunities in rural areas has become even more urgent owing to the pandemic.
But we remain confident that, with the support of the United States, the Verification
Mission and the international community, Colombia will continue to forge a durable
and equitable peace.

20-1394121/26

S/2020/1023

Annex XII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Dinh Quy Dang
It is my honour to deliver this statement on behalf of Indonesia and Viet Nam,
two States members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and current
members of the Security Council.
At the outset, we warmly welcome Her Excellency Ms. Claudia Blum de
Barberi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, to today’s meeting. We would
like to thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, for his
insightful briefing.
Colombia’s Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and
Lasting Peace in 2016 was a remarkable achievement. While we acknowledge several
positive developments that have been achieved, as well as the progress that has been
generated by the Peace Agreement, it is regrettable that we have yet to see its full
implementation. As a result, the peace process has remained fragile while progress
on reintegration has remained a challenge. We therefore continue to call on all
relevant parties to redouble their efforts to deliver on their individual commitments.
Against this background, we would like to stress the following three points.
First, on the peace process, we support the three priorities recommended in
the March 2020 report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/239). We highly commend
efforts to increase the participation of the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del
Común (FARC) political parties in the political life of the country. Their participation
in initiating draft legislation, constitutional reforms and the five pillars of a “New
commitment for Colombia” to overcome the effects of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic is welcomed and encouraged.
However, we are concerned about both the approach and progress in the
implementation of the Final Peace Agreement and other peace-related programmes
in the country. We also remain concerned about the delay of a 90-day bilateral
ceasefire proposal by the Ejército de Liberación Nacional to the Government. In
this regard, we would like to stress the importance of national unity on the way
forward for the country. We call on the relevant parties in Colombia to set aside
their differences and engage in constructive dialogue with a view to bringing about
reconciliation and solidarity for the country as well as progress in the peace process.
Secondly, on security, the most recent report of the Secretary-General
(S/2020/943) provided very worrisome information on the unabated violence
and attacks against Colombian communities. Illegal armed groups and criminal
organizations have continued to take advantage of the COVID-19 pandemic to
strengthen their social and territorial control. Confrontations between security
forces and local communities over operations of forced eradication of illicit crops
have continued in various regions. We condemn all these attacks and urge all the
groups concerned to immediately stop these appalling acts of violence. We reiterate
that such violence and attacks are unacceptable and that their perpetrators must be
brought to justice.
In this regard, we welcome the convening of a plenary session of the
National Commission on Security Guarantees in August. We look forward to seeing
more fruitful discussions on the dismantling of illegal armed groups, criminal
organizations and their support networks. We urge all relevant parties to uphold their
responsibilities in protecting civilians, especially women and children.

22/26

20-13941

S/2020/1023

Thirdly, on reintegration and development, we take note of the progress on
the reintegration of former combatants through individual and collective economic
and social development programmes and projects, especially in the context of the
COVID-19 pandemic. While efforts aimed at reintegration are highly appreciated,
it is also important to note that this is a long-term process that requires patience,
political will and practical steps. The reintegration process should be implemented
in a comprehensive and sustained manner.
We emphasize the need for further measures to promote economic and
inclusive development, social cohesion, rural development, housing, education, job
creation and so on, in order to sustain the progress that has been achieved so far.
The country’s development plans must take into account the particular needs of its
communities. We expect to see a greater role played by the Government, the FARC
and the National Reintegration Council — working together with the United Nations
and regional and international organizations — in developing a joint strategy for
strengthened socioeconomic development, which lays out concrete measures to
assist former combatants in stabilizing their lives.
Before concluding, we would like to reiterate our support for the United
Nations Verification Mission in facilitating the peace process and promoting stability
in Colombia. Indonesia and Viet Nam are committed to working constructively with
the United Nations, regional and international organizations and relevant parties in
contributing to the process of peace, security, unity and development in Colombia.

20-1394123/26

S/2020/1023

Annex XIII
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, Claudia
Blum de Barberi
I thank the presidency of the Security Council for convening today’s meeting,
as well as the members of the Council for their constant support for Colombia. I
also thank Secretary-General António Guterres and his Special Representative,
Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, for the report presented today (S/2020/943).
I wish to reaffirm President Iván Duque Márquez’s willingness to recognize
the importance of the presence of the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia throughout his entire term in office. In this regard, we highlight resolution
2545 (2020), adopted on 25 September, which extended the Mission’s mandate for
an additional year. Colombia emphasizes the work of the Mission’s team and its
collaborative efforts with Colombian national institutions and civil society.
On 16 September, the Government of Colombia convened a meeting to
evaluate the accomplishments made during the two years in which the “Peace with
legality” policy has been implemented. As Council members know, this policy is the
instrument through which the 2016 Agreement is being fulfilled. On the occasion of
that meeting, President Duque Márquez highlighted for Council members and other
stakeholders a detailed report on the achievements made as well as the challenges we
continue to face in fulfilling the agreed commitments.
President Duque Márquez also pointed out how, during our history, Colombia
has been a country affected by different clashes and expressions of violence. In the
last four decades, these situations have been aggravated by such factors as drug
trafficking, illegal markets and terrorist attacks. In some periods, several attempts
were made to overcome violence by negotiating peace agreements. However, even
those that were concluded successfully have not prevented the re-emergence of
violence. Based on our experience, we have learned that building and consolidating
peace requires the solid application of the principles of truth, justice, reparation
and non-repetition.
In the 2016 Agreement, a transitional justice system focused on victims’
rights was designed. The Government has supported and continues to support this
independent system and its various mechanisms. However, it is necessary to reiterate
the inadequate contribution of actors who are obligated to appear before the transitional
justice system yet have not contributed significantly and comprehensively to the
truth. Colombia demands that members of the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria
del Común (FARC) political party tell the truth and recognize their responsibility
with regard to the recruitment of children, kidnappings, sex crimes, attacks
against civilians, the planting of antipersonnel mines and forced disappearances,
among other serious crimes. Likewise, they must give details on drug trafficking
routes, money laundering and the links between the former guerrilla and other
criminal organizations. The Government considers essential for the United Nations
Verification Mission to address the lack of contribution to truth, reparation and
justice by the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo.
We trust that the truth about their countless crimes during more than 50 years will
be revealed, so that the transitional justice mechanisms can impose proportional
penalties, in accordance with the victims’ expectations.
The 2016 Agreement foresees that the Mission will eventually verify
compliance with the sentences to be imposed in future by the Special Jurisdiction
for Peace. We appreciate that in resolution 2545 (2020) the Council expressed its
willingness to consider the possible addition of this task to the Mission’s mandate,
based on the consultation process coordinated by the Government of Colombia.
24/26

20-13941

S/2020/1023

The two components of the Mission’s current mandate are the reincorporation
process and the security guarantees. The report highlights the progress made in the
reincorporation of former combatants who remain committed to the process and the
work carried out by the National Reincorporation Council. Regarding economic and
social reincorporation, the report acknowledges the efforts made in the context of the
pandemic and their positive impact. Despite the difficult situation, ex-combatants
have received support and resources for individual and collective productive
projects. Even during the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) national lockdown, the
Reincorporation Council approved, in five virtual sessions, 15 projects benefitting
420 people.
The report also mentions the political reintegration of former combatants. In
this regard, it is important to remember that, in the 2018 parliamentary elections, the
FARC party obtained 0.34 per cent of the Senate’s votes and 0.22 per cent in the House
of Representatives. Still, the FARC party acceded to the 10 seats granted to them in
the 2016 Agreement. For any other political party, this number of congressional seats
would require 4.8 per cent of the total votes. Currently, a member of the FARC party
is Vice-President of the Senate. And in the local and regional elections of 2019 the
FARC party participated with the required guarantees.
Regarding the transformation of the former territorial areas for training
and reincorporation, the measures for their transition and consolidation go beyond
the agreed commitments. This fact reaffirms the importance attributed by the
Government to these spaces to guarantee the reincorporation of the ex-combatants
who live there.
The safety and security of former combatants, human rights defenders and
social and political leaders remains our greatest challenge. As stated in the report, on
12 August, President Iván Duque Márquez convened the National Commission for
Security Guarantees. At that meeting, the Commission analysed the violent events
of recent months and examined additional measures for the dismantling of criminal
organizations that operate in some regions. The Government has duly considered
the Mission’s recommendations, with a view to strengthening prevention, risk
management, security and protection strategies.
Current circumstances have not prevented the implementation of protection
measures. The Presidential Office for Stabilization coordinates 15 State agencies that
adopted specific actions to reinforce security, mainly in prevention. For 2,626 people
located in the former territorial areas for training and reincorporation, security is
provided by more than 1,200 police members and 2,400 army troops. In addition,
266 individual, collective and headquarters protection schemes are provided by the
National Protection Unit. For almost 600 people living outside the former territorial
areas for training and reincorporation in 579 municipalities, the State has granted
individual and collective protection schemes, based on risk assessments decided
jointly with five representatives of the FARC party.
The fight against impunity is a State priority. Regarding the attacks against
former combatants, the Attorney General’s Office has advanced in the investigations
in 126 cases out of the 266 events reported since 2017. This means progress in 47 per
cent of the cases, which include 100 homicides, 18 attempted homicides and eight
forced disappearances. In the cases already judged, 30 people have been convicted.
We are advancing in the stabilization of the 170 municipalities most affected
by violence and poverty, where almost 6.6 million Colombians reside. More than
220,000 people actively participated in the formulation of the 16 development plans
with a territorial focus being implemented in these municipalities. In the last two
years, 888 projects were completed in these regions. To date, close to $600 million
20-1394125/26

S/2020/1023

dollars has been invested in these development plans. Their implementation has
continued even during the pandemic. Last August, 25 projects, worth $71 million,
were approved for eight regions. Transformation in these territories must be a
strong process that reinforces the eradication of illegal economies, development of
infrastructure, the provision of public goods and services and more opportunities for
economic progress and welfare.
The Mission’s report indicates that limited women’s participation in the
implementation is a great challenge, although it does not provide concrete examples.
I want to emphasize the priority given by the Government to women’s participation
in the “Peace with legality” policy, including in decision-making and implementation
and as beneficiaries. Fifty-one gender indicators of the implementation plan show that
more than 870,000 women have benefited from its actions. Be assured that we will
continue to work committed to the empowerment of women and to the eradication of
inequalities and discrimination.
Colombia condemns the violent acts against officials of the country office of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and one of
its vehicles, which took place on 7 October in the Caquetá department. According
to information from the Attorney General’s Office, these officials, together with
delegates from the Ombudsman’s Office and the Truth Commission, were intercepted
by armed men, presumed members of a FARC-EP dissident structure. From the
moment the facts were known, the Government expressed its solidarity to the Office
of the High Commissioner and has maintained permanent contact with judicial
authorities to prevent impunity.
Colombia, like every other country in the world, faces the enormous
challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic. Our Government has implemented
comprehensive measures to safeguard people’s health, provide support to the most
vulnerable, reactivate the country’s economy and promote well-being for all. In this
context, we keep working and will continue to advance in the implementation of the
peace with legality policy — collectively, with institutions, actors and communities
committed to enhancing the concrete results achieved in the last two years.
Our plan is to keep making definitive progress in territorial stabilization,
justice, security, the protection of human rights, welfare and social and sustainable
development. Our goal, as emphasized by President Iván Duque Márquez, is to free
ourselves from the causes, motivations and factors that have created and intensified
violence in our country. We thank the members of the Security Council for helping
us to advance towards that purpose.

26/26

20-13941
