74,

General Assembly-Twenty-firat Session

ing of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
contained in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
3. Expresses its appreciation to the Government of
Spain for having invited the Special Committee to visit
the Territory and for the co-operation rendered to the
Sub-Committee on Equatorial Guinea of the Special
Committee during its visit to the Territory;
4. Invites the administering Power to implement as
soon as possible the following measures :
(a) Removal of all restrictions on political activities and establishment oí full democratic freedoms;
( b) Institution of an electoral system based on universal adult suffrage and the holding, before independence, of a general election for the whole Territory on the
basis of a unified electoral roll ;
(e) Transfer of effective power to the government
resulting from this election ;
5. Requests the administering Power to ensure that
the Territory accedes to independence as a single political and territorial unit and that no step is taken which
would jeopardize the territorial integrity of Equatorial
Guinea;
6. Requests the administering Power, in accordance
with the wishes of the people of Equatorial Guinea, to
set a date for independence as recommended by the
Special Committee and, for this purpose, to convene a
conference in which the various political parties and
all sections of the population would be fully represented;
7. Further requests the administering Power to establish in law and in practice full equality of political,
economic and social rights ;
8. Urges the administering Power to take effective
measures, including increased assistance, to ensure the
rapid economic development of the Territory and to
promote the educational and social advancement of the
people, and requests the specialized agencies to render
all possible assistance towards this end ;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to take appropriate action, in consultation with the administering Power
and the Special Committee, to ensure the presence of the
United Nations in the Territory for the supervision of
the preparation for, and the holding of, the election
envisaged in paragraph 4 ( b) above, and to participate
in any other measures leading towards the independence
of the Territory;
10. Further requests the Secretary-General to transmit the present resolution to the administering Power
and to report to the Special Committee on its implementation;
11. Decides to maintain the question of Equatorial
Guinea on its agenda.
1500th Plenary meeting,
20 December 1966.
2231 (XXI). Question of Gibraltar
The General Assembly,
Having examined the question of Gibraltar,
H aving heard the statements of the administering
Power and the representative of Spain,
H aving heard the statements of the petitioners,
Recalling its resolution 2070 (XX) of 16 December
1965, and the consensus adopted by the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementa-

tion of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples on 16 October 1964,29
Recalling further its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
Taking into account the noted willingness of th~ administering Power and of the Government of Spam to
continue the present negotiations,
Regretting the occurrence of certain acts w~ic~ had
prejudiced the smooth progress of these negot1at1ons,
1. Regrets the delay in the process of decolonization
and in the implementation of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) with regard to Gibraltar;
2. Calls upon the two parties to continue their negotiations, taking into account the interests of the people
of the Territory, and asks the administering Power to
expedite, without any hindrance and in consultation with
the Government of Spain, the decolonization of Gibraltar, and to report to the Special Commit!ee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementat10n of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples as soon as possible, and in any
case before the twenty-second session oí the General
Assembly;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to assist in the
implementation of the present resolution.
1500th plenary meeting,
20 December 1966.
2232 (XXI). Question of American Samoa, Anti,rua, Bahamas, Bermuda, British Virgin
Islands, Cayman Islands, Cocos (Keeling)
Islands, Dominica, Gilbert and Ellice lslands,
Grenada, Guam, Mauritius, Montserrat, New
Hehrides, Niue, Pitcairn, St. Helena, St.
Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia, St. Vincent,
Seychelles, Solomon Islands, Tokelau Is■
lands, Turks and Caicos Islands and the
United States Virgin Islands
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of American Samoa,
Antigua, Bahamas, Bermuda, British Virgin Islands,
Cayman Islands, Cocos (Keeling) Islands, Dominica,
Gilbert :md Ellice Islands, Grenada, Guam, Mauritius,
Montserrat, New Hebrides, Niue, Pitcairn, St. Helena,
St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia, St. Vincent, Seychelles, Solomon Islands, Tokelau Islands, Turks and
Caicos Islands and the United States Virgin Islands,
H aving examined the chapters of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to these Territories,80
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, 1654 (XVI) of 27 November 1961, 1810 (XVII)
of 17 December 1962, 1956 (XVIII) of 11 December
1963, 2066 (XX) of 16 December 1965, 2069 (XX)
of 16 December 1965 and 2189 (XXI) of 13 December
1966,
Deeply concerned at the information contained in the
report of the Special Committee on the continuation of
policies which aim, among other things, at the disruption of the territorial integrity of sorne of these Terri29 !bid., Nineteenth Session, Anneres, annex No. 8 (part 1)
(A/5800/Rev.1), chapter X, para. 209.
so !bid., Twenty-first Session, Anneres, addendum to agenda
item 23 (A/6300/Rev.l), chapters XIV-XIX and XXII.
