S/PRST/2015/23*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
25 November 2015
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 7568th meeting of the Security Council, held on 25 November 2015, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Protection of
civilians in armed conflict”, the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reaffirms its commitment regarding the protection
of civilians in armed conflict, and to the continuing and full implementation of
all its previous relevant resolutions including 1265 (1999), 1296 (2000), 1674
(2006), 1738 (2006), 1894 (2009), and 2222 (2015), as well as all of its
resolutions on Women, Peace and Security, Children and Armed Conflict and
Peacekeeping, and all relevant statements of its President.
“The Security Council expresses its outrage that civilians continue to
account for the vast majority of casualties in situations of armed conflict and at
the various short and long term impacts that conflict continues to have on
civilians, including forced displacement, and damage to and destruction of
civilian property and livelihoods.
“The Security Council reaffirms its strong condemnation of violations of
international humanitarian law committed by all parties to armed conflict, as
well as violations and abuses of international human rights law, as applicable,
and calls upon all parties to comply with their legal obligations. The Security
Council recalls the importance of ensuring compliance with international
humanitarian law and international human rights law, ending impunity for
violations and abuses, and ensuring accountability.
“The Security Council underscores the importance it attaches to the
Protection of Civilians as one of the core issues on its agenda, and expresses its
intention to continue addressing this issue regularly, both in country-specific
considerations and as a thematic item.
“The Security Council recognises the contribution of the updated Aide
Memoire for the consideration of issues pertaining to the protection of civilians
in armed conflict,** contained in the annex to this statement, to the protection of
civilians, and as a practical tool that provides a basis for improved analysis and
diagnosis of key protection issues, and stresses the need to continue its use on a
more systematic and consistent basis.
* Reissued for technical reasons on 11 January 2016.
** The initial Aide Memoire was adopted on 15 March 2002 in S/PRST/2002/6.

15-20840* (E)

130116

*1520840*

S/PRST/2015/23

“The Security Council takes note of with appreciation the report of the
Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in armed conflict of 18 June
2015 (S/2015/453) and the recommendations contained therein, and reiterates
the need for systematic monitoring and reporting on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, and the challenges and progress made in this regard. The
Security Council requests the Secretary-General to submit his next report on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict by 15 May 2016 and to submit future
reports every 12 months thereafter, to be formally considered by the Security
Council each year within the same General Assembly session.”

2/98

15-20840

S/PRST/2015/23

Aide Memoire
For the consideration of issues pertaining to the protection of civilians in
armed conflict
Enhancing the protection of civilians in armed conflict is at the core of the
work of the United Nations Security Council for the maintenance of peace and
security. In order to facilitate the Council’s consideration of protection of civilians
concerns in a given context, including at the time of the establishment or rene wal of
peacekeeping mandates, in June 2001, Council Members suggested that an Aide
Memoire, listing the relevant issues, be drafted in cooperation with the Council
(S/2001/614). On 15 March 2002, the Council adopted the Aide Memoire as a
practical guide for its consideration of protection of civilians issues and agreed to
review and update its contents periodically (S/PRST/2002/6). It was subsequently
updated twice and adopted as annex to Presidential Statement S/PRST/2003/27 on
15 December 2003, and Presidential Statement S/PRST/2010/25 of 22 November
2010.
This is the sixth edition of the Aide Memoire and is based on the Council’s
previous deliberations on the protection of civilians, including resolutions 1265
(1999), 1296 (2000), 1674 (2006), 1738 (2006), 1894 (2009) and 2222 (2015). It is
the result of consultation between the Security Council and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), as well as between OCHA and
concerned United Nations departments and agencies, and other relevant
humanitarian organizations.
The Aide Memoire is intended to facilitate the Security Council’s
consideration of issues relevant to the protection of civilians in armed conflict. To
this end, it highlights primary objectives for Security Council action; offers, on the
basis of the Security Council’s past practice, specific issues for consideration in
meeting those objectives; and provides, in the addendum, a selection of agreed
language from Security Council resolutions and presidential statements that refer to
such concerns.
Bearing in mind that each peacekeeping mandate has to be elaborated on a
case-by-case basis, the Aide Memoire is not intended as a blueprint for action. The
relevance and practicality of the various measures described has to be considered
and adapted to the specific conditions in each situation.
Most frequently civilians are caught in circumstances of dire need where a
peacekeeping operation has not been established. Such situations may require the
Council’s urgent attention. This Aide Memoire may, therefore, also provide
guidance in circumstances where the Council may wish to consider action outside
the scope of a peacekeeping operation.

15-20840

3/98

S/PRST/2015/23

I. General protection concerns pertaining to the conflictaffected population
A.

Protection of, and assistance to, the conflict-affected population
Parties to armed conflict to take the necessary measures to protect and meet
the basic needs of the conflict-affected population.
Issues for consideration:
 Stress the responsibility of parties to armed conflict to abide by all their
obligations under international humanitarian law and to respect, protect, and
meet the basic needs of civilian populations within their effective control.
 Stress the responsibility of States to protect civilians and ensure the human
rights of all individuals within their territory and subject to their
jurisdiction, and recall the responsibility of all parties to armed conflict to
respect human rights, as applicable.
 Express concern at acts, threats or situations of violence against civilians in
armed conflict, condemn violations of applicable international humanitarian
law as well as human rights law violations and abuses, and call on all
parties to immediately cease such violations and abuses.
 Call for strict compliance by parties to armed conflict with applicable
international humanitarian law and human rights law, as well as any Security
Council resolutions which apply to the situation, including with regard to:

▪ The prohibition against violence to life and person, in particular
murder, mutilation, cruel treatment and torture; enforced
disappearances; outrages upon personal dignity; and rape, sexual
slavery, enforced prostitution, forced pregnancy, enforced sterilization,
and any other form of sexual violence.

▪ The prohibition against arbitrary deprivation of libert y; corporal
punishment; collective punishment; and the passing of sentences and
the carrying out of executions without previous judgement pronounced
by a regularly constituted court, affording all judicial guarantees which
are generally recognized as indispensable.

▪ The prohibition against taking of hostages.
▪ The prohibition against ordering the displacement of the civilian
population for reasons related to the conflict, unless the security of the
civilians involved or imperative military reasons so dema nd.

▪ The prohibition against the recruitment or the active use of children in
hostilities by parties to armed conflict in violation of applicable
international law.

▪ The prohibition against slavery and the slave trade in all their forms
and uncompensated or abusive forced labour.

▪ The provision of humanitarian relief supplies in situations of armed
conflict.

4/98

15-20840

S/PRST/2015/23

▪ The prohibition of persecution on political, cultural, religious,
national, racial, ethnic or gender grounds.

▪ The prohibition of any adverse distinction in the application of
international humanitarian law and human rights law based on race,
colour, sex, language, religion or belief, political or other opinion,
national or social origin, wealth, birth or other status.

▪ The obligation to respect and protect, to whichever party they belong,
the wounded and sick, to take all possible measures, particularly after
an engagement, to search for and collect the wounded and sick and to
provide, to the fullest extent practicable and with the least possible
delay, the medical care and attention required by their condition
without distinction on any grounds other than medical ones.
 Condemn cases of arbitrary deprivation of liberty, incommunicado
detention in violation of international law, and acts of torture and other
forms of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment, in detention centres.
 Call on all parties to armed conflict as well as relevant Security Council authorized missions to ensure that all persons within their custody are
treated in strict compliance with international humanitarian law and human
rights law, as applicable, and further call on all parties to ensure access for
relevant organizations, as applicable, to all prisons and places of detention.
 Call upon parties to armed conflict to take steps and adopt specific
measures to enhance the protection of civilians, including engaging in good
faith in peace talks, and for States to ratify and implement international
human rights and refugee law instruments.
 Mandate United Nations peacekeeping and other relevant missions
authorized by the Security Council, where appropriate and on a case -bycase basis, to impartially contribute to the protection of the civilian
population, including those under threat of physical violence, within their
zones of operation. In doing so, request:

▪ That the protection of civilians is prioritized in decisions about the use
of available capacity and resources, including information and
intelligence resources, in the implementation of mandates.

▪ The development of clear guidelines/directives as to their protection
role, including practical protection measures such as the establishment
of early warning systems, support to local conflict resolution
mechanisms, intensified and systematic patrolling in potential volatile
areas, joint protection teams, and reviews of deployment, as
appropriate.

▪ Systematic coordination between the civil and military components of
the mission and between the mission and relevant humanitarian actors
in order to consolidate expertise on the protection of civilians, in
particular to improve the identification of, and response to, threats to
civilians.

▪ That missions communicate with the civilian population to raise
awareness and understanding about their mandate and activities and to

15-20840

5/98

S/PRST/2015/23

collect reliable information on violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights violations and abuses perpetrated against
civilians.
 Request that United Nations peacekeeping and other relevant missions
develop comprehensive protection strategies in consultation with United
Nations country teams and other relevant actors, and maximize the use of
their capacities for the implementation of these comprehensive protection
strategies.
 Expressly authorize missions to use all necessary means to carry out their
protection mandates.
 Stress that any United Nations support to non-UN security forces shall be
consistent with the Secretary-General’s Human Rights Due Diligence Policy
on United-Nations Support to Non-UN Forces.
 Condemn wilful impediments to the implementation of United Nations
Security Council authorized peace operations and other relevant missions’
mandates, in particular attacks against their staff and bureaucratic hurdles,
call upon host States to fully comply with Status-of-Forces and/or Status-ofMission agreements, and call upon parties to conflict to immediately cease
interfering with, and take steps to facilitate, the activities of these missions
in the implementation of their mandates.
 Request that reports of the Secretary-General on country-specific situations
include, where appropriate, information on the protection of civilians,
including internally-displaced persons and refugees, notably acts that could
constitute, as applicable, violations of international humanitarian law,
human rights violations or abuses, or violations of international refugee law,
by all parties, and developments on the implementation of the Secretary General’s Human Rights Due Diligence Policy.
 Request missions to monitor, help investigate, and report publicly and to the
Security Council, on a regular basis, on the situation with regard to human
rights and international humanitarian law in host countries, and request the
Secretary-General to ensure that UN missions have sufficient capacity,
including human rights monitors, to this end.
 Request that United Nations peacekeeping and other relevant missions
develop benchmarks and indicators of progress regarding the protection of
civilians to measure specific developments in the implementation of their
protection mandates.
 Request troop- and police-contributing countries to ensure the provision of
appropriate training, including training on international humanitarian law
and international human rights law, to heighten the awareness and
responsiveness to protection concerns of their personnel participating in
United Nations peacekeeping and other relevant missions authorized by the
Security Council to protect civilians.
 Urge relevant regional and/or subregional bodies to develop and implement
policies, activities and advocacy for the benefit of civilians affected by
armed conflict.

6/98

15-20840

S/PRST/2015/23

B.

Displacement
Parties to armed conflict and other relevant actors refrain from, and take the
necessary measures to prevent and respond to, the displacement of the
civilian population.
Issues for consideration:
 Express concern at the displacement of civilians as a result of armed
conflict, and call upon parties to armed conflict to take all feasible
precautions to minimize harm to civilians and civilian objects.
 Condemn, and call for the immediate cessation of, displacement in violation
of applicable international humanitarian law and human rights law.
 Call for strict compliance by parties to armed conflict with international
humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee law, as applicable, as well
as any Security Council resolutions which apply to the situation, including
with regard to:

▪ The prohibition against deportation, forcible transfer or displacement
of the civilian population, in whole or in part, unless the security of the
civilians concerned or imperative military reasons so demand.

▪ The obligation, in case of displacement, to ensure to the greatest
practicable extent that the civilians concerned are received under
satisfactory conditions of shelter, hygiene, health, safety and nutrition
and that members of the same family are not separated and that basic
needs are met during displacement.

▪ The right to freedom of movement and to leave one’s country and seek
asylum.

▪ The principle of non-refoulement under the Convention relating to the
Status of Refugees, while also recalling that the protections afforded
by the Refugee Convention and its Protocol shall not extend to any
person with respect to whom there are serious reasons for considering
that she or he has been guilty of acts contrary to the purposes and
principles of the United Nations.

▪ The obligation of States to ensure the human rights, as applicable, of
internally displaced persons during all phases of displacement,
including their rights to property and freedom of movement, and
including in relation to evictions and to the design, planning and
realization of any durable solutions.
 Call upon States to provide protection and assistance to refugees, in full
respect for international refugee law, and to internally-displaced persons, in
full respect for international human rights law, as applicable, and in keeping
with the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement.
 Underline the primary responsibility of States to respect and maintain the
security and civilian character of camps for refugees and internally
displaced persons, including disarming armed elements, separating
combatants, curbing the flow of small arms in camps and preventing
recruitment by armed groups in and around camps, and condemn the use of

15-20840

7/98

S/PRST/2015/23

camps for refugees and internally-displaced persons by parties to armed
conflict to gain a military advantage, thereby putting civilians in those
camps at risk.
 Mandate peacekeeping and other relevant missions authorized by the
Security Council to pay particular attention to the protect ion of internallydisplaced persons as particularly vulnerable civilians while carrying out
their protection mandate, including through ensuring security in and around
areas of high concentration of refugees and internally-displaced persons and
specific protection measures in camps for refugees and internally displaced
persons.
 Stress the need for the States, with the support of relevant United Nations
missions and country teams, to provide assistance to host States and
communities in meeting the needs of internally-displaced persons and
refugees and ensuring their safety and security.
 Request that reports of the Secretary-General on country-specific situations
include the protection of displaced persons as a specific aspect of the report.
 Urge relevant regional and/or subregional bodies to develop and implement
policies, activities and advocacy for the benefit of internally displaced
persons and refugees.
 Consider applying targeted and graduated measures against parties to armed
conflict who commit violations of applicable international law related to
forced displacement.
Durable solutions for refugees and internally displaced persons, including safe,
voluntary and dignified return and reintegration.
Issues for consideration:
 Call for strict compliance by parties to armed conflict with applicable
international humanitarian law, refugee law and human rights law,
including with regard to:

▪ Respect for the right of refugees and internally-displaced persons to
voluntary return in safety and dignity to their home s.

▪ Respect for the property rights of refugees and displaced persons,
without adverse distinction on the basis of gender, age or other status.
 Stress the importance of achieving dignified durable solutions for refugees
and internally-displaced persons, including voluntary, safe and dignified
return, local integration or resettlement, and of ensuring their full
participation in the design, planning and realization of these solutions.
 Stress that the realization of any durable solution shall be voluntary,
decided on the basis of all available information regarding the conditions of
the operation and the situation in places of origins or resettlement, including
security conditions, and conducted in a way that preserves the dignity and
ensures the safety and security of internally-displaced persons and refugees.
 Call upon all parties concerned to create the conditions conducive to
allowing the voluntary, safe, dignified and sustainable return, local
integration or resettlement of refugees and internally-displaced persons.

8/98

15-20840

S/PRST/2015/23

 Stress the importance of addressing, and call upon States to address,
housing, land and property issues in a non-discriminatory manner to prevent
conflict and secondary displacement, and create conditions conducive to the
realization of durable solutions.
 Request United Nations Peacekeeping and other relevant missions to
contribute to the reestablishment of security conditions conducive to
voluntary, safe, dignified and sustainable returns, or the realization of other
durable solutions, including through police patrols in areas of return, local
integration or resettlement.
 Call upon all parties concerned to ensure non-discriminatory treatment of
returning refugees and internally displaced persons.
 Call upon all parties concerned to ensure the participation of refugees and
internally displaced persons and inclusion of their needs, including their
right to voluntary, safe and dignified return and reintegration, in all peace
processes, peace agreements and post-conflict recovery and reconstruction
planning and programmes.
 Encourage United Nations peacekeeping and other relevant missions
authorized by the Security Council, as appropriate and on a case -by-case
basis, to support domestic mechanisms for addressing housing, land and
property issues or their establishment by national authorities.
 Encourage United Nations peacekeeping and other relevant missions
authorized by the Security Council, as appropriate and on a case -by-case
basis, to prevent the illegal appropriation and confiscation of land and
property belonging to refugees and internally displaced persons and to
ensure the protection of returning refugees and internally displaced persons.

C.

Humanitarian access and safety and security of
humanitarian workers
Parties to armed conflict to agree to and facilitate relief operations that are
humanitarian and impartial in character and to allow and facilitate rapid, safe
and unhindered passage of relief consignments, equipment and personnel.
Issues for consideration:
 Condemn, and call for the immediate removal of, impediments of
humanitarian access in violation of applicable international humanitarian
law.
 Call for strict compliance by parties to armed conflict with applicable
international humanitarian law, as well as relevant Security Counc il
resolutions, including with regards to:

▪ The prohibition against using starvation of civilians as a method of
warfare by depriving them of objects indispensable to their survival,
including wilfully impeding relief supplies in contravention of
international humanitarian law.

▪ Agreeing to relief actions which are humanitarian and impartial in
character and conducted without any adverse distinction.

15-20840

9/98

S/PRST/2015/23

▪ Providing, or facilitating the provision of, medical care and attention to
the wounded and sick, as required by their condition, to the fullest
extent practicable and with the least possible delay.
 Call for strict compliance by parties to armed conflict and third States with
their obligations under applicable international human itarian law to allow
and facilitate the rapid, safe and unhindered passage of relief consignments,
equipment and personnel subject to their right to prescribe technical
arrangements, including search, under which such passage is permitted.
 Call upon parties to armed conflict to facilitate the passage to all areas for
medical personnel, equipment, transport and supplies, including surgical
items.
 Call upon humanitarian organizations and actors to abide by, and parties to
armed conflict to uphold and respect, the humanitarian principles of
humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence, in order to ensure the
continued provision of humanitarian assistance, the safety and protection of
those receiving such assistance, and the security of humanitarian pers onnel.
 Condemn the arbitrary withholding of consent to relief operations and recall
that the arbitrary denial of humanitarian access and depriving civilians of
objects indispensable to their survival, including wilfully impeding relief
supply and access, may constitute a violation of international humanitarian
law.
 Demand that parties to armed conflict allow and facilitate the safe, rapid,
safe and unhindered access by humanitarian organizations to all areas for
the principled provision of humanitarian assistance.
 Call upon parties to armed conflict to remove all impediments to
humanitarian access, including bureaucratic impediments, and call upon
States hosting humanitarian operations to expedite the issuance of visas for
humanitarian actors as well as custom and clearance processes for
humanitarian supplies.
 Mandate United Nations peacekeeping and other relevant missions
authorized by the Security Council, where appropriate and as requested, to
help creating security conditions conducive to the rapid, safe, unhindered
and civilian-led provision of humanitarian assistance.
 Consider applying targeted and graduated measures against parties to armed
conflict who are responsible for obstructing the delivery of humanitarian
assistance in violation of international humanitarian law, including by
participating in attacks against humanitarian actors and assets.
Parties to armed conflict to respect and protect humanitarian workers
and facilities.
Issues for consideration:
 Condemn, and call for the immediate cessation of, attacks deliberately
targeting humanitarian workers.
 Call for strict compliance by parties to armed conflict with applicable
international humanitarian law, including the duty to respect and protect

10/98

15-20840

S/PRST/2015/23

relief personnel and installations, material, units and vehicles involved in
humanitarian assistance.
 Stress the primary responsibility of States hosting humanitarian operations
to ensure the security and protection of humanitarian personnel.
 Encourage the Secretary-General to bring to the attention of the Security
Council situations in which humanitarian assistance is denied as a
consequence of violence directed against humanitarian personnel and
facilities.
 Request that States include key provisions of the Convention on the Safety
of United Nations and Associated Personnel and its Optional Protocol, such
as those regarding the prevention of attacks against members of United
Nations operations, the criminalization of such attacks and the prosecution
or extradition of offenders in future as well as, if necess ary, in existing
status-of-forces, status-of-mission and host country agreements negotiated
with the United Nations.
Relevant international actors, including Donors and United Nations
humanitarian agencies, to increase humanitarian assistance and improve the
reach, quantity and quality of humanitarian aid.
Issues for consideration:
 Call upon Member States to contribute to Consolidated Appeal Processes.
 Consider adopting general exemptions to targeted economic and financial
sanctions as well as arms embargoes adopted by the Security Council in
order to facilitate the provision of humanitarian assistance and enhance the
security and safety of humanitarian personnel where relevant, as determined
by the relevant Security Council sanctions Committee.

D.

Conduct of hostilities
Parties to armed conflict to take all feasible steps to protect civilians from the
effects of hostilities.
Issues for consideration:
 Condemn, and call for the immediate cessation of, all acts of violence and
abuses committed against civilians in violation of applicable international
humanitarian law and human rights law.
 Call for strict compliance by parties to armed conflict with applicable
international humanitarian law, as well as any Security Council resolutions
which apply to the situation, including compliance with the prohibitions
against:

▪ Directing attacks against the civilian population or against individual
civilians not taking direct part in hostilities;

▪ Directing attacks against civilian objects;
▪ Launching an attack that is indiscriminate, i.e., of a nature to strike
military objectives and civilians or civilian objects without distinction;

15-20840

11/98

S/PRST/2015/23

▪ Launching an attack which may be expected to cause incidental loss of
life or injury to civilians or damage to civilian object s or a
combination thereof which would be excessive in relation to the
concrete and direct military advantage anticipated;

▪ Directing attacks against personnel, installations, material, units or
vehicles involved in a humanitarian assistance or peacekeep ing
mission in accordance with the United Nations Charter, as long as they
are entitled to the protection given to civilians or civilian objects under
international humanitarian law;

▪ Utilizing the presence of a civilian or other protected person to rend er
certain points, areas or military forces immune from military
operations;

▪ Rape and other forms of sexual violence;
▪ Directing attacks against buildings dedicated to religion, education, art,
science or charitable purposes, historic monuments, hospitals and
places where the sick and wounded are collected, provided they are not
military objectives;

▪ Directing attacks against buildings, material, medical units and
transport, and personnel using the distinctive emblems of the Geneva
Conventions in conformity with international law;

▪ Destroying or seizing the property of the adversary unless required by
military necessity;

▪ Using starvation of civilians as a method of warfare by depriving them
of objects indispensable to their survival, including wilfu lly impeding
relief supplies in contravention of applicable international
humanitarian law.
 Request within regular reporting by the Secretary-General as well as United
Nations Security Council authorized peace operations and other relevant
missions, information on concrete steps taken to ensure the protection of the
civilian population in the conduct of hostilities and on measures to ensure
accountability for violations of applicable international humanitarian law.
 Request parties to armed conflict and United Nations authorized missions
with a mandate to conduct or support offensive operations, to adopt and
implement specific measures to mitigate the risk that harm be caused to
civilians or civilian objects as a consequence of hostilities in violation of
international humanitarian law, such as, when possible and practical, the
establishment of civilian casualty tracking systems, systematic
investigations in cases where the use of force resulted in civilian casualties,
regular reviews of tactics and procedures, and the issuance of clear and
specific orders and tactical directives to minimize civilian harm and damage
to civilian objects as a result of hostilities.

12/98

15-20840

S/PRST/2015/23

E.

Small arms and light weapons, including mines and explosive
remnants of war, and the indiscriminate use of weapons
Protection of the civilian population through the control of, and reduction in
the availability of, illicit small arms and light weapons.
Issues for consideration:
 Express concern at the detrimental impact of the proliferation and
availability of small arms and light weapons on the security and safety of
civilians by fuelling armed conflict, and request relevant Security Council authorized missions to monitor the presence of arms among the civilian
population.
 Request States and regional and subregional organizations to adopt
measures to curb and reduce the illicit trafficking, of small arms and light
weapons such as voluntary collection and destruction; effective stockpile
management, storage and security; arms embargoes; sanctions; and legal
measures against corporate actors, individuals and entities involved in such
activities.
 Encourage strengthened practical cooperation between United N ations
peacekeeping and other relevant missions authorized by the Security
Council aimed at monitoring and preventing the cross-border movement of
small arms and light weapons.
 Mandate United Nations peacekeeping and other relevant missions
authorized by the Security Council to assist Monitoring Groups or Panels of
Experts assisting relevant Security Council sanctions Committees in their
monitoring role, and collect and dispose of, or secure, illicit and/or surplus
small arms and light weapons as well as surplus ammunition stockpiles.
 Encourage the development and reinforcement of national capacities to
store ammunition stockpiles according to international standards, including
through the rehabilitation or construction of armouries and ammunition
depots.
 Consider imposing arms embargoes and other measures aimed at preventing
the sale or supply of arms and related materiel of all types to parties to
armed conflict that commit violations of applicable international law, and
consider imposing targeted sanctions on individuals and entities listed by
relevant Security Council sanctions Committees as acting in violation of
Security Council-imposed restrictive measures on arms.
 Encourage strengthened practical cooperation among relevant sanctions
monitoring groups of the Security Council, peacekeeping and other relevant
missions authorized by the Security Council and States.
 Request the establishment of a baseline arms inventory as well as arms
marking and registration systems in situations where a United Nations ar ms
embargo coincides with disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
efforts.

15-20840

13/98

S/PRST/2015/23

Protection of the civilian population through the cessation of the indiscriminate
use of weapons, and the marking, clearance, removal or destruction of mines
and explosive remnants of war (ERW), including cluster munitions and
improvised explosive device remnants.
Issues for consideration:
 Condemn, and call upon parties to armed conflict to refrain from, the illegal
and indiscriminate use of weapons,.
 Urge States to consider ratifying or acceding to the Arms Trade Treaty, and
take steps to ensure the full implementation of its provisions.
 Call on parties to armed conflict, after the cessation of active hostilities and
as soon as feasible, to mark, clear, remove or destroy mines and ERW in
affected territories under their control, prioritizing areas affected by mines
and ERW which are assessed to pose serious humanitarian risk.
 Call on parties to armed conflict to record and retain information on the use
of mines and explosive ordnance or the abandonment of explosive
ordnance, to facilitate rapid marking and clearance, removal or destruction
of mines and ERW and risk education, and to provide the relevant
information to the party in control of, and civilian populations in, the
territory.
 Call on parties to armed conflict to take all feasible precautions in the
territory under their control affected by mines and ERW to protect the
civilian population, in particular children, including issuing warnings,
undertaking risk education, marking, fencing and monitoring of territory
affected by mines and ERW.
 Call on parties to armed conflict to protect United Nations Security Council
authorized peace operations and other relevant missions, as well as
humanitarian organizations, from the effects of mines and ERW and to
make available information on the location of mines and ERW that they are
aware of in the territory where the missions/organizations are or will be
operating.
 Call on parties to armed conflict, States and other relevant acto rs to provide
technical, financial, material or human resources assistance to facilitate the
marking, clearance, removal or destruction of mines and ERW.
 Call on parties to armed conflict, States and other relevant actors to provide
assistance for the care, rehabilitation and economic and social reintegration
of victims of ERW and their families and communities.

F.

Compliance, accountability and the rule of law
Compliance by parties to armed conflict with applicable international
humanitarian law and human rights law.
Issues for consideration:
 Call on parties to armed conflict and Security Council -authorized missions
with a mandate to conduct or support offensive operations, to take

14/98

15-20840

S/PRST/2015/23

appropriate measures to respect and ensure respect for international
humanitarian law and human rights law, including by:

▪ Enforcing appropriate military disciplinary measures and upholding the
principle of command responsibility.

▪ Training

troops and police forces on applicable
humanitarian law and human rights law.

international

▪ Vetting armed and security forces to ensure that personnel have a
reliably attested record of not having been involved in violations of
international humanitarian law or human rights law violations or
abuses.
 Consider applying targeted and graduated measures against parties to armed
conflict that threaten peace, attack or obstruct the action of United Nations
Peacekeeping or other relevant mission, commit violations of applicable
international humanitarian law and human rights law, or incite publicly
hatred and violence.
 Stress that the support of United Nations peacekeeping and other relevant
missions to military operations led by national armed forces is strictly
conditioned on the compliance of those armed forces with international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law and on joint planning of such
operations.
 Call upon United Nations peacekeeping and other relevant missions to
intercede with national armed forces if elements of the latter receiving
support from the mission are suspected of committing violations of
international humanitarian, human rights and refugee law and, if the
situation persists, to withdraw the mission’s support.
 Request relevant United Nations-authorized missions to provide training,
including in the area of human rights, international humanitarian law, child
protection and the prevention of gender-based and sexual violence, to the
armed forces of host States.
Accountability for persons suspected of violations of international
humanitarian law or international human rights law violations or abuses,
genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes or serious violations of human
rights law.
Issues for consideration:
 Stress the importance of ending impunity for violations of applicable
international humanitarian law and international human rights law
violations and abuses as part of a comprehensive approach to seeking
sustainable peace, justice, truth and national reconciliation.
 Call on States to comply with their obligations to investigate, search for,
prosecute or extradite persons suspected of committing genocide, war
crimes, crimes against humanity or other serious violations of international
law, including international humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee
law, irrespective of their status or political affiliation.

15-20840

15/98

S/PRST/2015/23

 Stress the need for the exclusion of, and reject any form of, or endorsement
of, amnesty for genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes or other
serious violations of human rights in conflict resolution processes and
ensure that no such amnesty previously granted is a bar to prosecution
before any United Nations-created or -assisted court.
 Mandate United Nations Security Council authorized peace operations and
other relevant missions support and promote, in cooperation with relevant
States, the establishment of effective arrangements at the national or
international level for investigating and prosecuting violations of
international humanitarian law and international human rights law
violations and abuses, including through capacity building and support to
national justice sector reforms.
 Request the cooperation of States and United Nations peacekeeping and
other relevant missions authorized by the Security Council in the
apprehension and surrender of alleged perpetrators of genocide, crimes
against humanity, or war crimes, as applicable, as well as alleged
perpetrators of international humanitarian law or international human rights
law violations, and international human rights law abuses.
 Stress the need for comprehensive, independent and im partial investigation,
consistent with international standards, into alleged human rights abuses
and violations, and violations of international humanitarian law.
 Consider the establishment of ad hoc judicial mechanisms and reparation
programs at the national or international level to investigate and prosecute
international humanitarian law and international human rights law
violations and abuses, war crimes and serious violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law, and ensure the implementa tion of
applicable provisions on the right to reparations for violations of individual
rights.
 Consider the referral of situations involving genocide, crimes against
humanity or war crimes to the International Criminal Court.
Protection of civilians through the restoration and enforcement of the rule of
law, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes, and security
sector reform.
Issues for consideration:
 Call upon States to ensure equal protection under the law and equal access
to justice for victims, including women and children, of violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law and to take the
necessary measures to ensure the protection of victims and witnesses.
 Mandate United Nations Security Council authorized peace oper ations and
other relevant missions to support restoration of the rule of law, including
through the provision of assistance in monitoring, restructuring and
reforming the justice and law enforcement sectors.
 Consider mandating United Nations peacekeeping and other relevant
missions authorized by the Security Council to, as an emergency measure
dictated by exceptional circumstances and upon request from host States,

16/98

15-20840

S/PRST/2015/23

maintain public law and order in areas where the host State is unable to do
so.
 Request the rapid deployment of qualified and well-trained international
civilian police, and justice and corrections experts as a component of
United Nations peacekeeping and other relevant missions authorized by the
Security Council.
 Call on States and regional and subregional organizations to provide
technical assistance for local police, judiciary and penitentiaries (e.g.,
mentoring, legislative drafting).
 Stress the importance of permanently disarming, demobilizing and
reintegrating former combatants of national ar med groups and disarming,
demobilizing, repatriating, resettling and reintegrating foreign armed
groups, while respecting the imperative to fight impunity and to assist the
victims in conflict-affected communities.
 Underline the need to pay particular attention to the creation of effective
reinsertion opportunities for former combatants, and mandate United
Nations peacekeeping operations and other relevant missions authorized by
the Security Council to provide support to host States in that regard.
 Stress the importance of security sector reform, call upon host States to
develop and implement comprehensive security sector reform programmes
to professionalize, and ensure accountability and the civilian oversight of,
national security forces, including through vetting for human rights
violations and training on human rights, child protection and sexual and
gender based violence.
 Mandate United-Nations authorized missions and entities, and call upon
international partners, to provide support and assistance to ho st States in
designing and implementing comprehensive security sectors reform
programmes, including training, co-location and mentoring activities, in
full compliance with the United Nations Human Rights Due Diligence
Policy.
 Mandate United Nations peacekeeping and other relevant missions
authorized by the Security Council to support host States in developing
and implementing community disarmament programmes, including
technical support to mentor the safe handling of weapons and ammunition
collected, comprising the verification, securing, storage and disposal of
non-serviceable items.
 Mandate United Nations peacekeeping and other relevant missions and
United Nations entities to provide good offices, advice and support to host
Governments for the design of comprehensive disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes as well as disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation, resettlement and reintegration programmes
for combatants not suspected of war crimes or other serious violations of
human rights, and to provide support for the implementation of these
plans, including operational support to cantonment and weapon collection
processes, in full compliance with the United Nations Human Rights Due
Diligence Policy.

15-20840

17/98

S/PRST/2015/23

 Consider adopting targeted sanctions against individuals and entities who
impede DDR and DDRRR processes, as determined by the relevant
Security Council sanctions Committee.
 Consider adopting exemptions to relevant Security Council -mandated arms
embargoes for the transfer of arms and related lethal materiel, and other
non-lethal military equipment, to security forces of host States intended
solely for the support of or use in a United Nations-supported national
security sector reform programme, upon notification to the relevant
Security Council sanctions Committee, and request the relevant Panel of
Expert or Monitoring Group to monitor on the implementation of such
exemptions, including the potential diversion of arms and related materiel
imported under the exemptions.
Foster accountability, build confidence and enhance stability by promoting
transitional justice mechanisms, including truth and reconciliation mechanisms.
Issues for consideration:
 Mandate the establishment of appropriate, locally adapted mechanisms for
truth and reconciliation (e.g., technical assistance, funding and reintegration
of civilians within communities).
 Request, where appropriate, the establishment by host States, the Secretary General or regional organizations, of commissions of inquiry, fact -finding
missions, transitional justice mechanisms, reparation programs and similar
measures, to investigate acts that could constitute violations of international
humanitarian law or international human rights law violations or abuses,
including genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity or serious
violations of human rights law, and provide justice and reparation to
victims.

G.

Media and information
Protection of journalists, other media professionals and associated personnel.
Issues for consideration:
 Condemn, and call for the immediate cessation of, attacks against
journalists, media professionals and associated personnel operating in
situations of armed conflict.
 Call for compliance by parties to armed conflict with applicable
international humanitarian law and respect for the civilian status of
journalists, media professionals and associated personnel as well as their
equipment and installations.
 Demand that States take all necessary steps to prosecute those responsible
for attacks against journalists, media professionals and associated personnel
in violation of applicable international humanitarian law.
Counter occurrences of speech used to incite violence.
Issues for consideration:

18/98

15-20840

S/PRST/2015/23

 Condemn, and call for the immediate cessation of, incitements to
discrimination, hostility, hatred and violence against civilians in situations
of armed conflict.
 Demand that States bring to justice individuals who incite or otherwise
cause such violence.
 Impose targeted and graduated measures in response to media broadcasts
inciting genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes or other serious
violations of human rights law.
 Mandate peacekeeping and other relevant missions authorized by the
Security Council to promote the establishment of media monitoring
mechanisms to ensure effective monitoring, reporting and documenting of
any incidents, origins and contents that incite “hate media”.
Promote and support accurate management of information on the armed
conflict.
Issues for consideration:
 Urge parties to armed conflict to respect the professional independence of
journalists, media professionals and associated personnel.
 Encourage United Nations Security Council authorized peace operations
and other relevant missions to include a mass-media component that can
disseminate information about international humanitarian law and human
rights law while also giving objective information about the activities of the
United Nations.
 Request relevant actors to provide technical assistance to States on steps to
counter hate speech consistent with international human rights law.

II. Specific protection concerns arising from Security Council
discussions on children affected by armed conflict
Parties to armed conflict to take the necessary measures to meet the specific
protection, health, education and assistance needs of children.
Issues for consideration:
 Condemn, and call for the immediate cessation of, violations and abuses
committed against children in situations of armed conflict, including those
involving the recruitment and use of children in hostilities by parties to
armed conflict in violation of applicable international law; the killing or
maiming of children; rape and other forms of sexual violence against
children; abduction of children; attacks against schools or hospitals; and
denial of humanitarian access for children.
 Call for strict compliance by parties to armed conflict with applicable
international humanitarian law and human rights law relating to children
affected by armed conflict, as well as any Security Council resolutions
which apply to the situation.

15-20840

19/98

S/PRST/2015/23

 Call upon all parties to immediately end, and take all measures to prevent,
grave violations against children including through issuing clear command
orders prohibiting all violations and abuses committed against children.
 Call upon relevant parties to develop and implement concrete time -bound
action plans to halt recruitment and use of children in violation of
international law and other grave violations committed against children in
situations of armed conflict, in close collaboration with United Nations
Security Council authorized peace operations and other relevant missions,
United Nations country teams and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Children and Armed Conflict, including by taking
measures to ensure the dissemination and implementation of these
commitments and action plans throughout the chain of command.
 Call upon parties to armed conflict to respect the civilian character of
schools and cease attacks and threats of attacks against schools, student s
and teachers, in contravention of international humanitarian law, and further
call upon parties to armed conflict to refrain from military use of education
institutions in contravention of applicable international law.
 Call upon States to make and implement specific commitments on timely
investigation of alleged violations and abuses against children in order to
hold perpetrators accountable before criminal jurisdictions and ensure that
those responsible for such violations and abuses are excluded from th e
security sector.
 Call upon States to ensure that children released from armed groups are
treated as victims and consider alternative, non-judicial measures that focus
on the rehabilitation and reintegration of children.
 Call for the immediate, safe and unconditional release of abducted children
by all parties to armed conflict and encourage States, United Nations
entities, and regional and sub-regional organizations, to undertake efforts to
obtain such release and ensure family reunification, as well as t he
rehabilitation and reintegration of released children.
 Call upon all parties concerned to implement the recommendations of the
Security Council Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
 Include specific provisions for the protection of children in t he mandates of
United Nations Security Council authorized peace operations and other
relevant missions, in particular:

20/98



Request the mission to pay particular attention to the protection of
children in the implementation of its protection of civilians
mandate, in close collaboration with relevant entities of the United
Nations Country Team.



Request the Secretary-General to establish and implement countrylevel monitoring and reporting mechanisms on grave violations
perpetrated against children, pursuant to resolution 1612 (2005).



Request the mission, in collaboration with relevant entities of the
United Nations Country Team, to support the host Government in
promoting child protection, and developing and implementing

15-20840

S/PRST/2015/23

action plans to halt the recruitment and use of children and other
grave violations committed against children in situations of armed
conflict in violation of applicable international law.


Request the mission, in collaboration with relevant entities of the
United Nations County Team, to ensure that child protection is
mainstreamed as a core aspect of the its activities and a core aspect
of justice sector reform, DDR/DDRRR processes, and SSR
programmes, including through:
o

The development and implementation of appropriate
guidance on child protection, such as standard operating
procedures for the handover of children released from
armed forces and armed groups to civilian child protection
actors;

o

Thorough age verification mechanisms as part of vetting
processes for integrating armed forces; the inclusion of
child protection in training modules for security forces, or;

o

The establishment of child protection units in security
forces.



Request the mission, in collaboration with relevant entities of the
United Nations County Team, to provide training on child
protection to members of national security forces.



Request the deployment of child protection advisors within the
mission.

 Request that reports of the Secretary-General on country-specific situations
include the protection of children as a specific aspect of the report.
 Call upon all parties concerned to ensure that the protection, rights and
well-being of children affected by armed conflict are specifically integrated
into peace processes, peace agreements and post-conflict recovery and
reconstruction planning and programmes, including measures for family
tracing and reunification, the rehabilitation and reintegration of separated
children, and the release and reintegration of children associated with
armed forces and groups.
 Urge States, United Nations entities, regional and subregional organizations
and other concerned parties to take appropriate measures to control illicit
subregional and cross-border activities harmful to children, as well as other
violations and abuses committed against children in situations of armed
conflict in violation of applicable international law.
 Urge relevant regional and/or subregional bodies to continue mainstreaming
child protection in their activities, advocacy, mission planning and
programmes, and to develop and implement policies and guidelines for the
protection of children affected by armed conflict.
 Consider applying targeted and graduated measures against parties to armed
conflict that commit grave violations against children in situations of armed
conflict.

15-20840

21/98

S/PRST/2015/23

III. Specific protection concerns arising from Security Council
discussions on women affected by armed conflict
Parties to armed conflict and other relevant actors to refrain from, and take
the necessary measures to prevent and respond to, sexual violence.
Issues for consideration:
 Condemn, and call for the immediate cessation of, acts of sexual violence
committed in the context of, and associated with, armed conflict.
 Call for strict compliance by parties to armed conflict with the rules of
international humanitarian law and human rights law, as well as any
Security Council resolutions which apply to the situation, including with
regards the prohibition of rape, sexual slavery, enforced prostitution, forced
pregnancy, enforced sterilization or any other form of sexual violence.
 Call on parties to armed conflict to take appropriate measures to refrain
from, prevent and protect all persons from all forms of sexual violence,
including by:

▪ Issuing clear orders through chains of command prohibiti ng sexual
violence, enforcing appropriate military disciplinary measures in a
timely manner, and upholding the principle of command responsibility.

▪ Training troops on the categorical prohibition of all forms of sexual
violence.

▪ Debunking myths that fuel sexual violence.
▪ Vetting armed and security forces to ensure that personnel have a
reliably attested record of not having been involved in the perpetration
of rape and other forms of sexual violence.

▪ Evacuating to safety civilians under imminent threat of sexual
violence.
 Making and implementing specific and time-bound commitments to
combat sexual violence, in accordance with resolution 2106 (2013).
 Request that reports of the Secretary-General on country-specific situations
include sexual violence as a specific aspect of the report, including, to the
extent possible, disaggregated data as to gender and age of victims; and
request the development of mission-specific strategies and plans of action
for preventing and responding to sexual violence, as p art of a broader
protection of civilians strategy.
 Include specific provisions addressing sexual violence in situations of
armed conflict in the mandates of United Nations Security Council
authorized peace operations and other relevant missions, in partic ular:


22/98

Request the Secretary-General to establish and implement countrylevel monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements on grave
violations perpetrated against children, pursuant to resolution 1960
(2010).

15-20840

S/PRST/2015/23



Request the mission to support the host Government in addressing
sexual violence explicitly, in disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration processes, security sector reform processes and justice
sector reform initiatives, and in developing and implementing
concrete and time-bound action plans to combat conflict-related
sexual violence.

 Request the appointment of women protection advisors within the mission.
 Urge relevant regional and/or subregional bodies to develop and implement
policies, activities and advocacy for the benefit of civilians affect ed by
sexual violence.
 Request troop- and police-contributing countries to deploy higher numbers
of women peacekeepers or police, and to ensure the provision of
appropriate training to their personnel participating in United Nations
peacekeeping and other relevant missions on the protection of civilians,
including women and children, and the prevention of sexual violence in
conflict and post-conflict situations.
Parties to armed conflict and other relevant actors to take the necessary
measures to meet the specific protection, health and assistance needs of women
and girls, and improve their access to justice.
Issues for consideration:
 Condemn, and call for the immediate cessation of, violations and abuses
committed against women and girls in situations of armed conflict.
 Call for strict compliance by parties to armed conflict with applicable
international humanitarian law and human rights law, as well as any
Security Council resolutions which apply to the situation, relating to the
protection of women and girls affected by armed conflict.
 Call upon all parties concerned to ensure that the protection, rights and
well-being of women and girls affected by armed conflict are specifically
integrated into all peace processes, peace agreements and post -conflict
recovery and reconstruction planning and programmes.
 Call upon the host Government to develop and implement nationally -owned
multi-sectoral strategies for preventing and responding to sexual and
gender-based violence.
 Call upon the Government of host States to ensure women’s effective access
to justice, health and assistance services, including through appropriate
national legislation and the effective participation and representation of
women at all levels of the security sector and law enforcement instituti ons.
 Include specific provisions for the protection of women and girls in the
mandates of United Nations Security Council authorized peace operations
and other relevant missions, requesting in particular:

15-20840



The mission to pay particular attention to the protection of women
in the implementation of its protection of civilians mandate.



The mission to pay special attention to the protection and needs of
women in the implementation of other substantive aspects of its

23/98

S/PRST/2015/23

mandate, such as support to disarmament and demobilization
activities, security sector reform, transitional justice, mine
clearance, or small arms control.


The mission to promote women’s representation, participation and
leadership in protection mechanisms as an essential component to
improve protection for women and girls.



The mission to support the efforts of host Governments in
developing and implementing nationally-owned multi-sectoral
strategies for preventing and responding to sexual and gender based violence.



The mission to provide training on the protection of women and
girls to members of national security forces.

 Request that reports of the Secretary-General on country-specific situations
include the protection of women and girls as a specific aspect of the report.
 Urge relevant regional and/or subregional bodies to develop and implement
policies, activities and advocacy for the benefit of women and girls affected
by armed conflict.
Equal participation and full involvement of women in the prevention and
resolution of armed conflict.
Issues for consideration:
 Urge States, United Nations entities, regional and subregional organizations
and other concerned parties to ensure increased representation of women at
all decision-making levels in national, regional and international institutions
and mechanisms for the prevention, management and resolution of conflict.
 Call on all actors involved in negotiating and implementing peace
agreements to adopt a gender perspective, including by considering:

▪ The needs of women and girls during repatriation and resettlement and
for rehabilitation, reintegration and post-conflict reconstruction.

▪ Measures that support local women’s peace initiatives and indigenous
processes for conflict resolution, and that involve women in the
implementation mechanisms of peace agreements.

▪ Measures that ensure the protection of, and respect for, the human
rights of women and girls, particularly as they relate to the
constitution, the electoral system, the police and the judiciary.
 Request the Secretary-General and his Special Envoys to ensure the full
implementation of the relevant provisions of resolution 1325 (2000) and
subsequent resolutions on Women, Peace and Security, including support to
the full participation of women in discussions pertinent to the prevention
and resolution of conflict, the maintenance of peace and security, and post conflict peace-building, and encourage all parties to such talks to facilitate
the equal and full participation of women at all decision -making levels.

24/98

15-20840

S/PRST/2015/23

 Ensure that Security Council missions take into account gender
considerations and the rights of women and girls, including through
consultation with local and international women’s groups.
 Urge troop- and police-contributing countries to expand the role, numbers
and contribution of women in United Nations operations, and especially
among military observers and civilian police.
Sexual exploitation and abuse (SEA).
Issues for consideration:
 Urge humanitarian and development organizations, as well as Security
Council authorized peace operations and other relevant missions staff, to
take appropriate action to prevent SEA by their personnel, including
vetting, robust pre-deployment and in-theatre awareness training and, in the
case of United Nations actors, to promote and ensure compliance, inclu ding
by civilian staff of United Nations peacekeeping and other relevant
missions, with the Secretary-General’s Bulletin on special measures for
protection from sexual exploitation and abuse (ST/SGB/2003/13).
 Urge troop- and police-contributing countries to take appropriate action to
prevent SEA by their personnel, including vetting, robust pre -deployment
and in-theater awareness training to promote and ensure compliance with
the Secretary-General’s Bulletin on special measures for protection from
sexual exploitation and abuse (ST/SGB/2003/13).
 Urge troop- and police-contributing countries to conduct swift and thorough
investigations into any allegations of SEA involving their uniformed
personnel, to prosecute those allegedly responsible, as appropriate, keeping
the Secretary-General informed in a timely manner at every stage, to ensure
full accountability in cases of SEA involving their personnel and to report
to the Secretary-General on action taken.

15-20840

25/98

I. GENERAL PROTECTION CONCERNS PERTAINING TO THE CONFLICT-AFFECTED POPULATION
A. Protection of, and assistance to, the conflict-affected population
Express concern at
acts, threats or
situations of violence
against civilians, and
condemn violations of
applicable
international
humanitarian law and
human rights law, and
human rights abuses

15-20840

Expressing deep concern at the serious deterioration in the security situation in [affected area] overall
so far in [year], and the profound negative impact of this on civilians, in particular women and
children, in particular through a marked escalation of hostilities between Governmen t forces and
rebel armed groups, as well as an escalation of inter-communal conflicts over land, access to
resources, migration issues and tribal rivalries, including with the involvement of paramilitary units
and tribal militias, and a rise in criminality and banditry targeting the local population; further
expressing deep concern that the deteriorating security situation, as characterised by attacks by rebel
groups and Government forces, aerial bombardment by the Government of [affected country], inter tribal fighting, banditry and criminality, continues to threaten civilians; and reiterating its demand
that all parties to the conflict in [affected area] immediately end violence, including attacks on
civilians, peacekeepers and humanitarian personnel
Deploring the violations of international humanitarian law and human rights violations and abuses
committed by Government of [affected country] security forces, their proxies, and armed groups,
including those opposing the Government of [affected country], especially at [specific localities], as
reported by the Panel of Experts [established to assist the relevant Security Council sanctions
Committee]
Condemning the multiple violations of international humanitarian law and the widespread human
rights violations and abuses, including those involving extrajudicial killings, enforced
disappearances, arbitrary arrests and detention, torture, sexual violenc e against women and children,
rape, recruitment and use of children and attacks against civilians, looting and destruction of property
and attacks against places of worship, denial of humanitarian access, deliberate attacks against
national and international personnel of humanitarian organisations, United Nations personnel and its
associated personnel, and humanitarian assets, including supplies, facilities and transports committed
by both former [armed group] elements and militia groups, in particular the [specific militia]
Strongly condemning the resurgence of violence … the continuous cycle of provocations and
reprisals by armed groups, both inside and outside of [capital of affected country]; the threats of
violence, human rights violations and abuses and international humanitarian law violations, including
those involving extrajudicial killings, enforced disappearances, arbitrary arrests and detention,
torture, sexual violence against women and children, rape, recruitment a nd use of children and
attacks against civilians, attacks against places of worship, and denial of humanitarian access,
committed by armed elements, which continue to adversely affect the dire humanitarian situation
faced by the civilian population and to impede humanitarian access to vulnerable populations
Strongly condemning the continuing widespread violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law by the [national] authorities, as well as the human rights abuses and violations of
international humanitarian law by armed groups
Expressing concern at the reports of violations of human rights, including extrajudicial killings,
violence against women, children and journalists, arbitrary detention and pervasive sexual violence in
[affected country], including in camps for internally displaced persons, and underscoring the need to
end impunity, uphold human rights and to hold accountable those who commit such crimes
Strongly condemning reported and ongoing human rights violations and abuses and violations of
international humanitarian law, including those involving extrajudicial killings, ethnically targeted
violence, sexual and gender-based violence, rape, recruitment and use of children, enforced
disappearances, arbitrary arrests and detention, violence aimed at spreading terror among the civilian
population, and attacks on schools and hospitals as well as United Nations peacekeeping personnel,

S/RES/2228 (2015),
pp. 6

S/RES/2200 (2015),
pp. 13

S/RES/2217 (2015),
pp. 9

S/RES/2196 (2015),
pp. 11

S/RES/2165 (2014),
pp. 8
S/RES/2158 (2014),
pp. 12
S/RES/2155 (2014),
pp. 5

See also, for example,
S/RES/2227 (2015), pp.
21; S/RES/2198 (2015),
pp. 17; S/RES/2187
(2014), pp. 5; S/RES/2182
(2014), pp. 14;
S/RES/2173 (2014), pp. 6;
S/RES/2164 (2014), pp.
19; S/RES/2153 (2014),
pp. 16; S/RES/2149
(2014), pp. 9; S/RES/2147
(2014), pp. 18;
S/RES/2139 (2014), op. 1;
S/RES/2121 (2013), pp. 8;
S/RES/2113 (2013), op.
23; S/RES/2113 (2013),
pp. 14; S/RES/2109
(2013), op. 20;
S/RES/2100 (2013), pp. 9;
S/RES/2088 (2013), op.
13; S/PRST/2013/2
(2013), par. 7;
S/RES/2046 (2012), pp. 6,
pp. 9 and pp. 11;
S/RES/2042 (2012), pp. 4;
S/RES/2040 (2012), op. 4;
S/RES/2021 (2011), pp.
11; S/RES/2009 (2011),
pp. 4; S/RES/1990 (2011),
pp. 9; S/RES/1975 (2011),
pp. 9; S/RES/1925 (2010),
pp. 11 and op. 18;
S/RES/1923 (2010), pp. 4;
S/RES/1919 (2010), pp.
12 and op. 4; S/RES/1910
(2010), pp. 16 and op. 16;
S/RES/1906 (2009), pp. 6
and op. 10; S/RES/1828
(2008), op. 11;
S/RES/1674 (2006), op. 3,
op. 5, op. 11 and op. 26;
S/RES/1574 (2004), op.
11; S/RES/1556 (2004),
pp. 8; S/RES/1493 (2003),

S/PRST/2015/23

26/98

Addendum: Selection of agreed language

15-20840

by all parties, including armed groups and national security forces, as well as the incitement to
commit such abuses and violations …
Expresses deep concern at the escalation of interreligious and intercommunal violence as well as
violence targeting members of ethnic and religious groups and their leaders …
Reiterating its strong condemnation of all violations of international law committed against and/or
directly affecting civilians, including women and girls in armed conflict and post-conflict situations,
including those involving rape and other forms of sexual and gender -based violence, killing and
maiming, obstructions to humanitarian aid, and mass forced displacement,
Expressing grave concern at the continuing human rights violations, including inter alia arbitrary
arrests and detentions, torture, and incidences of extrajudicial killings, as well as looting of property,
by armed groups and by national security institutions … as we ll as the inability of the authorities to
hold those responsible to account,
Expressing its concern about the continuing precarious and volatile security …

Remind parties of
their obligations
under, and call for
compliance with,
applicable
international
humanitarian law
and human rights law,
and relevant Security
Council resolutions

S/RES/2109 (2013),
pp. 9
S/RES/2000 (2011),
pp. 8
S/RES/2233 (2015),
pp. 15
S/RES/2226 (2015),
op. 17

S/RES/2220 (2015),
pp. 9
S/RES/2219 (2015),
pp. 11
S/RES/2216 (2015),
op. 9
S/RES/2214 (2015),
op. 6

S/RES/2210 (2015),
pp. 26

S/RES/2191 (2014),
op. 1

See also, for example,
S/RES/2211 (2015), pp.
16; S/RES/2205 (2015),
op. 23; S/RES/2200
(2015), pp. 6; S/RES/2170
(2014), pp. 8; S/RES/2165
(2014), op. 1;
S/PRST/2014/3, para. 6;
S/RES/2122 (2013),
pp.10; S/RES/2121
(2013), op.6; S/RES/2100
(2013), op. 24;
S/PRST/2013/2 (2013),
par. 4, 5, 6, and 18;
S/RES/2067 (2012), pp.
16; S/RES/2051 (2012),
op. 11; S/RES/2036
(2012), op. 1; S/RES/1979
(2011), pp. 11;
S/RES/1975 (2011), pp. 9;
S/RES/1964 (2010), pp.
17; S/RES/1935 (2010),
pp. 12 and op. 9;
S/RES/1906 (2009), pp. 3
and op. 11; S/RES/1892
(2009), op. 15;
S/RES/1890 (2009), pp.
15; S/RES/1883 (2009),
pp. 11; S/RES/1972
(2009), pp. 13;
S/RES/1861 (2009), pp. 4;
S/RES/1860 (2009), pp. 3
and pp. 4; S/RES/1801
(2008), op. 13;
S/RES/1794 (2007), pp. 5
and op. 7; S/RES/1790
(2007), pp. 18;

S/PRST/2015/23

27/98

… reaffirming that all parties, including [armed group], associated armed groups, and militias, must
respect human rights and abide by all applicable obligations under international humanitarian law,
including those protecting the civilian population, by which both official [national] forces and
member states that assist them must also abide …
Welcomes the continued cooperation between, and the conduct of coordinated activities by, [UN
Mission] and the defence and security forces, including [national army] and calls for strict adherence
by the defence and security forces, including [national arm y] to international humanitarian, human
rights and refugee laws and in this context, recalls the importance of training in human rights, child
protection and sexual- and gender-based violence for security and law-enforcement agencies
… reaffirming that parties to armed conflict bear the primary responsibility to take all feasible steps
to ensure the protection of civilians and recalling that States bear the primary responsibility to respect
and ensure the human rights of all individuals within their territory and subject to their jurisdiction,
as provided for by relevant international law
Re-emphasizing the importance of the Government of [affected country] to be able to respond
proportionately to threats to the security of all citizens in [affected country] and calling on the
Government of [affected country] to ensure that its security forces remain committed to upholding
human rights and applicable international law,
Reaffirms, consistent with international humanitarian law, the need for all parties to ensure the safety
of civilians, including those receiving assistance, as well as the need to ensure the security of
humanitarian personnel and United Nations and its ass ociated personnel …
Reaffirms that Member States must ensure that any measures taken to counter terrorism comply with
all their obligations under international law, in particular international human rights law, international
refugee law, and international humanitarian law, and underscores that respect for human rights,
fundamental freedoms and the rule of law are complementary and mutually reinforcing with effective
counter-terrorism measures, and are an essential part of a successful counter-terrorism effort and
notes the importance of respect for the rule of law so as to effectively prevent and combat terrorism,
and notes that failure to comply with these and other international obligations, including under the
Charter of the United Nations, is one of the factors contributing to increased radicalization and
fosters a sense of impunity
… reaffirming that all parties to armed conflict must take all feasible steps to ensure the protection of
affected civilians, especially women, children and displaced persons, including from sexual violence
and all other forms of gender-based violence, and that perpetrators of such violence must be held
accountable, calling for all parties to comply with their obligati ons under international law including
international humanitarian law and human rights law and for all appropriate measures to be taken to
ensure the protection of civilians …
Demands that all parties to the … domestic conflict [in affected country], in particular the [national]
authorities, immediately comply with their obligations under international humanitarian law and

S/RES/2127 (2013),
op. 19
S/RES/2122 (2013),
pp. 9

op. 8; S/RES/1468 (2003),
op. 2; and S/RES/1296
(2000), op. 2 and op. 5.

S/RES/2175 (2014),
op. 1

S/RES/2171 (2014),
pp. 7

S/RES/1776 (2007), pp.
12; S/RES/1674 (2006),
op. 6; S/PRST/2004/46;
S/RES/1574 (2004), op.
11; S/RES/1564 (2004),
pp. 10; S/RES/1493
(2003), op. 8; and
S/RES/307 (1971), op. 3.

S/RES/2169 (2014),
pp. 15

S/RES/2117 (2013),
op. 13
S/RES/2109 (2013),
pp. 11

S/RES/2088 (2013),
op. 10
S/RES/1973 (2011),
op. 3
S/RES/1906 (2009),
op. 17
S/PRST/2009/1
S/RES/2228 (2015),
op. 18

S/RES/2213 (2015),
op. 6

See also, for example,
S/RES/2238 (2015), op. 8;
S/RES/2145 (2014), op.
39; S/RES/2173 (2014),
op. 19; S/RES/2162
(2014), pp. 18;
S/RES/2144 (2014), op. 4;
S/RES/2124 (2013), op.
12; and S/PRST/2013/21,
para. 8.

S/PRST/2015/23

28/98

Arbitrary deprivation
of liberty, and the
treatment and
protection of detainees

15-20840

international human rights law, and fully and immediat ely implement all the provisions of [previous
Security Council resolutions and presidential statement on affected country] …
Reaffirms the obligation of all parties involved in an armed conflict to comply with international
humanitarian law, in particular their obligations under the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and the
obligations applicable to them under the Additional Protocols thereto of 1977, to ensure the respect
and protection of all humanitarian personnel and United Nati ons and associated personnel, as well as
with the rules and principles of international human rights law and refugee law
Recalling that the prevention of conflict remains a primary responsibility of States, and further
recalling their primary responsibility to protect civilians and to respect and ensure the human rights
of all individuals within their territory and subject to their jurisdiction, as provided for by relevant
international law, and further, reaffirming the responsibility of each individual State to protect its
populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing, and crimes against humanity
… reaffirming that all parties should continue to take all feasible steps and to develop modalities to
ensure the protection of affected civilians, including children, women and members of religious and
ethnic minority groups, and should create conditions conducive to the voluntary, safe, dignified, and
sustainable return of refugees and internally displaced persons or local integration of internally
displaced persons …
… reiterates its demand that all parties to armed conflict comply strictly with the obligations
applicable to them under international humanitarian, human rights law and refugee law, and stresses
the need for parties to take all required measures to avoid civilian casualties, respect and protect the
civilian population;
Recalling the Presidential Statement of 12 February 2013 that recognized that States bear the primary
responsibility to protect civilians as well as to respect and ensure the human rights of all individuals
within their territory and subject to their jurisdiction as provided for by relevant inte rnational law,
reaffirmed that parties to armed conflict bear the primary responsibility to take all feasible steps to
ensure the protection of civilians, urged parties to armed conflict to meet civilians’ basic needs …
Underscores the primary responsibility of the Government of the [affected country] to maintain law
and order, promote security and protect the civilian population, including foreign nationals, with full
respect for the rule of law, human rights, and applicable international humanitarian law …
Demands that the authorities [of the affected country] comply with their obligations under
international law, including international humanitarian law, human rights and refugee law and take all
measures to protect civilians and meet their basic needs, and to ensure the rapid and unimpeded
passage of humanitarian assistance;
Calls upon the States in the region to ensure that any military actions against armed groups are carried out in accordance
with international humanitarian, human rights and refugee law, and that they take appropriate measures to protect civilians
and reduce the impact of military actions upon the civilian population, including through regular contacts with and early
warning of the civilian population on potential attacks.
The Security Council recognises the needs of civilians under foreign occupation and stresses … in this regard, the
responsibilities of the occupying Power.
… emphasizes the importance of ensuring, within its current mandate, [AU-UN Mission]’s and other relevant
organizations’ ability to monitor [cases of arbitrary arrest and detention]; and in this regard urges the Government of
[affected country] to extend even greater cooperation with [AU-UN Mission] towards fulfilment of this goal and to
provide accountability and access to justice for victims; calls on the Government of [affected country] fully to respect its
obligations, including by fulfilling its commitment to lift the state of emergency in [affected area], releasing all political
prisoners and allowing free expression
Condemns cases of torture and mistreatment, and deaths by torture, in detention centres in [affected country], calls upon
the … government [of affected country] to take all steps necessary to accelerate the judicial process, transfer detainees to
State authority and prevent and investigate violations and abuses of human rights, calls for all … parties [in affected
country] to cooperate with … government [of affected country] efforts in this regard, calls for the immediate release of all
individuals arbitrarily arrested or detained in [affected country], including foreign nationals, and underscores the …
government [of affected country]’s primary responsibility for promoting and protecting the human rights of all persons in
[affected country], particularly those of … migrants and other foreign nationals

15-20840

Role of United
Nations peacekeeping
and other relevant
missions and actors

S/RES/2210 (2015),
op. 39

S/RES/2182 (2014),
op. 36
S/RES/2162 (2014),
pp. 18
S/RES/2158 (2014),
op. 14
S/RES/2144 (2014),
pp. 12
S/RES/2139 (2014),
op. 11
S/RES/2000 (2011),
op. 11
S/RES/2230 (2015),
op. 10
S/RES/2226 (2015),
op. 19 (g)

S/RES/2223 (2015),
op. 4 (a), (i)

S/RES/2211 (2015),
op. 15 (b)

See also, for example,
S/RES/2217 (2015), op.
32 (a), (i) and 32 (e), (iv);
S/RES/2211 (2015), op. 9
(a); S/RES/2187 (2014),
op. 4 (a), (i) and 4 (b), (i);
S/RES/2179 (2014), op. 8;
S/RES/2164 (2014), op.
13 (a), (i) and (ii), and (c),
(iv) and (v); S/RES/2167
(2014), pp. 8; S/RES/2162
(2014), op. 21;
S/RES/2158 (2014), op. 1
(e), (i); S/RES/2155
(2014), op. 4 (a), (i) and
(b), (i), and op.5;
S/RES/2147 (2014), op. 4
(a), (i) to (iii); S/RES/2121
(2013), op.10;
S/RES/2119 (2013),
op.19; S/RES/2075
(2012), op. 14;

S/PRST/2015/23

29/98

Stresses in this context the importance of further progress in the reconstruction and reform of the prison sector in [affected
country], in order to improve the respect for the rule of law and human rights therein, emphasizes the importance of
ensuring access for relevant organizations, as applicable, to all prisons and places of detention in [affected country], calls
for full respect for relevant international law including humanitarian law and human rights law, and notes the
recommendations contained in the report of [UN Mission] dated [date], and the announcement by the Government of
[affected country] of a national plan on elimination of torture
Reiterates the need for [AU Mission] to ensure that any detainees in their custody, including disengaged combatants, are
treated in strict compliance with applicable obligations under international humanitarian law and human rights law,
including ensuring their humane treatment, and further reiterates its request for [AU Mission] to allow appropriate access
to detainees by a neutral body
Expressing concern at reports of human rights violations and abuses in detention, calls upon the government to ensure that
the conditions of detention of detainees are in line with international obligations and to take all steps necessary to prevent
and investigate violations and abuse of human rights in the context of detention and welcomes the support provided by the
[regional organization] and [country] in this regard
Expresses concern at the reports of human rights violations received by [UN mission] and its partners, … and calls upon
the … Government of [affected country] to promote respect for and actively protect human rights, including of persons in
detention centres
Expressing grave concern at the lack of judicial process for conflict-related detainees, including children, many of whom
continue to be held outside state authority, and at reports of human rights violations and abuses, including torture and
sexual and gender-based violence, in detention centres, and, in that regard, underlining that all parties in [affected country]
should extend full cooperation to [UN Mission] on all issues pertaining to the promotion and protection of human rights
Strongly condemns the arbitrary detention and torture of civilians in [affected country], notably in prisons and detention
facilities, as well as the kidnappings, abductions and forced disappearances, and demands the immediate end of these
practices and the release of all arbitrarily detained persons starting with women and children, as well as sick, wounded and
elderly people and including United Nations personnel and journalists
Calls upon the Government to ensure that the conditions of protection and detention … are in line with international
obligations, including with regard to access by relevant organizations with a mandate to monitor detention centres, and
fulfil their prosecutions and trials in accordance with international obligations relating to due process and fair trial
requirements
Underscores that [UN Mission]’s protection of civilians mandate as set out in [paragraph of previous resolution] includes
taking the necessary actions to protect civilians under imminent threat of physical violence, irrespective of the source of
such violence;
Decides that the mandate of [UN Mission] shall be the following: … (g) Support for compliance with international
humanitarian and human rights law – To contribute to the promotion and protection of human rights in [affected country],
with special attention to grave violations and abuses committed against children and women, notably sexual- and genderbased violence, in close coordination with the Independent Expert established under [relevant UN Human Rights Council
resolution]; – To monitor, help investigate, and report to the Council, on abuses and violations of human rights and
violations of international humanitarian law, including those against children in line with resolutions 1612 (2005), 1882
(2009), 1998 (2011) 2068 (2012) and 2143 (2014), in order to prevent such abuses and violations and to end impunity; –
To bring to the attention of the Council all individuals identified as perpetrators of serious human rights violations and to
keep the Committee established [by the Security Council to oversee the implementation of sanctions regime in relation to
the situation in affected country] informed of any significant developments in this regard when appropriate …
Decides that the mandate of [UN Mission] shall be as follows, and authorizes [UN Mission] to use all necessary means to
perform the following tasks: (a) Protection of civilians: (i) To protect civilians under threat of physical violence,
irrespective of the source of such violence, within its capacity and areas of deployment, with specific protection for
women and children, including through the continued use of the Mission’s Child Protection and Women Protection
Advisers
Authorizes [UN Mission], in support of [national] authorities and their efforts to deliver the reforms called by [regional
agreement] and stabilisation in [area of affected country], to contribute to the following tasks, in coordination with the
United Nations Country Team (UNCT) and other actors, including through the SRSG’s good offices; … (b) Monitor,
report and follow-up on human rights violations and abuses and violations of international humanitarian law, … and

… urges [the Mission] to enhance its efforts to prevent civilian casualties;

15-20840

… reaffirms that the protection of civilians must be given priority in decisions about the use of
available capacity and resources and encourages further the use of innovative measures implemented
by [the mission] in the protection of civilians;
Recalls its authorization and stresses its full support given to the [the mission], while impartially
implementing its mandate, to use all necessary means to carry out its mandate to protect civilians
under imminent threat of physical violence, within its capabilities and its areas of deployment,
including to prevent the use of heavy weapons against the civilian popula tion and requests the
Secretary-General to keep it urgently informed of measures taken and efforts made in this regard.

S/RES/2211 (2015),
pp. 19
S/RES/2173 (2014),
op. 9

S/RES/2171 (2014),
op. 13
S/RES/2162 (2014),
op. 19 (a)

S/RES/2162 (2014),
op. 14
S/RES/2149 (2014),
op. 30 (e), (i)

S/RES/2147 (2014),
op. 36
S/PRST/2014/3,
para. 8

S/RES/2116 (2013),
pp. 11
S/RES/2113 (2013),
op. 23
S/RES/2109 (2013),
op. 3
S/RES/2093 (2013),
op. 9
S/RES/2053 (2012),
op. 1
S/RES/1975 (2011),
op. 6

S/RES/2063 (2012), op. 3;
S/RES/2053 (2012), op.
24; S/RES/2003 (2011),
op. 3 and op. 21;
S/RES/1935 (2010), op. 2;
S/RES/1925 (2010), op.
12 (a), (b) and (c), and op.
17; S/RES/1919 (2010),
op. 4; S/RES/1906 (2009),
op. 5; S/RES/1828 (2008),
op. 7; S/RES/1794 (2007),
op. 2;
S/RES/1778 (2007), op. 1,
op. 2 and op. 6;
S/RES/1769 (2007), op.
15; S/RES/1701 (2006),
op. 12; S/RES/1674
(2006), op. 16;
S/RES/1590 (2005), op. 4;
and S/RES/1565 (2004),
op. 4.

S/PRST/2015/23

30/98

support the United Nations system in-country to ensure that any support provided by the United Nations shall be
consistent with international humanitarian law and human rights law and refugee law as applicable;
Reaffirming that the successful protection of civilians is critical to the fulfilment of [UN Mission]’s mandate and the
delivery of an improved security environment, also stressing the importance of peaceful means and progress on key
reforms to promote the protection of civilians
Emphasizes [UN Mission]’s Chapter VII mandate, as defined in [Security Council resolution], to deliver its core tasks to
protect civilians without prejudice to the primary responsibility of the Government of [affected country] and to ensure the
freedom of movement and security of [UN Mission]’s own personnel and humanitarian workers; recalls that [UN
Mission] is authorized to take all the necessary action in fulfilment of this mandate; and urges [UN Mission] to deter any
threats against itself and its mandate
… calls on States which have not already done so to consider ratifying the instruments of international humanitarian,
human rights and refugee law, and to take appropriate steps to implement these instruments domestically, which could
contribute to timely prevention of conflicts
Decides that the mandate of [UN Mission] shall be the following: (a) Protection of civilians – To protect, without
prejudice to the primary responsibility of the [national] authorities, the civilian population from threat of physical violence,
within its capabilities and areas of deployment and encourages [UN Mission] to move to a more preventive and preemptive posture in pursuit of its priorities and in active defence of its mandate, building on positive steps taken so far,
without prejudice to the agreed basic principles of peacekeeping
Urges the Government to take concrete and discernible steps to prevent and mitigate inter-communal
violence by seeking a broad national consensus on addressing effectively identity and land tenure
issues
Decides that the mandate of [UN Mission] shall initially focus on the following priority tasks: (e) Promotion and
protection of human rights (i) To monitor, help investigate and report publicly and to the Security Council on violations of
international humanitarian law and on abuses and violations of human rights committed throughout [affected country], in
particular by different armed groups, … and to contribute to efforts to identify and prosecute perpetrators, and to prevent
such violations and abuses, including through the deployment of human rights observers;
Calls on Member states to pledge and provide the remaining force enablers, in particular military air assets, required for
the Mission, and recalls the importance of close consultations with troop- and police-contributing countries
The Security Council reaffirms the need for peacekeeping missions with protection of civilian mandates to ensure their
implementation, and stresses the importance of continued and further engagement by senior mission leadership, with a
view to ensuring that all mission components and all levels of the chain of command are properly informed of and are
involved in the mission’s protection mandate and their relevant responsibilities. The Security Council reiterates the need
for strong leadership in peacekeeping missions, and also encourages further coordination between UN and regional and
subregional institutions, as appropriate, on issues relating to the protection of civilians in peacekeeping operations
… encouraging the efforts to ensure adequate human rights capacity and expertise within [the
Mission] to carry out its human rights promotion, protection, and monitoring activities
… requests [the Mission] to continue to support local conflict resolution mechanisms, including with
civil society organizations and authorizes the … [Head of the relevant Mission] to conduct mediation
and reconciliation efforts involving [national] armed groups …
Notes the priority of [the Mission]’ mandated tasks … for the protection of civilians and for the
achievement of an improved security environment, urges [the Mission] to deploy its assets
accordingly …

15-20840

Condemn
impediments to, and
call for the facilitation
of, the implementation
of protection activities,
including by
United Nations
Peacekeeping
Operations and other
relevant missions and
actors

S/RES/1925 (2010),
op. 11
S/RES/1894 (2009),
op. 19

S/RES/1674 (2006),
op. 24
S/RES/2228 (2015),
op. 15

S/RES/2223 (2015),
op. 19

S/RES/2223 (2015),
pp. 23
S/RES/2220 (2015),
pp. 20
S/RES/2205 (2015),
op. 24
S/RES/2205 (2015),
op. 19

See also, for example,
S/RES/2227 (2014), op. 6
and op. 18; S/RES/2217
(2015), op. 46 and op. 47;
S/RES/2211 (2015), pp.
24 and op. 37;
S/RES/2205 (2015),
op.18; S/RES/2113
(2013), pp. 12, pp. 15,
op. 11 and op. 12;
S/RES/2198 (2015),
pp.21; S/RES/2187
(2014), op.
17;S/RES/2179 (2014),
op. 17; S/RES/2173
(2014), op. 16;
S/RES/2156 (2014), op.
17; S/RES/2155 (2014),
op. 15; S/RES/2127
(2014), pp. 20 and op. 36;
S/RES/2109 (2013),
pp. 14, op. 19 and op. 35;
S/RES/2104 (2013),
op. 14; S/RES/2098
(2013), pp. 26;
S/RES/2076 (2012),
op. 14; S/RES/2035
(2012), op. 10.

S/RES/2196 (2015),
pp.12
S/RES/2187 (2014),
op. 15

S/RES/2155 (2014),
pp. 16

S/PRST/2015/23

31/98

Emphasizes that the protection of civilians must be given priority in decisions about the use of available capacity and
resources and authorizes [the mission] to use all necessary means, within the limits of its capacity and in the areas where
its units are deployed, to carry out its protection mandate …
Reaffirms its practice of ensuring that mandates of UN peacekeeping and other relevant missions include, where
appropriate and on a case-by-case basis, provisions regarding the protection of civilians, stresses that mandated protection
activities must be given priority in decisions about the use of available capacity and resources, including information and
intelligence resources, in the implementation of mandates; and recognizes, that the protection of civilians when and as
mandated requires a coordinated response from all relevant mission components.
Recognizes the increasingly valuable role that regional organizations and other intergovernmental institutions play in the
protection of civilians, and encourages the Secretary-General and the heads of regional and other intergovernmental
organizations to continue their efforts to strengthen their partnership in this regard.
Reiterates its deep concern that hindrances remain to [AU-UN Mission] in the implementation of its mandate, including
movement and access restrictions, caused by insecurity, acts of criminality and significant movement restrictions by
Government forces, armed movements and militia groups; calls on all parties in [affected area] to remove all obstacles to
[AU-UN Mission]’s full and proper discharge of its mandate, including by ensuring its security and freedom of
movement; and in this regard, demands that the Government of [affected country] comply with the Status of Forces
Agreement fully and without delay, particularly provisions relevant to the movement of patrols in conflict-affected areas
and flight clearances, as well as those provisions relevant to the removal of obstacles to the use of [AU-UN Mission] aerial
assets, and the timely processing of [AU-UN Mission]’s equipment at the port of entry to [affected country];
Demands that the Government of [affected country] and all relevant parties cooperate fully in the deployment, operations,
and monitoring, verification, and reporting functions of [UN Mission], in particular by guaranteeing the safety, security,
and unrestricted freedom of movement of United Nations and associated personnel, throughout the territory of [affected
country], and further calls upon the Government of [affected country] to … continue to support [UN Mission] by the
allocation of land for protection of civilian sites
Expressing deep concern at persistent restrictions placed upon the movement and operations of [UN Mission], including
through repeated violations of the Status of Forces Agreement and blocking the deployment of essential assets and
enablers, and underscoring the importance of close cooperation and communication between [UN Mission] and the
Government in addressing these issues
Expressing concern at the continuing threats posed by the illicit transfer, destabilizing accumulation and misuse of small
arms and light weapons to the safety and security of United Nations peacekeepers and their effectiveness in implementing
peacekeeping mandates, and to the safety and security of humanitarian workers and their effective provision of
humanitarian assistance,
… reiterates its call upon [State parties to the conflict] to extend their full cooperation to the Secretary-General to [allow
effective human rights monitoring and reporting], including by issuing visas to the concerned United Nations personnel;
Renews its call upon the [State parties to the conflict] to provide full support to the United Nations, including by promptly
issuing visas to military, police and civilian United Nations personnel, including humanitarian personnel, without
prejudice to their nationality, for entry into [territory of State parties to the conflict], facilitating basing arrangements and
flight clearances, and providing logistical support, calls upon [State parties to the conflict] to facilitate travel from within
[their territories] to and from [affected area], and further calls upon all parties to fully adhere to their obligations under the
Status of Forces Agreements
Equally condemning the targeted attacks against … [UN Mission], … underlining that attacks targeting peacekeepers are
among the designation criteria in [paragraph of the resolution providing for criteria to determine individuals and entities
who may be included on relevant sanctions list] and may constitute a war crime and reminding all parties of their
obligations under international humanitarian law
Condemns in the strongest terms attacks on and threats made to [UN Mission] personnel and United Nations facilities …
such as [specific attacks], stresses that such attacks may constitute violations of the Status of Forces Agreement and/or war
crimes, demands that all parties respect the inviolability of United Nations premises and immediately desist and refrain
from any violence against those gathered at United Nations facilities, further demands the immediate and safe release of
detained and kidnapped UN and associated personnel, and stresses that efforts to undermine the ability of [UN Mission] to
implement its mandate and attacks on United Nations personnel will not be tolerated
Expressing deep concern at persistent restrictions placed upon the movement and operations of [UN Mission], strongly
condemning the attacks by government and opposition forces and other groups on United Nations personnel and facilities,

S/PRST/2015/23

32/98

Protection strategies
and practical
protection measures

15-20840

including [examples of specific attacks], and calling upon the Government of [affected country] to complete its
investigations of these attacks in a swift and thorough manner and to hold those responsible to account
Demands that the Government … and all relevant parties cooperate fully in the deployment,
operations, and monitoring, verification, and reporting functions of [the Mission], in particular by
guaranteeing the safety, security and unrestricted freedom of mov ement of United Nations personnel,
as well as of associated personnel throughout the territory of the [affected country], further demands
that the Government refrain from placing restrictions on [the Mission’s] movements, and in this
regard strongly condemns all attacks on [the Mission’s] troops and staff including [specific attack],
… and demands that there be no recurrence of such attacks or impunity for the perpetrators;
… condemns the attacks, threats, acts of obstructions and violence perpetrated by [armed forces],
militias and mercenaries against United Nations personnel, obstructing them from protecting
civilians, monitoring and helping investigate human rights violations and abuses, stresses that those
responsible for such crimes under international law must be held accountable and calls upon all
parties … to fully cooperate with the [relevant UN Mission] and cease interfering with [relevant UN
Mission]’s activities in implementation of its mandate
… requests [AU-UN Mission] to continue to support local conflict resolution mechanisms, including
with civil society mechanisms
Underlines that [AU-UN Mission] must continue to give priority in decisions about the use of
available capacity and resources to: (a) the protection of civilians across [affected area], including
women and children, through, and without prejudice to the basic principles of peacekeeping, inter
alia, continuing to move to a more preventive and pre-emptive posture in pursuit of its priorities and
in active defence of its mandate; enhanced early warning; proactive military deployment and active
and effective patrolling in areas at high risk of conflict and high concentration of IDPs; more prompt
and effective responses to threats of violence against civilians, including through regular reviews of
the geographic deployment of [AU-UN Mission]’s force; securing IDP camps, adjacent areas and
areas of return, including development and training of community p olicing; … and requests [AU-UN
Mission] to maximize the use of its capabilities, in cooperation with the UNCT and other
international and non-governmental actors, in the implementation of its mission -wide comprehensive
strategy for the achievement of these objectives
Decides that the mandate of [UN Mission] shall be the following: (a) Protection of civilians … – To
implement the comprehensive strategy for the protection of civilians in coordination with the United
Nations Country Team (UNCT); – To work closely with humanitarian agencies, particularly in
relation to areas of tensions and with respect to the return of displaced persons, to collect information
on and identify potential threats against the civilian population, and br ing them to the attention of
[national] authorities as appropriate
Requests [UN Mission] to further intensify its presence and active patrolling in areas of high -risk of
conflict, high concentrations of IDPs, including as guided by its early warning strategy, in both
government and opposition-held areas, and key routes for population movement, and to conduct
regular reviews of its geographic deployment to ensure that its forces are best placed to protect
civilians, and requests the Secretary-General to update the Security Council on how the Mission is
working toward meeting its protection of civilian obligations, including, but not limited to new patrol
areas and proactive deployment, on the measures to be taken to transform the mission to become
more efficient and effective in implementing its mandate in his next report in [month/year] as well as
further updates on these reviews as part of his regular reports;
Decides that the mandate of [UN Mission] shall be as follows, and authorizes [UN Mission] to use all
necessary means to perform the following tasks: (a) Protection of civilians: … (iii) To implement a
mission-wide early warning strategy, including a coordinated approach to information gathering,
monitoring, verification, early warning and dissemination, and response mechanisms, including
response mechanisms to prepare for further potential attacks on United Nations personnel and facilities
Decides that the mandate of [UN Mission] shall include the following immediate priority tasks: (a)
Protection of civilians … (iv) To fully implement and deliver, in close consultation with humanitarian
and human rights organizations and other relevant partners, the mission -wide protection strategy

S/RES/2109 (2013),
op. 10

S/RES/1975 (2011),
op. 4

S/RES/2228 (2015),
op. 11
S/RES/2228 (2015),
op. 4

S/RES/2226 (2015),
op. 19 (a)

S/RES/2223 (2015),
op. 12

S/RES/2223 (2015),
op. 4 (a), (iii)

S/RES/2217 (2015),
op. 32 (a), (iv)

See also, for example,
S/RES/2228 (2015), pp.
16 and op. 19;S/RES/2223
(2015), op. 4 (a), (ii), and
(b), (i); S/RES/2173
(2014), op. 8; S/RES/2155
(2014), op. 4 (a), (ii), (iii)
and (v), and op.
12;S/RES/2149 (2014),
op. 30 (a), (iii) and (iv);
S/RES/2147 (2014), op.
31; S/RES/2127 (2013),
op. 25; S/RES/2113
(2013), op. 4; S/RES/2112
(2013), op. 6; S/RES/2109
(2013), op. 3 and op. 5;
S/RES/2098 (2013),
op. 25; S/RES/2062
(2012), op. 6; S/RES/2003
(2011), op. 3; S/RES/1996
(2011), op. 3; S/RES/1935
(2010), op. 4; S/RES/1933
(2010), op. 16;
S/RES/1925 (2010),
op. 12; S/RES/1919
(2010), op. 6 and op. 10;
S/RES/1906 (2009), op. 9;
and S/RES/1794 (2007),
op. 18.

15-20840

S/RES/2211 (2015),
op. 12

S/RES/2180 (2014),
op. 22
S/RES/2155 (2014),
op. 9

S/RES/2134 (2014),
op. 10

S/PRST/2013/2
(2013), par. 22

S/RES/2000 (2011),
op. 7

S/RES/1894 (2009),
op. 24

S/RES/2232 (2015),
op. 19
S/RES/2228 (2015),
op. 20

33/98

See also, for example,
S/RES/2239 (2015),
op. 40; S/RES/2158
(2014), op. 6; S/RES/2149
(2014), op. 39;
S/RES/2147 (2014),

S/PRST/2015/23

Implementation of the
United Nations
Human Rights Due
Diligence Policy

Encourages [UN Mission] to enhance its interaction with the civilian population to raise awareness
and understanding about its mandate and activities through a comprehensive public outreach
programme, to identify potential threats against the civilian population and to collect reliable
information on violations of international humanitarian law and violations and abuses of human
rights perpetrated against civilians
Encourages [UN Mission] to continue assisting the Government of [affected country] in providing
adequate protection to the civilian population, with particular attention to the needs of internally
displaced persons and other vulnerable groups, especially women and children, including through
joint community policing in the camps, in line with Security Council resolution 1894 (2009)
Requests [UN Mission] to focus and streamline its activities, across its military, police and civilian
components in order to achieve progress on the tasks outlined in [paragraph mandating UN Mission
to carry out four key protection tasks, i.e. protection against threats of physical violenc e, including
practical protection measures; human rights monitoring and reporting; contribution to the creation of
conditions conducive to humanitarian access, and; support to the implementation of cessation of
hostilities agreement], recognizes that certain Mission tasks will therefore be ceased, and in this
regard, requests the Secretary-General undertake a full personnel review in [month/year] and to
include the details in his next regular report on [UN Mission]
Stresses the urgent need to deploy throughout the country an increased number of [UN Mission]’s
human rights monitors in order to implement fully its mandate to monitor, help investigate and report
to the Council on violations of international humanitarian law and of a buses and violations of human
rights committed throughout the [affected country] and to deploy an adequate number of child
protection advisers and women protection advisers as stated in [paragraph of relevant resolution]
The Security Council emphasises the importance of ensuring that peacekeeping missions with
protection of civilian mandates develop mission wide protection strategies for incorporation in the
overall mission implementation plans and contingency plans in consult ation with the host
Government, local authorities, troop- and police-contributing countries, and other relevant actors.
The Council stresses the importance of ensuring the widest possible dissemination of tools created to
develop mission-wide strategies … The Council welcomes progress made by the Secretary General in
elaborating a conceptual framework, outlining resource and capability requirements, and developing
operational tools for the implementation of protection of civilian mandates …
Decides that [the mission] shall have the following mandate: Protection and security (a) Protection of
civilians … - To revise the comprehensive strategy for the protection of civilians and to coordinate
with the United Nations protection of civilians strategy in liaison with the United Nations country
team, to take into account the new realities on the ground and the specific needs of vulnerable groups,
and to include measures to prevent gender-based violence pursuant to resolution 1960 (2010) and
resolution 1882 (2009). - To work closely with humanitarian agencies, particularly in relation to areas
of tensions and of return of displaced persons, to collect information on and identify potential threats
against the civilian population, as well as reliable information on violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law, bring them to the attention of the Ivorian authorities as
appropriate, and to take appropriate action in accordance with the United Nations system -wide
protection strategy in harmonization with [the mission’s] protection strategy.
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that all relevant peacekeeping missions with protection mandates incorporate
comprehensive protection strategies into the overall mission implementation plans and contingency plans which include
assessments of potential threats and options for crisis response and risk mitigation and establish priorities, actions and clear
roles and responsibilities under the leadership and coordination of the SRSG, with the full involvement of all relevant
actors and in consultation with United Nations Country teams.
… underlines that [UN Mission’s] support [to national police force] should be provided in accordance with the human
rights due diligence policy on UN support to non-United Nations forces (HRDDP)
Requests [AU-UN Mission] to ensure that any support provided to non -United Nations security
forces is provided in strict compliance with the Human Rights Due Diligence Policy on United
Nations support to non-United Nations security forces (HRDDP), and requests the Secretary-General
to include progress made in implementing the policy in his reports to the Security Council

S/RES/2225 (2015),
op. 17
S/RES/2221 (2015),
op. 34

S/RES/2221 (2015),
op. 15 (b)

S/RES/2221 (2015),
op. 9 (e)

S/RES/2187 (2014),
op. 4 (a), (vi)

S/RES/2164 (2014),
op. 16

S/RES/2164 (2014),
op. 13 (a), (vi)

S/RES/2124 (2013),
op. 15

S/RES/2106 (2013),
pp. 12

15-20840

S/RES/1906 (2009),
op. 22

op. 33; S/RES/2226
(2015), op. 22;
S/RES/2113 (2013),
op. 18; S/RES/2100
(2013), op. 26;
S/RES/2112 (2013),
op. 23; S/RES/2109
(2013), op. 16;
S/RES/2098 (2013),
op.12 and op. 15

S/PRST/2015/23

34/98

Further urges all United Nations entities, including peacekeeping missions, political missions,
peacebuilding offices, United Nations offices, agencies, funds and programmes to give full attention
to violations against children in the application of the Human Rights Due Diligence Policy on United
Nations Support to non-United Nations Security Forces
Requests [UN Mission] to ensure that any support provided to national security forces is in strict
compliance with the United Nations HRDDP, urges the United Nations system in [affected country]
to adopt a join and uniform approach regarding HRDDP implementation, and calls upon the
Government of [affected country] to work with [UN Mission] to support the promotion of [national]
security service personnel with reputable human rights records
Authorizes [UN Mission], in support of [national] authorities and their efforts to deliver the reforms
called by [regional agreement] and stabilisation in [area of affected country], to contribute to the
following tasks, in coordination with the United Nations Country Team (UNCT) and other actors,
including through the SRSG’s good offices; … (b) Monitor, report and follow -up on human rights
violations and abuses and violations of international humanitarian law, … and support the United
Nations system in-country to ensure that any support provided by the United Nations shall be
consistent with international humanitarian law and human rights law and refugee law as applicable
Authorizes [UN Mission], in pursuit of the objectives described in [previous paragraph], to take all
necessary measures to perform the following tasks, bearing in mind that these are mutually
reinforcing tasks; … (e) Neutralizing armed groups through [specific] brigade – In support of the
authorities of [affected country], … carry out targeted offensive operations through the [specific
brigade] in cooperation with the whole of [UN Mission], either unilaterally or jointly with [national
army], … in accordance with … the human rights due diligence policy on Uni ted Nations-support to
non-United Nations forces (HRDDP) …
Decides that the mandate of [UN Mission] shall be as follows, and authorizes [UN Mission] to use all
necessary means to perform the following tasks: (a) Protection of civilians: … (vi) To foster a secure
environment for the eventual safe and voluntary return of internally -displaced persons (IDPs) and
refugees including, where compatible and in strict compliance with the United Nations Human Rights
Due Diligence Policy (HRDPP), through monitoring of, ensuring the maintenance of international
human rights standards by, and specific operational coordination with the police services in relevant
and protection-focused tasks, in order to strengthen protection of civilians
Requests [UN Mission] to take fully into account the need to protect civilians and mitigate risk to
civilians, including, in particular, women, children and displaced persons and civilian objects in the
performance of its mandate as defined in [paragraphs of the resolution mandating UN Mission to,
inter-alia, provide support to national armed forces for combating the threat of armed groups and
extending State authority in affected country], where undertaken jointly with [national security
forces], in strict compliance with the Human Rights Due Diligence Policy on United Nations Support
to non-United Nations Security Forces [ref.]
Decides that the mandate of [UN Mission] shall focus on the following priority tasks: (a) Security,
Stabilization and protection of civilians (vi) To enhance its operational coordination with [national
armed forces], within its resources and areas of deployment and within the framework of the [peace
agreement], subject to an assessment of risk and in strict compliance with the Human Rights Due
Diligence Policy on United Nations Support to non-United Nations Security Forces (S/2013/110)
Underlines that the [United Nations] support [to the armed forces of the host Government] outlined in
[relevant paragraph] of this resolution must be in full compliance with the United Nations Human
Rights and Due Diligence Policy (HRDDP), further underlines its expectation that the Secretary General will report on all [UN Mission] support to the [national armed forces] including on the
implementation of the HRDDP …
Recalling the Human Rights Due Diligence Policy on United Nations Support to non -United Nations
Security Forces as a tool to enhance compliance with international humanitarian, human rights and
refugee law, including to address sexual violence in armed conflict and post -conflict situations,
Reiterates … that the support of [the mission] to [the] military operations against … armed groups is
strictly conditioned on [the] compliance [of the armed forces] with international humanitarian, human

15-20840

Reporting

35/98

… requests the Secretary-General to provide updates on [regular reviews of UN Mission’s geographic
deployment to ensure that UN Mission’s forces are best placed to protect civilians] as part of his
regular reports;

S/RES/2230 (2015),
op. 25

S/RES/2228 (2015),
op. 28

S/RES/2228 (2015),
op. 19

S/RES/2223 (2015),
op. 12

S/RES/2211 (2015),
op. 43

S/RES/2200 (2015),
op. 24

S/RES/2187 (2014),
op. 14
S/RES/2173 (2014),
op. 20
S/RES/2155 (2014),
op. 12

See also, for example,
S/RES/2223 (2015), op. 4
(b), (i); S/RES/2220
(2015), op. 26;
S/RES/2217 (2015), op.
32 (e), (i);S/RES/2210
(2015), pp. 26;
S/RES/2187 (2014), op. 4
(b), (i); S/RES/2179
(2014), op.
21;_S/RES/2155 (2014),
op. 4 (b), (i); S/RES/2126
(2013), op. 21;
S/RES/2109 (2013), op.
16; S/RES/2104 (2013),
op. 1; S/RES/2098 (2013),
op. 15 and op. 34;
S/RES/2091 (2013), op. 6;
S/PRST/2013/2 (2013),
par. 22 and 24;
S/RES/2085 (2012), op.
18; S/RES/2062 (2012),
op. 22; S/RES/2035
(2012), op. 8; S/RES/2003
(2011), op. 13;
S/RES/1945 (2010), op. 4;
S/RES/1933 (2010),
op. 22; S/RES/1906
(2009), op. 40;
S/RES/1906 (2009), op.
41; S/RES/1833 (2008),
op. 6; S/RES/1794 (2007),
op. 7; S/RES/1790 (2007),
op. 5; S/RES/1674 (2006),
op. 25; and S/RES/1529
(2004), op. 9.

S/PRST/2015/23

rights and refugee law and on an effective joint planning of these operations, dec ides that [the
mission] military leadership shall confirm, prior to providing any support to such operations, that
sufficient joint planning has been undertaken, especially regarding the protection of the civilian
population, calls upon [the mission] to intercede with the [armed forces] command if elements of [a]
… unit receiving [the mission]’s support are suspected of having committed grave violations of such
laws, and if the situation persists, calls upon [the mission] to withdraw support from these … un its.
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that effective human rights monitoring is carried out, and
the results included in his reports to the Council, and reiterates its call upon the Government of
[affected country] and the Government of [neighboring affected country] to extend their full
cooperation to the Secretary-General to this end, including by issuing visas to the concerned United
Nations personnel
Requests the Secretary-General to report to the Council every 90 days following adoption of this
resolution on [AU-UN Mission], including: (i) information on the political, humanitarian and security
situation in [affected area], including detailed reporting on incidents of violence and attacks against
civilians, by whomsoever perpetrated; (ii) information on violations of the Status of Forces
Agreement, including those involving attacks or threats of attack on [AU -UN Mission], as well as
violations of international humanitarian law perpetrated by any party to the conflict; (iii)
developments and progress towards achievement of [AU -UN Mission]’s strategic priorities and
benchmarks; (iv) developments and progress in addressing the challenges facing [AU -UN Mission] as
identified in the review of [AU-UN Mission]; (v) and on the implementation of this resolution
Requests [AU-UN Mission] to monitor, verify, and draw to the attention of the authorities abuses and
violations of human rights, including those committed against women and children, and violations of
international humanitarian law, and further requests enhanced, detailed, full and public reporting by
the Secretary-General to the Council on [violations and abuses of human rights], as part of his regular
90-day reports
… requests the Secretary-General to update the Security Council on how the Mission is working
toward meeting its protection of civilian obligations, including, but not limited to new patrol areas
and proactive deployment, on the measures to be taken to transform the mission to become more
efficient and effective in implementing its mandate in his next report in [month/year] as well as
further updates on these reviews as part of his regular reports;
Requests the Secretary-General to report to the Council every three months on the implementation of
[UN Mission]’s mandate, … as set out in this resolution, including on: (i) The situation on the
ground, including updates on operations to neutralize armed groups and any instances where the
Mission’s protection of civilians obligations are not fully met, as well as sexual violence and the
impact of conflict on women and children
Requests the Panel of Experts [established to assist the relevant Security Council sanctions
Committee] to assess in its midterm update and final report progress towards reducing violations by
all parties of [relevant sanctions regime], and progress towards removing impediments to the political
process, threats to stability in [affected area] and the region; violations of international humanitarian
law or violations or abuses of human rights, including those that involve attacks on the civilian
population, sexual- and gender-based violence and violations and abuses against children, and other
violations of [relevant sanctions regime], and to provide the Committee with information on the
individuals and entities that meet the listing criteria in [paragraph of relevant resolution]
… requests the Secretary-General to include progress made in implementing the [HRDDP] in his
reports to the Council;
… requests enhanced, detailed, full and public reporting by the Secretary -General to the Council on
[abuses and violations of human rights, including those committed against women and children, and
violations of international humanitarian law], as part of his regular 90 -day reports

S/PRST/2015/23

36/98

Protection
benchmarks and
indicators

15-20840

Decides that the mandate of [UN Mission] shall initially focus on the following priority tasks: (e)
Promotion and protection of human rights (i) To monitor, help investigate and report publicly and to
the Security Council on violations of international humanitarian law and on abuses and violations of
human rights committed throughout [affected country], in particular by different armed groups, …
and to contribute to efforts to identify and prosecute perpetrators, and to prevent such violations and
abuses, including through the deployment of human rights observers
… recognizing the importance of the ongoing monitoring and reporting to the United Nations
Security Council, including by [UN authorized international military force], of the situation of
civilians and in particular civilian casualties, and noting in this regard the work of the Civilian
Casualties Mitigation Team [of the UN authorized international military force],
Requests the Secretary-General to continue reporting to the Council every 90 days on … on progress
on the political track, the security and humanitarian situation, including in the IDP sites and refugee
camps, the actions of all parties with respect to … human rights, violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law, early recovery and on all restrictions and bureaucratic
impediments to [the Mission]’s freedom of movement …
Decides that [the mission] shall have the following mandate: Protection and security … (g) Support
for efforts to promote and protect human rights … – To monitor, help investigate, and report publicly
and to the Council, on human rights and humanitarian law violations with a view to preventing
violations, developing a protecting environment and ending impunity, and, to this end, to strengthen
its human rights monitoring, investigation and reporting capacity, – To bring to the attention of the
Council all individuals identified as perpetrators of serious human rights violations and to keep t he
Committee established pursuant to [relevant resolution] regularly informed of developments in this
regard.
… authorizes the mission to perform the following tasks; (b) Support the Government of [affected
country] in exercising its responsibilities for conflict prevention, mitigation, and resolution and
protect civilians through: (iii) Monitoring, investigating, verifying, and reporting regularly on human
rights and potential threats against the civilian population as well as actual and potential violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law, working as appropriate with the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, bringing these to the attention of the authorities as necessary, and
immediately reporting gross violations of human rights to the UN Security Council.
Recognizes the important role of the Secretary-General in providing timely information to the Security Council on
protection of civilians in armed conflict in particular through thematic and country specific reports and through briefings.
Requests the Secretary-General to include in his reports to the Council on country-specific situations more comprehensive
and detailed information relating to the protection of civilians in armed conflict, including on protection-related incidents
and actions taken by parties to armed conflict to implement their obligations to respect and protect the civilian population,
including information specific to the protection needs of refugees, internally displaced persons, women, children and other
vulnerable groups.
Notes the need for a clear exit strategy … and decides that future reconfigurations of [UN Mission] and its mandate
should be determined on the basis of the evolution of the situation on the ground and, in the context of implementation by
the Government of [affected country] and all other signatories of the [regional agreement], progress towards the following
objectives, in line with the three priorities of Protection of civilians, stabilization and support to the implementation of the
[regional agreement], as set out in the mission concept: (a) Reduction of the threat posed by [national] and foreign armed
groups, violence against civilians, including sexual and gender-based violence and violence against children to a level that
can be effectively managed by the [national] justice and security institutions; (b) Stabilization through the establishment of
functional, professional, and accountable state institutions, including security institutions, in conflict-affected areas, and
through strengthened democratic practices that reduces the risk of instability, including adequate political space,
promotion and protection of human rights and a credible electoral process
… The Council reaffirms its practice of requiring mission specific benchmarks, as and where
appropriate, to measure and review progress made in the implementation of peacekeeping mandates
and in this regard underlines the importance of clear mission specific benchmarks in the context of
mission transition.

S/RES/2149 (2014),
op. 30 (e), (i)

S/RES/2120 (2013),
pp. 24
S/RES/2113 (2013),
op. 14

S/RES/2000 (2011),
op. 7

S/RES/1996 (2011),
op. 3

S/RES/1894 (2009),
op. 31
S/RES/1894 (2009),
op. 32

S/RES/2147 (2014),
op. 3 (a) and (b)

S/PRST/2013/2
(2013), par. 24

See also, for example,
S/RES/2211 (2015), op. 6;
S/RES/2119 (2013), op.3;
S/RES/2116 (2013), op. 6;
S/RES/2098 (2013),
op.11, S/RES/1925
(2010), op. 6.,
S/RES/1923 (2010), op. 2

15-20840

Relations and
complementarity
between the mission,
the UNCT and other
protection actors

S/RES/1935 (2010),
op. 8

[S]tresses the importance of including indicators of progress regarding the protection of civilians in benchmarks for
relevant missions.
Notes also that, in this context, the Government of [the affected country] commits to work towards the achievement of the
following benchmarks related to the protection of civilians and humanitarian workers, in accordance with international
humanitarian law … (i) Voluntary return and resettlement in secure and sustainable conditions of internally displaced
persons; (ii) Demilitarization of refugee and internally displaced person camps as evidenced by a decrease in arms,
violence and human rights abuses; (iii) Improvement in the capacity of [national] authorities in [the area affected by
violence], including national law enforcement agencies, the judiciary and the prison system to provide the necessary
security for refugees, internally displaced persons, civilians and humanitarian workers with respect for international
human rights standards.
Requests the Government of [the affected country] and the Secretary-General to establish a joint Government …/UN
high-level Working Group to assess on a monthly basis the situation on the ground with respect to protection of civilians,
the measures adopted by the Government of [the affected country] … to progress towards meeting the [protection]
benchmarks …
… stresses the importance of the appropriate distribution of tasks and coordination between [AU-UN Mission] and the
UNCT in order to implement the review of [AU-UN Mission];
Decides that the mandate of [UN Mission] shall include the following immediate priority tasks: (a) Protection of civilians
… (iii) To identify and record threats and attacks against the civilian population, including through regular interaction with
the civilian population and working closely with humanitarian and human rights organizations;
Encourages [UN Mission] to enhance its interaction with the civilian population to raise awareness and understanding
about its mandate and activities through a comprehensive public outreach programme, to identify potential threats against
the civilian population and to collect reliable information on violations of international humanitarian law and violations
and abuses of human rights perpetrated against civilians;
Decides that the mandate of [UN Mission] shall be as follows, and authorizes [UN Mission] to use all necessary means to
perform the following tasks: (a) Protection of civilians: … (ii) To deter violence against civilians, including foreign
nationals, especially through … identification of threats and attacks against the civilian population, including through
regular interaction with the civilian population and closely with humanitarian, human rights and development
organizations, in areas at high risk of conflict … ; … (vi) To foster a secure environment for the eventual safe and
voluntary return of internally-displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees including … through … specific operational
coordination with the police services in relevant and protection-focused tasks, in order to strengthen protection of civilians;
Underlining the importance of close coordination of the range of United Nations policing activities, both at headquarters
and in the field, in particular between Security Council-mandated missions and the United Nations Country Team, as
appropriate, and encouraging relevant United Nations entities mandated to undertake policing activities to work through
existing coordination mechanisms, as appropriate
Stresses the need to address gaps in the integrated strategic and operational architecture of [UN Mission], calls on [UN
Mission] and UNCT to put in place the full requirements of the United Nations Policy on Integrated Assessment and
Planning, including the establishment of integrated mechanisms for joint analysis, planning, coordination, monitoring, and
decision-making, especially for joint operational planning for the military and police on protection of civilians; further
calls on the Secretariat to assist the Mission in these tasks, and requests that the Secretary-General include steps taken in
this regard in his next regular report to the Council on [UN Mission]
Noting the need for effective coordination and integration structures within [UN Mission], and between [UN Mission] and
UNCT, and encouraging swift development and implementation of a clearer strategic vision, priorities and a strategic and
operational planning system within [UN Mission], as well as an improved early warning and response mechanism and
coordination of protection of civilians activities with UNCT
Authorizes the Secretary-General to take the necessary steps to facilitate inter-mission cooperation and, if needed and
subject to further Council consideration, complementary force and asset generation, and authorizes, in order to reach the
new levels of troops and police within the overall troop ceiling set out in [relevant paragraph of the resolution] on a

S/RES/1894 (2009),
op. 27
S/RES/1923 (2010),
op. 3

S/RES/1923 (2010),
op. 4
S/RES/2228 (2015),
op. 2
S/RES/2217 (2015),
op. 32 (a), (iii)
S/RES/2211 (2015),
op. 12
S/RES/2187 (2014),
op. 4 (a), (ii) and (vi)

S/RES/2185 (2014),
pp. 13
S/RES/2148 (2014),
op. 10

S/RES/2148 (2014),
pp. 17
S/RES/2132 (2013),
op. 5

See also, for example,
S/RES/2187 (2014), pp.
19; S/RES/2164 (2014),
op. 20; S/RES/2162
(2014), op. 19 (a);
S/RES/2155 (2014), op. 4
(a), (ii) and (vi);
S/RES/2116 (2013),
op.13; S/RES/2112
(2013), op. 10;
S/RES/2109 (2013), op.
30; S/RES/2098 (2013),
op. 17 and op. 18;
S/PRST/2013/2 (2013),
par. 22 and 23;
S/RES/2063 (2012), op.
16; S/RES/2062 (2012),
op. 19; S/RES/2057
(2012), pp. 6; S/RES/1925
(2010), op. 16;
S/RES/1906 (2009),
op. 14; and S/RES/1880
(2009), op. 28.

S/PRST/2015/23

37/98

Stresses the importance of achievable and realistic targets against which the progress of United Nations peacekeeping
operations can be measured; requests the Secretary-General to continue reporting to the Council every 90 days on
progress made towards implementing [the mission]’s mandate across [the affected region], including on progress towards
and obstacles to the implementation of the [protection] strategy …, also including an assessment of progress against the
benchmarks set out in … the report of the Secretary-General …

Training for
peacekeeping
personnel

Requests the Secretary-General to further promote professionalism, effectiveness and system-wide coherence in the
policing-related work of the United Nations including, in close consultation, as appropriate, with Member States and the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations in full respect of its vital role, through: a. the development and
implementation of standards and guidance for United Nations policing-related work, through the Strategic Guidance
Framework for International Police Peacekeeping; b. the development of comprehensive, standardized training for United
Nations Police Components, including pre-deployment, induction and in-service training; c. the provision of senior police
leadership training, including through the Senior Mission Leaders’ Course;
Emphasizes the need for [AU Mission], and all military forces in [the affected country], while carrying out their mandate,
to act in full respect of the sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity of [host country] and in full compliance with
applicable international humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee law and recalls the importance of training in this
regard
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that technical support is provided, in pre-deployment and in theatre, to [the
mission]’s troop- and police-contributing countries to include guidance and training for military and police personnel on
the protection of civilians from imminent threat and appropriate responses, including on human rights, sexual violence and
gender issues.
Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with relevant actors, to ensure that peacekeeping missions with protection
of civilians’ mandates, in keeping with the strategic plans that guide their deployment, conduct mission-wide planning,
pre-deployment training, and senior leadership training on the protection of civilians and requests troop and police
contributing countries to ensure the provision of appropriate training of their personnel participating in UN peacekeeping
and other relevant missions to heighten the awareness and responsiveness to protection concerns, including training on
HIV/AIDS and zero tolerance of sexual exploitation and abuse in UN peacekeeping missions.
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that United Nations personnel involved in peacemaking, peacekeeping and
peace-building activities have appropriate training in international humanitarian, human rights and refugee law, including
child and gender-related provisions, negotiation and communication skills, cultural awareness and civilian-military
coordination, and urges States and relevant international and regional organizations to ensure that appropriate training is
included in their programs for personnel involved in similar activities.

S/PRST/2015/23

38/98

temporary basis, appropriate transfer of troops, force enablers, and multipliers from other missions, in particular [UN
Missions], subject to the agreement of the troop-contributing countries and without prejudice to the performance of the
mandates of these United Nations missions
Emphasizes the need for strong coordination and information-sharing between [UN Mission], [AU task force] and [AU
Mission] in the context of their protection of civilians activities …
Stressing the importance of continued to efforts to enhance eff ective working between [the Mission]’s
military, civilian and police components, and between [the Mission] and humanitarian organizations
in [the affected region], in the implementation of its mandate,
Reaffirms the inter-mission cooperation arrangements provided for in its [relevant resolution] and
calls upon the United Nations in [relevant counties], including all components of [relevant missions],
within their respective mandates, capabilities and areas of depl oyment, to enhance their inter-mission
cooperation for the stabilization of the border area, including through the development of a shared,
strategic vision and plan, in support of the [relevant national] authorities;
Recalls that the protection of civilians requires a coordinated response from all relevant mission components and
encourages [the mission] to enhance interaction, under the authority of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, between its civil and military components at all levels and humanitarian actors, in order to consolidate expertise
on the protection of civilians.

S/RES/2127 (2013),
op. 31
S/RES/2113 (2013),
pp. 23
S/RES/2066 (2012),
op. 13

S/RES/1906 (2009),
op. 8

S/RES/2185 (2014),
op. 4 (b) and (c)

S/RES/2127 (2013),
op. 33
S/RES/1906 (2009),
op. 13
S/RES/1894 (2009),
op. 23

S/RES/1265 (1999),
op. 14

See also, for example,
S/RES/1325 (2000), op. 6;
and S/RES/1296 (2000),
op. 19.

15-20840

15-20840

B. Displacement
Protection of refugees
and internally
displaced persons,
including prevention
from forced
displacement

S/RES/2233 (2015),
pp. 9
S/RES/2232 (2015),
op. 30
S/RES/2223 (2015),
pp. 14

S/RES/2182 (2014),
pp. 14
S/RES/2170 (2014),
op. 2
S/RES/2134 (2014),
op. 27

See also, for example,
S/RES/2228 (2015), pp.
10; S/RES/2206 (2015),
pp. 5; S/RES/2190 (2014),
pp. 6; S/RES/2173 (2014),
pp. 8; S/RES/2158 (2014),
pp. 12 and op. 14;
S/RES/2153 (2014),
pp.16; S/RES/2111
(2013), pp. 6 and pp. 13;
S/RES/2102 (2013), pp. 9;
S/RES/2099 (2013), pp.
12; S/RES/2098 (2013),
pp. 12; S/RES/2076
(2012, pp. 8; S/RES/2063
(2012), pp. 14;
S/RES/1975 (2011), op.
10; S/RES/1944 (2010),
pp. 12; S/RES/1674
(2006), op. 12

S/RES/2113 (2013),
pp. 15

S/RES/2112 (2013),
pp. 6
S/RES/2093 (2013),
op. 28
S/RES/2093 (2013),
op. 29
S/RES/2062 (2012),
pp. 7
S/RES/1674 (2006),
op. 13
S/RES/1296 (2000),
op. 3

S/PRST/2015/23

39/98

Expressing grave concern for the more than [X] million individuals seeking refuge in other areas of [affected country],
reiterating its gratitude to the host communities, underscoring that host communities should provide access to safe areas
for internally displaced people …
Expresses concern at the increase in forced evictions of internally displaced persons from public and private infrastructure
in major towns in [affected country], stresses that any eviction should be consistent with relevant national and international
frameworks, and calls upon [national authorities] and all relevant actors to strive to provide concrete durable solutions for
internal displacement
Expressing its deep appreciation for the actions taken by [UN Mission] peacekeepers and Troop- and Police-Contributing
Countries to protect civilians, including foreign nationals, under threat of physical violence and to stabilize the security
situation within and beyond [UN Mission] sites, expressing appreciation for [UN Mission]’s efforts to support internally
displaced persons seeking protection on its sites, while underlining the necessity to find sustainable solutions for the
internally displaced population, including in alternative safe and secure locations, and in keeping with the Guiding
Principles on Internal Displacement
Expressing concern at the continuing violations and abuses of human rights, including extrajudicial killings, violence
against women, children and journalists, arbitrary detention and pervasive sexual violence in [affected country], including
in camps for internally displaced persons, underscoring the need to end impunity, promote and protect human rights, hold
accountable those who commit such crimes
Strongly condemns the … forced displacement of members of minority groups, … especially in [areas of affected
countries]
Expresses deep concern at the increasing numbers of internally displaced persons as a result of the ongoing violence,
stresses the need to ensure that the basic needs of those persons are met, in particular access to water, food and shelters,
and commends UN humanitarian agencies and partners for their efforts to provide urgent and coordinated support to the
population in need in the [affected country] while also recognizing the need to augment assistance to address increasing
needs
Expressing deep concern at the significant increase in population displacements this year and the
consequent increase in humanitarian assistance and protection needs, and at the fact that
approximately [figure] IDPs and refugees remain displaced, further expressing deep concern at the
deteriorating conditions for the internally displaced in [the affected area] as well as for new refugees
in neighbouring countries and [nationals of neighbouring country] who have fled [the affected area],
and at the situation of refugees and IDPs unable to reach camps, and therefore vulnerable to ongoing
violence or lacking humanitarian assistance, stressing the importance of continued international
support to address these needs, recognizing that some displaced will settle permanently in urban
areas, but underlining the need to ensure security in areas of return,
… strongly condemning all intimidation, threats and attacks committed against refugees, returnees
and internally displaced persons in [the affected country] …
Expresses concern at the security situation in camps for internally displaced persons (IDPs) and
settlements, condemns all human rights violations and abuses, including sexual violence, committed
against IDPs by all parties, including armed groups and mili tias, and calls for the strengthening of
protection of IDP camps;
Recalls the relevant prohibition of the forced displacement of civilians in armed conflict, and stresses
the importance of fully complying with international humanitarian law and other applicable
international law in this context;
… strongly condemning all intimidation, threats and attacks committed against refugees and
internally displaced persons (IDP) in [the affected country] …
Urges the international community to provide support and assistance to enable States to fulfil their responsibilities
regarding the protection of refugees and other persons protected under international humanitarian law.
Notes that the overwhelming majority of internally displaced persons and other vulnerable groups in situations of armed
conflict are civilians and, as such, are entitled to the protection afforded to civilians under existing international
humanitarian law.

Civilian character of
camps and settlements
of refugees and
internally displaced
persons

15-20840

Recalling the responsibility of [national authorities] … to comply with [the] right [of all people in affected country] to
return to their own country or to leave in order to seek asylum in other States
The Security Council further calls for coordinated international support to the neighbouring countries hosting … refugees
[from affected country], at their request, in addressing legitimate security concerns and ensuring the safety and security of
host communities and refugees, and countering radicalization, through inter alia the provision of support for effective
border management and internal security measures
Reiterating its appreciation for the significant and admirable efforts that have been made by the countries of the region,
notably [countries], to accommodate the more than [X] million refugees who have fled [affected country] as a result of
ongoing violence including the approximately [X] refugees who have fled since the adoption of [Security Council
resolution], and urging again all Member States, based on burden-sharing principles, to support these neighbouring host
countries to enable them to respond to the growing humanitarian needs, including by providing direct support
The Security Council reaffirms the importance of the principle of non -refoulement, the right for
refugees to return voluntarily to [the affected country] and encourages countries neighbouring [the
affected country] to protect all people fleeing the violence in [the affected country], including [people
from a specific area in the region]. It urges all Member States, based on burden sharing principles, to
support these countries in assisting refugees and affected communities …
Acknowledges the cooperative policy of neighbouring States, including [list of relevant States] in
keeping their borders open for refugees … and encourages these States to continue this policy and
contribute to a stabilization of the situation wherever possible;
Recalling in addition the right to seek and enjoy asylum reflected in Article 14 of the Universal Declaration and the
non-refoulement obligation of States under the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees adopted on 28 July 1951,
together with its Protocol adopted on 31 January 1967 (“the Refugees Convention and its Protocol”) and also recalling
that the protections afforded by the Refugees Convention and its Protocol shall not extend to any person with respect to
whom there are serious reasons for considering that he has been guilty of acts contrary to the purposes and principles of
the United Nations.
The Security Council reaffirms the principle of non-refoulement of refugees, as provided for in relevant instruments of
international law, welcomes recent efforts of countries neighbouring [the affected State] to support the voluntary
repatriation of refugees in safety and dignity, and urges those host States to continue to provide international protection to
[those] refugees in need of it. It encourages the international community to provide the necessary assistance in this regard.
The Security Council is particularly concerned at the withdrawal of refugee status from and the consequent ending of
assistance to many refugees from the [neighbouring State] … The decisions of the [affected State] in this regard may lead
to the involuntary return of tens of thousands of people to an area that is neither safe nor prepared to receive them. The
Council stresses the importance of the principle of non-refoulement set out in the 1951 Geneva Convention on the Status
of Refugees, to which [the affected State] is a party. The Council urges the [affected State] to continue to provide asylum
to all refugees regardless of their origin.
Condemns the use of civilian establishments, in particular the camps for internally displaced persons, by the armed
groups, including those opposing the Government of [affected country], to gain a military advantage in a manner that
places the civilians and civilian objects at risk from the dangers arising from armed conflict;
… underscoring the need for all parties to respect and maintain the security and civilian character of camps for refugees
and internally displaced persons,
… the Security Council calls upon all actors to take adequate and necessary measures to ensure
respect for the principles of refugee protection and obligations under refugee law, including the
civilian and humanitarian character of refugee camps.
Calls upon all parties to respect the civilian and humanitarian character of refugee camps and
internally displaced persons sites …
Encourages [the mission] and the United Nations country team to continue to assist the Government to prevent the
recruitment of refugees and children by armed groups and to maintain the civilian nature of refugee camps and internally
displaced person sites, in coordination with [national security forces] and the humanitarian community.
Calls upon all parties to armed conflicts to respect the civilian and humanitarian character of refugee camps and
settlements, and ensure the protection of all civilians inhabiting such camps, in particular women and girls, from all forms
of violence, including rape and other sexual violence, and to ensure full, unimpeded and secure humanitarian access to
them.

S/PRST/2015/23

40/98

Asylum and
non-refoulement

S/RES/2217 (2015),
pp. 21
S/PRST/2015/10,
para. 6
S/RES/2165 (2014),
pp. 7

S/PRST/2013/15
(2013), par. 16

S/RES/2056 (2012),
op. 15
S/RES/1624 (2005),
pp. 7

S/PRST/2000/12

S/PRST/1995/49

S/RES/2200 (2015),
op. 17
S/RES/2139 (2014),
pp. 6
S/PRST/2013/2
(2013), par. 20
S/RES/2076 (2012),
op. 12
S/RES/1923 (2010),
op. 23
S/RES/1889 (2009),
op. 12

See also, for example,
S/RES/1834 (2008),
pp. 12; S/RES/1778
(2007), pp. 12 and op. 5;
S/RES/1325 (2000), op.
12; S/RES/1286 (2000),
op. 12; S/RES/1272
(1999), op. 12; and
S/PRST/1999/32.

15-20840

Durable solutions,
including safe,
voluntary and
dignified return and
reintegration

S/RES/1861 (2009),
pp. 13
S/RES/1674 (2006),
op. 14
S/RES/1296 (2000),
op. 14

S/RES/1208 (1998),
op. 6

S/RES/2233 (2015),
pp. 14

S/RES/2230 (2015),
pp. 22
S/RES/2228 (2015),
op. 23

S/RES/2227 (2015),
op. 14 (f) and (i)
S/RES/2223 (2015),
op. 20
S/RES/2211 (2015),
pp. 9

S/RES/1959 (2010),
op. 14

See also, for example,
S/RES/2232 (2015), op.
30; S/RES/2205 (2015),
pp. 22; S/RES/2187
(2014), op. 18 and op. 4
(a), (vi); S/RES/2162
(2014), pp. 4; S/RES/2155
(2014), op.17;
S/RES/2113 (2013), op.
21; S/RES/2104 (2013),
pp. 26; S/RES/2061
(2012), pp. 11;
S/PRST/2013/2 (2013),
par. 19; S/RES/2063
(2012), op. 18;
S/RES/2001 (2011), pp.
11; S/RES/1959 (2010),
op. 14; S/RES/1923
(2010), pp. 7; S/RES/1917
(2010), op. 38 and op. 39;
S/RES/1895 (2009), pp. 8;
S/RES/1883 (2009), pp.
11; S/RES/1826 (2008),
op. 8; S/RES/1812 (2008),
op. 18; S/RES/1716
(2006), op. 9; S/RES/1591
(2005), pp. 7; S/RES/1564
(2004), op. 6; S/RES/1556
(2004), pp. 19;
S/RES/1545 (2004), pp.
13; S/RES/1494 (2003),
op. 15; S/RES/1272
(1999), op. 12; and
S/RES/1096 (1997), op. 8.

S/PRST/2015/23

41/98

Emphasizing the need to respect international refugee law, preserve the civilian and humanitarian nature of the refugee
camps and internally displaced persons sites and prevent any recruitment of individuals, including children, which might
be carried out in or around the camps and sites by armed groups.
Reaffirms the need to maintain the security and civilian character of refugee and internally displaced person camps,
stresses the primary responsibility of States in this regard, and encourages the Secretary-General where necessary and in
the context of existing peacekeeping operations and their respective mandates, to take all feasible measures to ensure
security in and around such camps and of their inhabitants.
Invites the Secretary-General to bring to its attention situations where refugees and internally displaced persons are
vulnerable to the threat of harassment or where their camps are vulnerable to infiltration by armed elements and where
such situations may constitute a threat to international peace and security, expresses, in this regard, its willingness to
consider such situations and, where necessary, adopt appropriate steps to help create a secure environment for civilians
endangered by conflicts, including by providing support to States concerned in this regard …
Notes that a range of measures by the international community are needed to share the burden borne by African States
hosting refugees and to support their efforts to ensure the security and civilian and humanitarian character of refugee
camps and settlements, including in the areas of law enforcement, disarmament of armed elements, curtailment of the
flow of arms in refugee camps and settlements, separation of refugees from other persons who do not qualify for
international protection afforded refugees or otherwise do not require international protection, and demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants.
Reaffirming that all parties … should create conditions conducive to the voluntary, safe, dignified, and sustainable return
of refugees and internally displaced persons or local integration of internally displaced persons, particularly in areas
newly-liberated from [armed group], and to promote stabilization activities and long-term sustainable development,
welcoming commitments and encouraging continued efforts of the Government of [affected country] for the relief of
internally displaced persons, refugees and returnees, noting the important role of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, based on its mandate, in providing continued advice and support to the Government of
[affected country], in coordination with [UN Mission], on these issues, and encouraging the Government of [affected
country] to continue working with [UN Mission] and humanitarian agencies to ensure the delivery of humanitarian relief
to those in need,
Expressing concern about the residual threat of landmines and explosive remnants of war in [affected area], which hinders
the safe return of displaced persons to their homes and safe migration
Stresses the importance of achieving dignified and durable solutions for refugees and internally displaced persons, and of
ensuring their full participation in the planning and management of these solutions; demands that all parties to the conflict
in [affected area] create the conditions conducive to allowing the voluntary, informed, safe, dignified and sustainable
return of refugees and internally displace d persons, or, where appropriate, their local integration; in this regard stresses the
need for the establishment of a mechanism in order to verify the extent to which these returns are voluntary and informed
in nature, and underlines the importance of addressing land issues for the realization of durable solutions in [affected area]
Decides that [UN Mission] shall perform the following tasks: … (f) Humanitarian assistance and projects for stabilization
(i) In support of [national] authorities, to contribute to the creation of a secure environment for the … the voluntary, safe
and dignified return or local integration or resettlement of internally displaced persons and refugees in close coordination
with humanitarian actors
… stresses that any returns or other durable solutions for IDPs or refugees must be undertaken on a voluntary and
informed basis in conditions of dignity and safety
… expressing deep concern regarding the very high number of internally displaced persons in [affected country], at more
than [X] million, and the over [X] refugees from [area in affected country] caused by the various [national] and foreign
armed groups active in the region, and calling upon [affected country] and all States in the region to work towards the
peaceful environment conducive to the realization of durable solutions for refugees and internally displaced persons,
including their eventual voluntary return and reintegration in [affected country], with the support, as appropriate, of the
United Nations country team, supporting UNHCR’s current efforts to complete biometric registration of the … refugee
population [from neighboring country] in [affected country] to help facilitate the return of these refugees to [neighboring
country] …
Welcomes … the progress towards achieving dignified durable solutions for refugees living in
[neighboring country], and encourages a sustained effort to find solutions with regards to the residual
… refugee caseload [from the affected country], in compliance with relevant international law

Role of United Nations
peacekeeping and
other relevant
missions and actors
15-20840

S/RES/1674 (2006),
op. 11

The Security Council is deeply concerned that in spite of its previous requests there has been little progress on the issue of
the return of [refugees from ethnic minority group] and urges [the Government] to adopt a comprehensive approach in
order to facilitate the return of refugees … to their homes of origin throughout [the affected State]. It deplores the
continued failure by [the affected State] to safeguard effectively their property rights, especially the situation where many
of those [ethnic minority refugees] who have returned to the former sectors have been unable to regain possession of their
properties. The Council calls upon [the affected State] to apply immediately proper procedures to the question of property
rights and to stop all forms of discrimination against the [minority population] in the provision of social benefits and
reconstruction assistance.
Reaffirms its support for the established principles that all declarations and actions made under duress, particularly those
regarding land and ownership, are null and void, and that all displaced persons should be enabled to return in peace to
their former homes.
Underlines that [AU-UN Mission] must continue to give priority in decisions about the use of available
capacity and resources to: (a) the protection of civilians across [affected area], including women and
children, through, and without prejudice to the basic principles of peacekeeping, inter alia, … proactive
military deployment and active and effective patrolling in areas at … high concent ration of IDPs; …
securing IDP camps, adjacent areas and areas of return, including development and training of
community policing; … requests [AU-UN Mission] to maximize the use of its capabilities, in
cooperation with the UNCT and other international and non-governmental actors, in the implementation
of its mission-wide comprehensive strategy for the achievement of these objectives;

S/PRST/1996/48

S/PRST/2015/23

42/98

Housing, land and
property

Calls upon all parties concerned to ensure that all peace processes, peace agreements and post-conflict recovery and
reconstruction planning have regard for the special needs of women and children and include specific measures for the
protection of civilians including … (iii) the creation of conditions conducive to the voluntary, safe, dignified and
sustainable return of refugees and internally displaced persons …
Reaffirms the unacceptability of the demographic changes resulting from the conflict, reaffirms also the inalienable rights
of all refugees and internally displaced persons affected by the conflict, and stresses that they have the right to return to
their homes in secure and dignified conditions …
Welcomes the commitment of the parties to the right of all refugees and displaced persons freely to return to their homes
of origin or to other places of their choice … in safety … and stresses the importance of facilitating the return or
resettlement of refugees and displaced persons which should be gradual and orderly and carried out through progressive,
coordinated programs that address the need for local security, housing and jobs …
Noting with concern the potential for conflict over [affected country]’s natural resources and disputes related to land
ownership and also noting that issues related to corruption continue to threaten to undermine stability and the effectiveness
of government institutions
… demands that all parties to the conflict in [affected area] create the conditions conducive to allowing the voluntary,
informed, safe, dignified and sustainable return of refugees and internally displace d persons, or, where appropriate, their
local integration; in this regard … underlines the importance of addressing land issues for the realization of durable
solutions in [affected area]
Urges the Government to take concrete and discernible steps to prevent and mitigate violence, including inter-communal
tensions by seeking a broad national consensus on addressing effectively identity and land tenure issues
Stressing the importance of land issues for a lasting peace and security in [affected country], noting the commitment of the
Government to addressing this complex issue, and encouraging the Government of [affected country] and [relevant
national administrative body] to handle land grievances and disputes in a non-partisan manner and to also address land
tenure in the broader context of socioeconomic development, bearing in mind the need to foster reconciliation and
national cohesion …
Urges the Government of [the affected country], with support from [the mission], to … address the
underlying causes of instability, in particular the impact of the return of displaced persons and
refugees and possible land-related social tensions;
Urges the signatories of the [peace agreement] to work towards a sustainable solution for the voluntary return,
reinstallation, reintegration and security of displaced persons, including by addressing land tenure issues, with the support
of the United Nations system, and to fulfil in this regard their commitments in accordance with the … Political Agreement
and their obligations under international law.

S/RES/1615 (2005),
op. 18
S/RES/1088 (1996),
op. 11
S/RES/2239 (2015),
pp. 7
S/RES/2228 (2015),
op. 23

See also, for example,
S/RES/2226 (2015), pp. 7;
S/RES/2190 (2014), pp.
10; S/RES/2173 (2014),
op. 23; S/RES/2162
(2014), op. 14.

S/RES/2226 (2015),
op. 14
S/RES/2137 (2014),
pp. 12

S/RES/2053 (2012),
op. 20
S/RES/1933 (2010),
op. 14

S/RES/941 (1994),
op. 3
S/RES/2228 (2015),
op. 4

See also, for example,
S/RES/2233 (2015),
pp. 14 and 15;
S/RES/2226 (2015),
op. 19 (h); S/RES/2210
(2015), op. 45;
S/RES/2187 (2014),
op. 17; S/RES/2173
(2014), op. 8; S/RES/2155

15-20840

S/RES/2226 (2015),
op. 30
S/RES/2223 (2015),
op. 19
S/RES/2223 (2015),
op. 4 (a), (ii)

S/RES/2217 (2015),
op. 32 (c)

S/RES/2211 (2015),
op. 9 (a)

(2014), op. 4 (vi) and
op. 16; S/RES/2149
(2014), op. 30 (c);
S/RES/2132 (2013), pp. 8;
S/RES/2113 (2013), op. 4
and op. 21; S/RES/2100
(2013), op. 16;
S/RES/2066 (2012),
op. 12; S/RES/2012
(2011), op. 15;
S/RES/1812 (2008),
op. 18; S/RES/1778
(2007), op. 1; S/RES/1756
(2007), op. 2; S/RES/1674
(2006), op. 16;
S/RES/1565 (2004), op. 5;
S/RES/1545 (2004), op. 5
and op. 13; S/RES/1509
(2003), op. 6; S/RES/1419
(2002), op. 11;
S/RES/1244 (1999),
op. 11; and S/RES/1145
(1997), op. 13.

S/RES/2180 (2014),
op. 22
S/RES/2124 (2013),
op. 21

S/RES/1925 (2010),
op. 12 (g)
S/RES/1861 (2009),
op. 1

S/RES/1861 (2009),
op. 6 (c) and (e)

S/PRST/2015/23

43/98

Calls on the Governments of [affected country] and [neighboring country] to continue reinforcing
their cooperation … and to implement the shared border strategy to inter alia support the … voluntary
and safe repatriation of refugees as well as to address the root causes of conflict and tension
… calls upon the Government of [affected country] to ensure freedom of movement for IDPs,
including those leaving and entering protection of civilian sites, and to continue to support [UN
Mission] by the allocation of land for protection of civilian sites
Decides that the mandate of [UN Mission] shall be as follows, and authorizes [UN Mission] to use all
necessary means to perform the following tasks: (a) Protection of civilians: … (ii) To deter violence
against civilians, including foreign nationals, especially through proactive deployment, active
patrolling with particular attention to displaced civilians, including, but not limited to, those in
protection sites and refugee camps, … in particular when the Government of [affected country] is
unable or failing to provide such security;
Decides that the mandate of [UN Mission] shall include the following immediate priority tasks: … (c)
Facilitate the immediate, full, safe and unhindered delivery of humanitarian assistance To enhance
civil-military coordination within [UN Mission] and impr ove coordination with humanitarian actors,
to facilitate the creation of a secure environment … for the voluntary safe, dignified and sustainable
return or local integration or resettlement of internally displaced persons or refugees in close
coordination with humanitarian actors
Authorizes [UN Mission], in pursuit of the objectives described in [previous paragraph], to take all
necessary measures to perform the following tasks, bearing in mind that these are mutually
reinforcing tasks; (a) Ensure, within its area of operations, effective protection of civilians under
threat of physical violence, including by deterring, preventing and stopping armed groups from
inflicting violence on the populations, paying particular a ttention to civilians gathered in displaced
and refugee camps, … in the context of violence emerging from any of the parties engaged in the
conflict, and mitigating the risk to civilians before, during and after any military operation
Encourages [UN Mission] to continue assisting the Government of [affected country] in providing
adequate protection to the civilian population, with particular attention to the needs of internally
displaced persons and other vulnerable groups, especially women and children, including through
joint community policing in the camps, in line with Security Council resolution 1894 (2009)
Requests the [Government] to ensure the protection and well -being of all internally displaced
persons, including from sexual violence and exploitation, paying particular attention to ensuring that
the human rights of internally displaced persons in [the country] are respected in relation to
relocations, and to ensure a fully consultative process, providing prior notice and ensuring safe,
sanitary new sites that have basic services, as well as full, safe and unhindered access for
humanitarian organizations;
Decides that [the mission] shall have the following mandate in this order of priority: Protection of civilians (g) Support the
Government’s efforts, along with international partners and neighbouring countries, to create an environment conducive to
the voluntary, safe and dignified return of internally displaced persons and refugees, or voluntary local integration or
resettlement.
Decides to extend … the multidimensional presence in [the affected countries] intended to help create the security
conditions conducive to a voluntary, secure and sustainable return of refugees and displaced persons, inter alia, by
contributing to the protection of refugees, displaced persons and civilians in danger, by facilitating the provision of
humanitarian assistance in [the affected region] and by creating favourable conditions for the reconstruction and economic
and social development of those areas.
Decides that [the mission] shall have the following mandate in [the affected country], in liaison with the United Nations
country team … Security and protection of civilians (c) To liaise with the … Government [of the affected country] and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in support of their efforts to relocate refugee
camps which are in close proximity to the border, and to provide to UNHCR, on availability and cost-reimbursable basis,
logistical assistance for that purpose; … (e) To support the initiatives of national and local authorities in [the affected
country] to resolve local tensions and promote local reconciliation efforts, in order to enhance the environment for the
return of internally displaced persons.

S/PRST/2015/23

44/98

Targeted and
graduated measures
in response to
violations of
applicable
international law
related to forced
displacement

Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations … decides that [the peacekeeping mission] shall have the
following mandate: … (b) to monitor and report on the human rights situation, in cooperation with the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, including on the situation of returned refugees and displaced
persons.
Recalls that the [opposition group] bears a particular responsibility to protect the returnees and to facilitate the return of the
remaining displaced population, and requests further measures to be undertaken [by United Nations agencies] to create
conditions conducive to the return of refugees and internally displaced persons, … to develop their skills and to increase
their self-reliance, with full respect for their inalienable right to return to their homes in secure and dignified conditions.
Decides that the provisions of [paragraphs of the resolution providing for travel ban and financial restrictive measures]
shall apply to individuals, as designated for such measures by [relevant Security Council sanctions Committee] who are
leaders of any entity, including any [national] government, opposition, militia, or other group, that has, or whose members
have, engaged in any of the activities described in [paragraphs of the resolution providing for activities and policies the
direct or indirect involvement in constitutes a criterion for listing by the relevant Security Council sanctions Committee,
including the targeting of civilians through forced displacement]
Underscores that such actions or policies [the direct or indirect involvement in constitutes a criterion for listing by the
relevant Security Council sanctions Committee] may include, but are not limited to: … (d) The targeting of civilians,
including women and children, through … forced displacement,
Further decides in this regard that the measures contained in [paragraphs of the resolution providing for individual
restrictive measures] shall also apply to the individuals and entities designated by the Committee as: (b) involved in
planning, directing, or committing acts that violate international human rights law or international humanitarian law, as
applicable, or that constitute human rights abuses or violations, in the [affected country], including acts involving sexual
violence, targeting of civilians, ethnic- or religious-based attacks, attacks on schools and hospitals, and abduction and
forced displacement
Encourages all States to submit to the Committee for inclusion on its list of designees, individuals …
[operating in the [affected country] and committing serious violations of international law involving
… forced displacement], as well as any entities owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by the
submitted individuals or entities or individuals or entities acting on behalf of or at the direction of the
submitted entities;

S/RES/1542 (2004),
op. 7 (III) (b)
S/RES/1494 (2003),
op. 15
S/RES/2206 (2015),
op. 8

See also, for example,
S/RES/2078 (2012), op. 4

S/RES/2206 (2015),
op. 7 (d)
S/RES/2134 (2014),
op. 37 (b)

S/RES/1952 (2010),
op. 21

C. Humanitarian access and safety and security of humanitarian workers
Express concern at
acts and threats of
violence against
humanitarian
workers and other
forms of
obstruction of the
delivery of
humanitarian aid

15-20840

Expresses serious concern at the deteriorating humanitarian situation in [affected area], and at the
threats to and attacks on humanitarian personnel and facilities; expresses concern that access to some
conflict areas where vulnerable populations reside remains restricted and that some conflict areas are
inaccessible, including in [areas], due to insecurity, acts of criminality and movement restrictions by
Government forces, armed movements and militia groups; … deplores the continued restrictions on
humanitarian access in [affected area] resulting from increased insecurity, attacks against humanitarian
workers, denial of access by the parties to the conflict and bureaucratic impediments imposed by the
Government of [affected country]; further expresses concern over the insufficient availability of
funding for humanitarian actors …
Condemning all attacks against humanitarian personnel and facilities and recalling that attacks against
humanitarian personnel and depriving civilians of objects indispensable to their survival may amount
to violations of international humanitarian law
Expressing concern at the continuing threats posed by the illicit transfer, destabilizing accumulation
and misuse of small arms and light weapons … to the safety and security of humanitarian workers and
their effective provision of humanitarian assistance
Condemning the multiple violations of international humanitarian law and the widespread human
rights violations and abuses, including those involving …, denial of humanitarian access, deliberate
attacks against national and international personnel of humanitarian organisations, United Nations
personnel and its associated personnel, and humanitarian assets, including supplies, facilities and
transports committed by both former [armed group] elements and militia groups, in particu lar the
[specific militia]

S/RES/2228 (2015),
op. 17

S/RES/2223 (2015),
pp. 9
S/RES/2220 (2015),
pp. 20
S/RES/2217 (2015),
pp. 9

See also, for example,
S/RES/2187 (2014), pp. 6;
S/RES/2175 (2014), pp.
11; S/RES/2173 (2014),
op. 18; S/RES/2155
(2014), pp. 6; S/RES/2145
(2014), op. 29;
S/RES/2127 (2013), op.
51; S/PRST/2013/15
(2013), par. 11;
S/RES/2117 (2013), pp.9;
S/RES/2113 (2013), op.
16; S/RES/2109 (2013),
pp. 13; S/RES/2096
(2013), op. 29;
S/RES/2063 (2012), op.
14; S/RES/2041 (2011),
pp. 14; S/RES/2003
(2011), op. 15;
S/RES/2002 (2011), pp.
11; S/RES/1964 (2010),

15-20840

S/RES/2210 (2015),
op. 29
S/RES/2191 (2014),
pp. 10
S/RES/2173 (2014),
pp. 10
S/RES/2165 (2014),
pp. 15

pp. 16; S/RES/1935
(2010), op. 10;
S/RES/1917 (2010), pp.
15; S/RES/1894 (2009),
op. 16; S/RES/1892
(2009), op. 14;
S/RES/1840 (2008),
op. 16; S/RES/1828
(2008), pp. 12 and op. 8;
S/RES/1780 (2007), op.
13; S/RES/1769 (2007),
pp. 13 and op. 14; and
S/RES/1265 (1999), op. 8
and op. 9.

S/RES/2139 (2014),
pp. 10

S/RES/2138 (2014),
pp. 8
S/RES/2127 (2013),
pp. 18
S/RES/2053 (2012),
pp. 13
S/RES/2010 (2011),
pp. 14
S/RES/1923 (2010),
pp. 4
S/RES/1910 (2010),
pp. 14

S/RES/2230 (2015),
op.23
S/RES/2227 (2015),
pp. 23
S/RES/2220 (2015),
op. 3

See also, for example,
S/RES/2223 (2015), pp. 8
and op. 20; S/RES/2217
(2015), op. 48;
S/RES/2216 (2015), op. 9;
S/RES/2211 (2015), op.
35; S/RES/2210 (2015,
pp. 23 and op. 29);
S/RES/2206 (2015), pp. 5;
S/RES/2175 (2014), pp. 6;

S/PRST/2015/23

45/98

Remind parties of
their obligations
under, and call for
compliance with,
applicable
international
humanitarian law
and relevant Security

Notes with concern the continued high incidence of attacks against humanitarian and development
workers, including attacks on health-care workers, and medical transports and facilities, condemns
these attacks in the strongest terms, emphasizing that the attacks impede efforts to aid the people of
[affected country] …
Expressing deep concern at the continuing and new impediments to the delivery of humanitarian
assistance across borders and across conflict lines …
Further expressing concern that the suspension of operations or the withdrawal of some international
humanitarian actors have left significant gaps in the delivery of humanitarian assi stance …
Deeply disturbed by the continued, arbitrary and unjustified withholding of consent to relief
operations and the persistence of conditions that impede the delivery of humanitarian supplies to
destinations within [affected country], in particular to besieged and hard -to-reach areas, and noting the
United Nations Secretary-General’s view that arbitrarily withholding consent for the opening of all
relevant border crossings is a violation of international humanitarian law and an act of non-compliance
with [Security Council resolution]
Expressing its regret that its Presidential Statement of [date and reference] has not delivered as
expected and has not yet translated into meaningful progress on the ground, and that humanitarian aid
delivery continues to be impeded throughout [affected country], while condemning all cases of denial
of humanitarian access and recalling that arbitrary denial of humanitarian access and depriving
civilians of objects indispensable to their survival, including wilfully impeding relief supply and
access, can constitute a violation of international humanitarian law
Expressing deep concern at the increased violence and insecurity in some parts of [affected area] in
recent months, including notably the escalation in inter -tribal fighting, expressing deep concern that
such clashes continue to restrict humanitarian access to conflict areas where vulnerable civilian
populations reside …
Reiterating its serious concern at the worsening humanitarian situation in the [affected country],
strongly condemning the repeated attacks on UN staff and humanitarian personnel, goods, assets and
premises and the looting of humanitarian aid which have resulted in obstructing the delivery of
humanitarian aid
Condemning all attacks against … humanitarian personnel, regardless of their perpetrators and
emphasizing that those responsible for such attacks must be brought to justice
Strongly condemning the targeting, obstruction or prevention of the delivery of humanitarian aid in
[the affected country] by any parties, especially armed groups, and deploring any attacks on
humanitarian personnel,
Concerned at armed activities and banditry in [the affected countries] which threaten the security of the civilian population,
the conduct of humanitarian operations in those areas and the stability of those countries, and which result in serious
violations of human rights and international humanitarian law.
Reiterating its serious concern at the worsening humanitarian situation in [the affected country], strongly condemning the
targeting and obstruction of the delivery of humanitarian aid by armed groups in [the affected country], which has
prevented the delivery of such aid in some areas, deploring the repeated attacks on humanitarian personnel, expressing its
condemnation in the strongest terms of all acts of violence or abuses committed against civilians and humanitarian
personnel, in violation of international humanitarian law and human rights law, and reaffirming the importance of the fight
against impunity.
Further demands that all parties involved allow all humanitarian personnel full, safe and unhindered access to civilians in
need of assistance and all necessary facilities for their operations, in accordance with international law, including applicable
international humanitarian law, and United Nations guiding principles of humanitarian assistance
Emphasizing the need for all parties to uphold and respect the humanitarian principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality
and independence in order to ensure the continued provision of humanitarian assistance, the safety and protection of
civilians receiving assistance and the security of humanitarian personnel operating in [affected country], and stressing the
importance of humanitarian assistance being delivered on the basis of need
Reemphasizes its call on parties to armed conflict … to comply with obligations under international humanitarian law to
respect and protect humanitarian personnel, facilities and relief consignments, and to take measures to eradicate the
negative impact of the illicit transfer, destabilizing accumulation and misuse of small arms and light weapons on

humanitarian actors, and to take all required steps to facilitate the safe, rapid and unimpeded passage of relief
consignments, equipment and personnel
Recalling that arbitrary denial of humanitarian access and depriving civilians of objects indispensable to their survival,
including wilfully impeding relief supply and access, may constitute a violation of international humanitarian law
Reaffirms the obligation of all humanitarian personnel and United Nations and its associated personnel to observe and
respect the laws of the country in which they are operating, in accordance with international law and the Charter of the
United Nations, and underlines the importance for humanitarian organizations to uphold the principles of humanity,
neutrality, impartiality and independence in their humanitarian activities
Recalling that the primary responsibility under international law for the security and protection of humanitarian personnel
and United Nations and associated personnel lies with the Government hosting a United Nations operation conducted
under the Charter of the United Nations or its agreements with relevant organizations
Urging all those concerned to comply fully with international humanitarian law, including the Geneva Conventions and the
Hague Regulations, as applicable, and to allow full unimpeded access by humanitarian personnel to all people in need of
assistance, and to make available, as far as possible, all necessary facilities for their operations, and to promote the safety,
security, and freedom of movement of humanitarian personnel and United Nations staff, its associated personnel and their
assets, and also to respect and protect health care workers and medical transport and facilities
Decides that all … parties to the conflict [in affected country] shall take all appropriate steps to ensure the safety and
security of United Nations and associated personnel, those of its specialized agencies, and all other personnel engaged in
humanitarian relief activities as required by international humanitarian law, without prejudice to their freedom of
movement and access, stresses the need not to impede or hinder these efforts, and recalls that attacks on humanitarian
workers may amount to war crimes
Calling upon all parties in the conflict to respect the impartiality, independence and neutrality of humanitarian actors

15-20840

Demands that all parties respect the principle of medical neutrality and facilitate free passage to all areas for medical
personnel, equipment, transport and supplies, including surgical items, and recalls that under international humanitarian
law, the wounded and sick must receive, to the fullest extent practicable, and with the least possible delay, medical care and
attention required by their condition and that medical and humanitarian personnel, facilities and transport must be respected
and protected, and expresses grave concern in this regard at the removal of medical supplies from humanitarian shipments
Emphasizing the need to respect the United Nations guiding principles of humanitarian emergency assistance and stressing
the importance of such assistance being delivered on the basis of need, devoid of any political prejudices and aims …
Recalls the need for [UN Mission] to facilitate the safe, civilian-led delivery of humanitarian assistance, in accordance with
United Nations guiding principles of humanitarian assistance and in coordination with all humanitarian actors
The Security Council reaffirms that parties to armed conflict bear the primary responsibility to take all feasible steps to
ensure the protection of affected civilians and urges parties to armed conflict to meet their basic needs, and give attention to
the specific needs of women and children, refugees, internally displaced persons, as well as other civilians who may have
specific vulnerabilities including persons with disabilities and older persons
Requests the Secretary-General, through his Special Representative, to continue to direct the
operations of an integrated [Mission], coordinate all activities of the United Nations system in the
[affected country], and support a coherent international approach to a stable peace in [the affected
country], while respecting United Nations guiding principles of humanitarian assistance including
humanity, impartiality, neutrality, and independence;
Strongly urges [the affected country] and [armed groups] … to permit humanitarian access to the
affected population in the [affected areas], ensuring in accordance with applicable international law,
including applicable international humanitarian law, and guiding principles of emergency
humanitarian assistance, the safe, unhindered and immediate access of United Nations and other
humanitarian personnel, as well as the delivery of supplies and equipment, in order to allow such
personnel to efficiently perform their task of assisting the conflict-affected civilian population;
Calls for the unimpeded provision and distribution throughout [the affected territory] of humanitarian assistance, including
of food, fuel and medical treatment.
Welcomes the initiatives aimed at creating and opening humanitarian corridors and other mechanisms for the sustained
delivery of humanitarian aid.

S/RES/2216 (2015),
pp. 10
S/RES/2175 (2014),
op. 5
S/RES/2175 (2014),
pp. 10
S/RES/2169 (2014),
pp. 16

S/RES/2165 (2014),
op. 8

S/RES/2147 (2014),
pp. 17
S/RES/2139 (2014),
op. 8

S/RES/2139 (2014),
pp. 5
S/RES/2134 (2014),
op.11
S/PRST/2014/3,
para. 5
S/RES/2109 (2013),
op. 2

S/RES/2046 (2012),
op. 4

S/RES/1860 (2009),
op. 2
S/RES/1860 (2009),
op. 3

S/RES/2164 (2014), pp.
18 and op. 28;
S/RES/2156 (2014), op.
20; S/RES/2149 (2014),
op. 45; S/RES/2143
(2014), op. 19;
S/PRST/2013/15 (2013),
par. 3 and par. 10;
S/RES/2117 (2013),
op.14; S/RES/2113
(2013), pp. 14;
S/PRST/2013/2 (2013),
par. 13 and 14;
S/RES/2109 (2013), op.
13; S/RES/2100 (2013),
pp. 8; S/RES/2076 (2012),
op. 11; S/RES/2075
(2012), op. 13;
S/RES/2063 (2012), pp.
12; S/RES/2061 (2012),
pp. 12; S/RES/2053
(2012), op. 26;
S/RES/2047 (2012), op.
11; S/RES/2032 (2011),
op. 9; S/RES/2014 (2011),
op. 10; S/RES/2010
(2011), pp. 13;
S/RES/2003 (2011), op.
15; S/RES/1923 (2010),
op. 22; S/RES/1828
(2008), op. 7; S/RES/1814
(2008), op. 12;
S/RES/1794 (2007), op.
17; S/RES/1778 (2007),
op. 17; S/RES/1769
(2007), op. 14;
S/RES/1674 (2006), op. 8
and op. 22; S/RES/1590
(2005), op. 8; S/RES/1574
(2004), op.
11;S/RES/1565 (2004),
op. 20 and op. 21;
S/RES/1545 (2004),
op. 12; S/RES/1533
(2004), op. 5; S/RES/1509
(2003), pp. 6 and op. 8;
S/RES/1502 (2003), op. 4;
S/RES/1497 (2003), op.
11; and S/RES/1493
(2003), op. 12.

S/PRST/2015/23

46/98

Council resolutions,
and call for the
observance of
humanitarian
principles

15-20840

Humanitarian
assistance and
preparedness

47/98

Stressing the ongoing importance of providing humanitarian and development assistance to the civilian populations
throughout [the affected country], encouraging comprehensive preparedness efforts by the United Nations … including the
need for increased humanitarian and development assistance … and the need for continued cooperation among the [parties

S/RES/1674 (2006),
op. 11
S/RES/1556 (2004),
op. 1
S/RES/1296 (2000),
op. 8

S/RES/1296 (2000),
op. 10
S/RES/2233 (2015),
pp. 9

S/RES/2217 (2015),
pp. 33
S/RES/2147 (2014),
op. 35

See also, for example,
S/RES/2149 (2014), op.
46; S/RES/2140 (2014),
op. 28; S/RES/2139
(2014), pp. 7; S/RES/2126
(2013), pp. 24;
S/PRST/2013/15 (2013),
par. 17; S/RES/2001
(2011), pp. 10;
S/RES/1910 (2010), pp.
15.

S/RES/2139 (2014),
op. 16

S/RES/2060 (2012),
op. 5
S/RES/2010 (2011),
pp. 15
S/RES/1974 (2011),
pp. 19

S/RES/1964 (2010),
pp. 18
S/RES/1933 (2010),
pp. 6
S/RES/1919 (2010),
pp. 13

S/PRST/2015/23

Calls upon all parties concerned to ensure that all peace processes, peace agreements and post-conflict recovery and
reconstruction planning … include specific measures for the protection of civilians including … the facilitation of the
provision of humanitarian assistance …
Calls on [the affected State to facilitate] international relief for the humanitarian disaster by means of a moratorium on all
restrictions that might hinder the provision of humanitarian assistance and access to affected populations …
Underlines the importance of safe and unimpeded access of humanitarian personnel to civilians in armed conflicts, calls
upon the parties concerned, including neighboring States, to cooperate fully with the United Nations Humanitarian
Coordinator and United Nations agencies in providing such access, invites States and the Secretary-General to bring to its
attention information regarding the deliberate denial of such access in violation of international law, where such denial may
constitute a threat to international peace and security, and, in this regard, expresses its willingness to consider such
information and, when necessary, to adopt appropriate steps.
Expresses its intention, where appropriate, to call upon the parties to a conflict to make special arrangements to meet the
protection and assistance requirements of women, children and other vulnerable groups, including through the promotion
of “days of immunization” and other opportunities for the safe and unhindered delivery of basic necessary services.
… emphasizing the urgency of addressing humanitarian issues confronting the … people [of affected country], stressing
the need to continue to plan and implement a coordinated response and to provide adequate resources to address these
issues, calling for an intensification of these efforts by all parties and urging all Member States to continue to fund the UN
humanitarian appeals, encouraging Member States to support the United Nations’ humanitarian response in [affected
country], working with the Government of [affected country], to assist all … individuals [of affected country] affected by
the ongoing conflict, and commending the efforts of Member States that have contributed to the humanitarian effort
Expressing serious concern about the dire situation of persons with disabilities in [affected country], including
abandonment, violence and lack of access to basic services, and emphasizing the need to ensure that the particular needs of
persons with disabilities are addressed in the humanitarian response
Calls on all Member States to generously contribute to the UN humanitarian appeal for [affected country] to help ensure
that UN humanitarian agencies and other international organizations are fully funded and able to address the protection and
assistance needs of internally displaced people, survivors of sexual violence, and other vulnerable communities
Urges all Member States to contribute or increase their support to the United Nations humanitarian appeals to meet the
spiralling needs of people affected by the crisis, and to provide this support in coordination with the relevant United Nations
agencies, and to ensure that all pledges are honoured in full, and further urges all Member States, based on burden-sharing
principles, to support the neighbouring host countries to enable them to respond to the growing humanitarian needs,
including by providing direct support
Underscores the importance of humanitarian aid operations, condemns any politicization of
humanitarian assistance, or misuse or misappropriation, and calls upon Member States and the United
Nations to take all feasible steps to mitigate these aforementioned practices in [the affected country];
Expressing serious concern that the United Nations consolidated appeal for [the affected country] is
not fully funded, stressing the need for urgent mobilisation of resources to those in need and calling on
all Member States to contribute to current and future consolidated humanitarian appeals
Stressing the need to further improve the reach, quality and quantity of humanitarian aid, ensuring
efficient, effective and timely coordination and delivery of humanitarian assistance, including through
enhanced coordination among the United Nations agencies, funds and progra mmes under the authority
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and between the United Nations and other
donors, especially where it is most needed, emphasizing in this regard the need for all, within the
framework of humanitarian assistance, of upholding and respecting the humanitarian principles, of
humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence,
Expressing its concern at the significant decline in humanitarian funding for [the affected country] and
calling on all Member States to contribute to current and future consolidated humanitarian appeals,
[N]oting the importance of contingency planning.

… stresses the need for the timely issuance of visas and travel permits for humanitarian organizations …

15-20840

Decides that [UN Mission] shall perform the following tasks: … (f) Humanitarian assistance and projects for stabilization
(i) In support of [national] authorities, to contribute to the creation of a secure environment for the safe, civilian-led delivery
of humanitarian assistance, in accordance with humanitarian principles, and the voluntary, safe and dignified return or local
integration or resettlement of internally displaced persons and refugees in close coordination with humanitarian actors
Requests the Secretary-General to intensify his efforts in order to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance and
evacuation, including the establishment of humanitarian pauses, as appropriate, in coordination with the Government of
[affected country], and calls on … parties [in affected country] to cooperate with the Secretary-General to deliver
humanitarian aid to those in need
Requests the Secretary-General to include in all his country-specific situation reports, and other relevant reports which
address the protection of civilians, the issue of the safety and security of humanitarian personnel and United Nations and its
associated personnel, including recording specific acts of violence against such personnel, remedial actions taken to prevent
similar incidents and actions taken to identify and hold accountable those who commit such acts, and to provide the
Security Council with recommendations on measures to prevent similar incidents, ensure accountability and enhance the
safety and security of such personnel
Also decides that all … parties to the conflict [in affected country] shall enable the immediate and unhindered delivery of
humanitarian assistance directly to people throughout [affected country], by the United Nations humanitarian agencies and
their implementing partners, on the basis of United Nations assessments of need and devoid of any political prejudices and
aims, including by immediately removing all impediments to the provision of humanitarian assistance
Decides to establish a monitoring mechanism, under the authority of the United Nations Secretary-General, to monitor,
with the consent of the relevant neighbouring countries of [affected country], the loading of all humanitarian relief
consignments of the United Nations humanitarian agencies and their implementing partners at the relevant United Nations
facilities, and any subsequent opening of the consignments by the customs authorities of the relevant neighbouring
countries, for passage into [affected country] across the border crossings of [locations], and with notification by the United
Nations to the … authorities [of affected country], in order to confirm the humanitarian nature of these relief consignments
Decides that the mandate of [UN Mission] shall initially focus on the following priority tasks: (c) Facilitate the immediate,
full, safe and unhindered delivery of humanitarian assistance – To contribute, including through effective civil-military
coordination and in close coordination with humanitarian actors, to the creation of a secure environment for the immediate,
full, safe and unhindered, civilian-led delivery of humanitarian assistance, in accordance with United Nations guiding
humanitarian principles and relevant provisions of international law, and for the voluntary safe, dignified and sustainable
return of internally displaced persons and refugees in close coordination with humanitarian actors
Demands that all parties, in particular the [national] authorities, promptly allow rapid, safe and unhindered humanitarian
access for United Nations humanitarian agencies and their implementing partners, including across conflict lines and across
borders, in order to ensure that humanitarian assistance reaches people in need through the most direct routes
Calls upon all parties to immediately lift the sieges of populated areas, including [occupied towns] and other locations, and
demands that all parties allow the delivery of humanitarian assistance, including medical assistance, cease depriving
civilians of food and medicine indispensable to their survival, and enable the rapid, safe and unhindered evacuation of all
civilians who wish to leave, and underscores the need for the parties to agree on humanitarian pauses, days of tranquillity,
localized ceasefires and truces to allow humanitarian agencies safe and unhindered access to all affected areas in [affected
country], recalling that starvation of civilians as a method of combat is prohibited by international humanitarian law

S/RES/2233 (2015),
pp. 17
S/RES/2232 (2015),
op. 11

S/RES/2228 (2015),
op. 17
S/RES/2227 (2015),
op. 14 (f) and (i)
S/RES/2216 (2015),
op. 12
S/RES/2175 (2014),
op. 7

S/RES/2165 (2014),
op. 6
S/RES/2165 (2014),
op. 3

S/RES/2149 (2014),
op. 30 (c)

S/RES/2139 (2014),
op. 6
S/RES/2139 (2014),
op. 5

See also, for example,
S/RES/2217 (2015), op.
32 (c); S/RES/2211
(2015), op. 35;
S/RES/2187 (2014), op. 4
(c), (i); S/RES/2175
(2014), op. 6 (a) to (e);
S/RES/2173 (2014), pp.
10; S/RES/2155 (2014),
op. 4 (c), (i); S/RES/2112
(2013), op. 6; S/RES/2104
(2013), op. 14;
S/RES/2093 (2013), op. 1;
S/RES/2086 (2013), op. 8;
S/RES/2085 (2012), op. 9;
S/RES/2073 (2012), op. 1;
S/RES/2000 (2011), op. 7;
S/RES/1999 (2011), op. 3;
S/RES/1933 (2010),
op. 16; S/RES/1894
(2009), op. 12 and op. 14;
S/RES/1778 (2007), op. 6;
S/RES/1772 (2007),
op. 9(d); S/RES/1769
(2007), op. 15;
S/RES/1756 (2007), op. 2;
S/RES/1701 (2006),
op. 12; S/RES/1674
(2006), op. 16;
S/RES/1590 (2005), op.
16; S/RES/1565 (2004),
op. 4 and op. 5;
S/RES/1542 (2004), op. 9;
S/RES/1528 (2004), op. 6;
S/RES/1509 (2003), op. 3
(k); S/RES/1502 (2003),
op. 5 (a); and S/RES/1270
(1999), op. 14.

S/PRST/2015/23

48/98

Role of United
Nations peacekeeping
and other relevant
missions and actors

to the peace agreement], the United Nations and humanitarian organizations and urging donors to support implementation
of the [peace agreement] and to honour all pledges of financial and material support.
Urging all those concerned to allow full unimpeded access by humanitarian personnel to all people in need of assistance,
and to make available, as far as possible, all necessary facilities for their operations, and to promote the safety, security, and
freedom of movement of humanitarian personnel and United Nations staff, its associated personnel and their assets, and
also to respect and protect health care workers and medical transport and facilities
Underlines the imperative of securing key supply routes to areas recovered from [armed group], requests [AU Mission] and
[national army] to ensure they give the utmost priority to securing key supply routes essential to improve the humanitarian
situation in the most affected areas, and as a critical condition for logistical support to [AU Mission], and requests the
Secretary-General to report, in consultation with [national Government] and [AU Mission], on progress in this regard in his
written reports to the Council

15-20840

S/PRST/2013/15
(2013), par. 13

S/PRST/2013/15
(2013), par. 14

S/PRST/2013/2
(2013), par. 17

S/RES/1894 (2009),
op. 15 (a) and (b)
S/RES/1894 (2009),
op. 17
S/RES/1863 (2009),
op. 2
S/RES/1861 (2009),
op. 7 (a) and (ii)
S/RES/1814 (2008),
op. 11

S/RES/2216 (2015),
pp. 10
S/RES/2200 (2015),
op. 21

49/98

S/RES/2175 (2014),
op. 6, (b) to (e)

See also, for example,
S/RES/2139 (2014), pp.
11; S/RES/1991 (2011),
pp. 11; S/RES/1925
(2010), pp. 14;
S/RES/1674 (2006),
op. 23; S/RES/1502
(2003), pp. 5, op. 1, op. 2,

S/PRST/2015/23

Accountability for
attacks against
humanitarian
workers and the
wilful impediment of
humanitarian access

The Security Council further urges the … authorities to take immediate steps to facilitate the
expansion of humanitarian relief operations, and lift bureaucratic impediments and other obstacles,
including through: (a) expediting the approval of further domestic and international Non Governmental Organizations to engage in humanitarian relief activities; (b) easing and expediting the
procedures for the operationalization of further humanitarian hubs, the entry and movement of
humanitarian personnel and convoys by granting the necessary visas and permits in a predictable
manner, the importation of goods and equipment, such as communication tools, protective armoured
vehicles and medical and surgical equipment, needed for humanitarian operations; (c) promptly
facilitating safe and unhindered humanitarian access to people in need, through the most effective
ways, including across conflict lines and, where appropriate, across borders from neig hbouring
countries in accordance with the UN guiding principles of humanitarian emergency assistance; and (d)
accelerating approval for the implementation of humanitarian projects, including those in the revised
… Humanitarian Assistance Response Plan.
The Security Council also urges all parties to: … (b) immediately demilitarize medical facilities,
schools and water stations, refrain from targeting civilian objects, and agree on the modalities to
implement humanitarian pauses, as well as key routes to enable promptly — upon notification from
relief agencies — the safe and unhindered passage of humanitarian convoys along these routes to
access people in need; and (c) designate empowered interlocutors with the necessary au thority to
discuss with humanitarian actors operational and policy issues.
… The Security Council recognizes the need for consistent engagement by humanitarian agencies with
all parties to armed conflict for humanitarian purposes, including activities aimed at ensuring respect
for international humanitarian law. The Council stresses the need to ensure simplified and expedited
procedures for humanitarian personnel and goods in order to better deliver quick support to civilia ns
on the ground. The Council also underlines the importance of systematic monitoring and analysis of
constraints on humanitarian access.
Expresses its intention to: (a) Call on parties to armed conflict to comply with the obligations applicable to them under
international humanitarian law to take all required steps to protect civilians and to facilitate the rapid and unimpeded
passage of relief consignments, equipment and personnel, (b) Mandate UN peacekeeping and other relevant missions,
where appropriate, to assist in creating conditions conducive to safe, timely and unimpeded humanitarian assistance.
Invites the Secretary-General to continue the systematic monitoring and analysis of constraints on humanitarian access, to
include as appropriate observations and recommendations in his briefings and country-specific reports to the Council.
[U]nderlines, in particular, that [the mission] is authorized to take all necessary measures to provide security for key
infrastructure and to contribute, as may be requested and within its capabilities and existing mandate, to the creation of the
necessary security conditions for the provision of humanitarian assistance.
Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, (a) Decides further that [the mission] shall be authorized to
take all necessary measures, within its capabilities and its area of operations …, to fulfil the following functions, in liaison
with the Government of [the affected country]: (ii) To facilitate the delivery of humanitarian aid and the free movement of
humanitarian personnel by helping to improve security in the area of operations.
Reiterates its support for the contribution made by some States to protect the World Food Programme maritime convoys,
calls upon States and regional organizations, in close coordination with each other and as notified in advance to the
Secretary-General, and at the request of [the Government], to take action to protect shipping involved with the
transportation and delivery of humanitarian aid … and United Nations-authorized activities, calls upon [regional
peacekeeping mission] troop-contributing countries, as appropriate, to provide support to this end, and requests the
Secretary-General to provide his support to this effect.
Recalling that arbitrary denial of humanitarian access and depriving civilians of objects indispensable to their survival,
including wilfully impeding relief supply and access, may constitute a violation of international humanitarian law
Urges the Government of [affected country] respond to the Committee [established by the Security Council to oversee the
implementation of the relevant sanctions regime] requests on … investigations conducted and accountability measures
undertaken for attacks against peacekeepers and humanitarian personnel …
Expresses its determination to take appropriate steps in order to ensure the safety and security of humanitarian personnel
and United Nations and its associated personnel, including, inter alia, by: … (b) Requesting the Secretary-General to seek
the inclusion of, and that host countries include, key provisions of the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and

Targeted and
graduated measures
as a response to the
obstruction of the
delivery of
humanitarian aid
and to attacks against
humanitarian
workers

Exceptions to United
Nations restrictive
measures on
humanitarian
grounds
15-20840

Condemning all attacks against United Nations peacekeepers and humanitarian personnel, regardless of their perpetrators,
and emphasizing that those responsible for such attacks must be brought to justice.
… underscores that acts that threaten the peace, security, or stability of [affected country and can
therefore trigger inclusion on the relevant Security Council sanctions Committee sanctions list] may
also include … obstructing the delivery of humanitarian assistance to [affected country] or access to,
or distribution of, humanitarian assistance in [affected country];
Urges the Government … to respond to the … requests [from the Committee appointed to oversee the
implementation of the relevant sanctions regime] on … investigations conducted and accountability
measures undertaken for attacks against … humanitarian personnel; and the situation of civilian
populations in [specific areas], where the Panel of Experts, [the Mission] and humanitarian a gencies
and personnel have been denied access, and measures taken to allow unimpeded and regular access for
humanitarian relief to these areas;
Decides that the provisions [relating to travel bans and freezing of assets and economic resources] shall apply to individuals
[and] entities, designated by the [Sanctions Committee]; (c) as obstructing the delivery of humanitarian assistance to [the
affected State], or access to, or distribution of, humanitarian assistance in [the affected State].
Expresses its determination to take appropriate steps in order to ensure the safety and security of humanitarian personnel
and United Nations and its associated personnel, including, inter alia, by: (b) Encouraging the Secretary-General, in
accordance with his prerogatives under the Charter of the United Nations, to bring to the attention of the Security Council
situations in which humanitarian assistance is denied as a consequence of violence directed against humanitarian personnel
and United Nations and its associated personnel.
Decides that until [date] and without prejudice to humanitarian assistance programmes conducted elsewhere, the measures
imposed by [paragraph of previous resolution requesting member States to take measures to ensure that no economic or
financial resource is made available, directly or indirectly, to individuals and entities listed by relevant Security Council
sanctions Committee] shall not apply to the payment of funds, other financial assets or economic resources necessary to
ensure the timely delivery of urgently needed humanitarian assistance in [affected country], by the United Nations, its
specialized agencies or programmes, humanitarian organizations having observer status with the United Nations General
Assembly that provide humanitarian assistance, and their implementing partners including bilaterally or multilaterally
funded NGOs participating in the United Nations Consolidated Appeal for [affected country]
… decides further that [the arms embargo provided for in the resolution] shall not apply to: … Supplies of non-lethal
military equipment intended solely for humanitarian or protective use, and related technical assistance or training, as

and op. 5 (a);
and S/RES/1265 (1999),
op. 10.

S/RES/2175 (2014),
op. 4
S/RES/2175 (2014),
pp. 7
S/RES/2165 (2014),
op. 8
S/RES/2053 (2012),
pp. 13
S/RES/2216 (2015),
op. 19

S/RES/2091 (2013),
op. 11

See also, for example,
S/RES/2206 (2015), op. 7
(f) and (g), and op. 8;
S/RES/1894 (2009), op. 4
and op. 17; S/RES/1727
(2006), op. 12;
S/RES/1296 (2000), op. 5;
and S/RES/1265 (1999),
op. 10.

S/RES/2002 (2011),
op. 1
S/RES/1502 (2003),
op. 5 (b)

S/RES/2182 (2014),
op. 41

S/RES/2127 (2013),
op. 54 (b) and (c)

See, for example,
S/RES/2111 (2013), op.
22

S/PRST/2015/23

50/98

Associated Personnel, including, among others, those regarding the prevention of attacks against members of United
Nations operations, the establishment of such attacks as crimes punishable by law and the prosecution or extradition of
offenders, in future as well as, if necessary, in existing status-of-forces, status-of-missions and host country agreements
negotiated between the United Nations and those countries, mindful of the importance of the timely conclusion of such
agreements; (c) Encouraging the Secretary-General, in accordance with his prerogatives under the Charter of the United
Nations, to bring to the attention of the Security Council situations in which humanitarian assistance is unable to reach
people in need as a consequence of violence directed against humanitarian personnel and United Nations and its associated
personnel; (d) Issuing the declaration of exceptional risk for the purposes of article 1 (c) (ii) of the Convention on the Safety
of United Nations and Associated Personnel, in situations where in its assessment circumstances would support such a
declaration, and inviting the Secretary-General to advise the Security Council, where in his assessment circumstances
would support such a declaration; (e) Calling upon all States to consider becoming parties to the Convention on the Safety
of United Nations and Associated Personnel and its Optional Protocol, and urging States parties to take steps to enable its
effective implementation
Urges States to ensure that crimes against humanitarian personnel do not remain unpunished, affirming the need for States
to ensure that perpetrators of attacks committed on their territory against such personnel do not operate with impunity, and
that perpetrators of such acts are brought to justice, as provided for by national laws and obligations under international law
Recalling the inclusion of attacks intentionally directed against personnel involved in a humanitarian assistance or
peacekeeping mission in accordance with the Charter, as long as they are entitled to the protection given to civilians or
civilian objects under the international law of armed conflict, as a war crime in the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court
… recalls that attacks on humanitarian workers may amount to war crimes

15-20840

approved in advance by the Committee established pursuant to [relevant paragraph of the resolution, to oversee the
implementation of the sanctions regime applicable to the targeted country] (c) Protective clothing, including flak jackets
and military helmets, temporarily exported to the [targeted country] by United Nations personnel, representatives of the
media and humanitarian and development workers and associated personnel, for their personal use only
Decides further that the ban [on all flights in the airspace of the affected State] imposed by [relevant
paragraph] shall not apply to flights whose sole purpose is humanitarian, such as delivering or
facilitating the delivery of assistance, including medical supplies, food, humanitarian workers and
related assistance, or evacuating foreign nationals from the [affected State] …

S/RES/1973 (2011),
op. 7

D. Conduct of hostilities
Express concern at
allegations of, and
condemn, the use of
specific tactics in
violation of
applicable
international
humanitarian law
and human rights
law

S/RES/2223 (2015),
pp. 16

S/RES/2223 (2015),
pp. 5

S/RES/2211 (2015),
pp. 10

S/RES/2210 (2015),
op. 28
S/RES/2200 (2015),
op.17
S/RES/2170 (2014),
op. 2

See also, for example,
S/RES/2217 (2015), pp. 9;
S/Res/2216 (2015), pp. 10;
S/RES/2164 (2014), pp.
19; S/RES/2149 (2014),
pp. 5; S/RES/2127 (2013),
pp. 4; S/RES/2098 (2013),
pp. 16; S/RES/2096
(2013), op. 28;
S/RES/2091 (2013), pp. 7
and pp. 8; S/RES/2069
(2012), pp. 21;
S/RES/2041 (2012), pp.
33; S/RES/2010 (2011),
op. 22; S/RES/2003
(2011), pp. 13;
S/RES/1868 (2009),
op. 12; S/RES/1860
(2009), op. 5; S/RES/1806
(2008), op. 12;
S/RES/1674 (2006), op.
26; S/RES/1574 (2004),
op. 11; S/RES/1493
(2003), op. 8; S/RES/1468
(2003), op. 2; and
S/RES/1296 (2000), op. 2
and op. 5.

S/RES/2165 (2014),
pp. 14

S/RES/2165 (2014),
pp. 10

S/PRST/2015/23

51/98

Expressing grave concern that according to [reports issued by UN Mission] there are reasonable
grounds to believe that war crimes and crimes against humanity, including extrajudicial killings, rape
and other acts of sexual violence, enforced disappearances the use of children in armed conflict, and
arbitrary arrests and detention have been committed by both gove rnment and opposition forces, and
noting that such crimes constitute actions that threaten the peace, security and stability of [affected
country]
Strongly condemning reported and ongoing human rights violations and abuses and violations of
international humanitarian law, including those involving extrajudicial killings, ethnically targeted
violence, rape and other forms of sexual and gender-based violence, recruitment and use of children,
enforced disappearances, arbitrary arrests and detention, violence aimed at spreading terror among the
civilian population, and attacks on schools, places of worship, hospitals, and United Nations and
associated peacekeeping personnel, by all parties, including armed groups and national security forces,
as well as the incitement to commit such abuses and violations
Remaining deeply concerned by the persistent high levels of violence and violations and abuses of
human rights and international law, condemning in particular those involving the targeted attacks
against civilians, widespread sexual and gender-based violence, systematic recruitment and use of
children by certain parties to the conflict, the displacement of significant numbers of civilians,
extrajudicial executions and arbitrary arrests …
Condemns in the strongest terms all attacks, including improvised explosive device attacks, suicide
attacks, assassinations and abductions, targeting civilians and [national] and international forces and
their deleterious effect on the stabilization, reconstruction and development efforts in [affected
country], and condemns further the use by [armed groups] of civilians as huma n shields
Condemns the use of civilian establishments, in particular the camps for internally displaced persons,
by the armed groups, including those opposing the Government of [affected country], to gain a
military advantage in a manner that places the civilians and civilian objects at risk from the dangers
arising from armed conflict
Strongly condemns the indiscriminate killing and deliberate targeting of civilians, numerous atrocities,
mass executions and extrajudicial killings, including of soldiers, persecution of individuals and entire
communities on the basis of their religion or belief, kidnapping of civilians, forced displacement of
members of minority groups, killing and maiming of chi ldren, recruitment and use of children, rape
and other forms of sexual violence, arbitrary detention, attacks on schools and hospitals, … especially
in [affected areas of affected countries]
Expressing grave alarm at … the targeting of civilians based on their ethnicity, religion and/or
confessional affiliations, expressing further grave alarm at the increased attacks resulting in numerous
casualties and destruction, indiscriminate shelling by mortars, car bombs, suicide att acks, tunnel
bombs as well as hostage taking, kidnappings, and attacks against civilian infrastructure including
deliberate interruptions of water supply …
Expressing grave alarm in particular at the continuing indiscriminate attacks in populated areas,
including an intensified campaign of aerial bombings and the use of barrel bombs in [city] and other
areas, artillery, shelling and air strikes, and the widespread use of torture, ill -treatment, sexual and
gender-based violence as well as all grave violations and abuses committed against children, and
reiterating that some of these violations may amount to war crimes and crimes against humanity

… recalls that starvation of civilians as a method of combat is prohibited by international humanitarian law

15-20840

Reiterating its demand that all parties demilitarize medical facilities, schools and other civilian facilities and avoid establishing
military positions in populated areas and desist from attacks directed against civilian objects
Requests [UN Mission] to take fully into account the need to protect civilians and mitigate risk to civilians, including, in
particular, women, children and displaced persons and civilian objects in the performance of its mandate as defined in
[paragraphs of the resolution mandating UN Mission to, inter-alia, provide support to national armed forces for combating the
threat of armed groups and extending State authority in affected country], where undertaken jointly with [national security
forces], in strict compliance with the Human Rights Due Diligence Policy on United Nations Support to non-United Nations
Security Forces (S/2013/110)
Demands that all parties immediately cease all attacks against civilians, as well as the indiscriminate employment of weapons in
populated areas, including shelling and aerial bombardment, such as the use of barrel bombs, and methods of warfare which are
of a nature to cause superfluous injury or unnecessary suffering, and recalls in this regard the obligation to respect and ensure
respect for international humanitarian law in all circumstances, and further recalls, in particular, the obligation to distinguish
between civilian populations and combatants, and the prohibition against indiscriminate attacks, and attacks against civilians
and civilian objects as such
Emphasizes the need for [AU Mission], and all military forces in [the affected country], while carrying out their mandate, to act
in full respect of the sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity of [host country] and in full compliance with applicable
international humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee law and recalls the importance of training in this regard

S/PRST/2015/23

52/98

Remind parties of
their obligations
under, and call for
compliance with
applicable
international
humanitarian law,
human rights law,
and relevant Security
Council resolutions

Condemning the fighting and targeted violence against civilians and specific ethnic and other
communities occurring across the country that have resulted in hundreds of deaths and casualties and
tens of thousands of internally displaced persons
Recalling the Presidential Statement of 12 February 2013 that … condemned all violations of
international law against civilians, in particular the deliberate targeting of civilians, indiscriminate or
disproportionate attacks, and sexual and gender based violence.
Strongly condemns the continued violations of international humanitarian and human rights law,
including the recruitment and use of children, killing and maiming of civilians, including of children,
rape and sexual slavery and other forms of sexual and gender-based violence and abductions, and
targeting of ethnic minorities perpetrated by armed groups …
Demanding an end to attacks on civilians, from any quarter, including by aerial bombing, and the use of civilians as human
shields.
Recalls that deliberately targeting civilians and other protected persons as such in situations of armed conflict is a flagrant
violation of international humanitarian law, reiterates its condemnation in the strongest terms of such practices, and demands
that all parties immediately put an end to such practices.
Underlines the importance of respect for international humanitarian law and the protection of civilians, especially women and
children, by all armed groups in [affected country]
… reiterates its demand that all parties to armed conflict comply strictly with the obligations applicable to them under
international humanitarian law, international human rights law and international refugee law, and stresses the need for parties to
take all required measures to avoid civilian casualties, respect and protect the civilian population
… stresses the need [for UN Mission] to carry out operations in accordance with international law, including international
humanitarian law and international human rights law, as applicable, and strongly encourages cooperation between the
Government of [affected country] and [UN Mission] on these operations, in accordance with its mandate to ensure all efforts
possible are being made to neutralize [armed group]
Gravely concerned at the lack of effective implementation of [previous resolutions on affected country] by the parties to the …
domestic conflict [in affected country], recalling in this regard their legal obligations under international humanitarian law and
international human rights law, as well as all the relevant decisions of the Security Council, including by ceasing all attacks
against civilians and civilian objects, including those involving attacks on schools, medical facilities and the deliberate
interruptions of water supply, the indiscriminate use of weapons, including artillery, barrel bombs and air strikes, indiscriminate
shelling by mortars, car bombs, suicide attacks and tunnel bombs, as well as the use of starvation of civilians as a method of
combat, including by the besiegement of populated areas, and the widespread use of torture, ill-treatment, arbitrary executions,
extrajudicial killings, enforced disappearances, sexual and gender-based violence as well as all grave violations and abuses
committed against children

S/RES/2132 (2013),
pp. 4
S/RES/2109 (2013),
pp. 11
S/RES/2088 (2013),
op. 13
S/RES/1828 (2008),
pp. 13
S/RES/1674 (2006),
op. 3
S/RES/2232 (2015),
op. 32
S/RES/2220 (2015),
op. 2
S/RES/2211 (2015),
op. 24
S/RES/2191 (2014),
pp. 5

S/RES/2165 (2014),
op. 7
S/RES/2165 (2014),
pp. 11
S/RES/2164 (2014),
op. 16

S/RES/2139 (2014),
op. 3

S/RES/2127 (2013),
op. 33

See also, for example,
S/RES/2217 (2015),
op. 45; S/RES/2211
(2015), op. 9 (a) and (e);
S/RES/2165 (2014), pp.
12; S/RES/2149 (2014),
op. 42; S/RES/2147
(2014), op. 4 (a), (i), and
(b); S/RES/2140 (2014),
op. 27; S/RES/2085
(2012), op. 9; S/RES/1974
(2011), pp. 23;
S/RES/1964 (2010),
op. 15; S/RES/1806
(2008), op. 13;
S/RES/1794 (2007), op. 7;
S/RES/1776 (2007),
pp. 12; S/RES/1574
(2004), op. 11;
S/RES/1564 (2004),
pp. 10; S/RES/1493
(2003), op. 8; and
S/RES/1265 (1999), op. 4.

15-20840

Call for the adoption
of specific measures
to prevent and
mitigate civilian
harm

S/PRST/2013/15
(2013), par. 9

S/RES/2096 (2013),
pp. 29
S/RES/2093 (2013),
op. 26
S/RES/1814 (2008),
op. 17
S/RES/1790 (2007),
pp. 18

S/RES/1674 (2006),
op. 6
S/RES/2232 (2015),
op. 15

See also, for example,
S/RES/2145 (2014),
op. 31; S/RES/2098
(2013), op.12

S/RES/2211 (2015),
op. 9 (a) and (e)

53/98

S/PRST/2015/23

The Security Council recalls that all obligations under international humanitarian law must be
respected in all circumstances. It recalls, in particular, the obligation to distinguish between civilian
populations and combatants, and the prohibition against indiscriminate attacks, and attacks against
civilians and civilian objects, as well as the prohibition on the use of chemical weapons and the
employment of weapons, projectiles and material and methods of warfare which are of a nature to
cause superfluous injury or unnecessary suffering. The Council urges all parties to imm ediately cease
and desist from all violations of international humanitarian law and violations and abuses of human
rights, and calls on all parties to fully respect their obligations under international humanitarian law
and to take all appropriate steps to protect civilians, including by desisting from attacks directed
against civilian objects, such as medical centres, schools and water stations, and also calls on all
parties to avoid establishing military positions in populated areas …
… reaffirming that all parties to armed conflict must take all feasible steps to ensure the protection of
civilians, calling for all parties to comply with their obligations under international law including
international humanitarian and human rights law and for all appropriate measures to be taken to ensure
the protection of civilians …
… stresses the responsibility of all parties in [the affected country] to comply with their obligations to
protect the civilian population from the effects of hostilities, in particular by avoiding any
indiscriminate attacks or excessive use of force, and underscores the need to end impunity, uphold
human rights and hold those who commit crimes accountable;
[S]tresses the responsibility of all parties and armed groups in [the affected State] to take appropriate steps to protect the
civilian population …, consistent with international humanitarian, human rights and refugee law, in particular by avoiding
any indiscriminate attacks on populated areas.
Affirming the importance for all parties, including foreign forces, promoting the maintenance of security and stability in
[the affected State] to act in accordance with international law, including relevant obligations under international
humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee law, and to cooperate with the relevant international organizations … and
underscoring that all parties, including foreign forces, should take all feasible steps to ensure the protection of affected
civilians.
Demands that all parties concerned comply strictly with their obligations under international humanitarian, human rights
and refugee law, in particular those contained in the Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907 and in the Geneva Conventions
of 1949 and their Additional Protocols of 1977, as well as the decisions of the Security Council.
Welcomes the commencement of activities establishing a Civilian Casualty Tracking Analysis and
Response Cell (CCTARC) as requested in [previous Security Council resolutions], and underlines the
importance of making the CCTARC operational and effective without further delay, in collaboration
with humanitarian, human rights and protection actors, and ensuring information is shared with
relevant actors including the UN
Authorizes [UN Mission], in pursuit of the objectives described in [previous paragraph], to take all
necessary measures to perform the following tasks, bearing in mind that these are mutually reinforcing
tasks; (a) Ensure, within its area of operations, effective protection of civilians under threa t of physical
violence, including by deterring, preventing and stopping armed groups from inflicting violence on the
populations, paying particular attention to civilians gathered in displaced and refugee camps,
humanitarian personnel and human rights defenders, in the context of violence emerging from any of
the parties engaged in the conflict, and mitigating the risk to civilians before, during and after any
military operation … (e) Neutralizing armed groups through [specific] brigade – In support of the
authorities of [affected country], on the basis of information collection and analysis, and taking full
account of the need to protect civilians and mitigate risk before, during and after any military
operation, carry out targeted offensive operations through the [specific brigade] in cooperation with
the whole of [UN Mission] … in strict compliance with international law, including international
humanitarian law, and in accordance with the standing operating procedures applicable to persons who
are captured or who surrender, and with the human rights due diligence policy on United Nations support to non-United Nations forces (HRDDP) …

S/PRST/2015/23

54/98

… calls upon all parties to armed conflict in [affected country] to issue clear orders prohibiting all
violations of international humanitarian law and human rights violations and abuses …
Authorizes [UN Mission], in support of the [national] authorities and their efforts to deliver the reforms
called by [regional agreement] and stabilisation in [affected area], to contribute to the following tasks, in
coordination with the UNCT and other actors, including through the SRSG’s good offices; (d) … support
the UN system in-country to ensure that any support provided by the United Nations shall be consistent
with international humanitarian law and human rights law and refugee law as applicable
… noting the importance of conducting continuous reviews of tactics and procedures and after-action
reviews and investigations in cooperation with the … Government in cases where civilian casualties
have occurred and when the … Government finds these joint investigations appropriate, as well as
continuing cooperation with the [national security forces] towards the further institutionalization of
protection of civilians, especially women and girls,
Requests that [the Mission] take fully into account the need to protect civilians and mitigate risk to
civilians, including, in particular, women, children and displaced persons and civilian objects in the
performance of its mandate as defined in [provisions mandating the Mission to provide active support
to national authorities in their actions against armed groups], where undertaken jointly with the
[national] Defence and Security Forces, in strict compliance with the Human Rights Due Diligence
Policy on United Nations Support to non-United Nations Security Forces (S/2013/110);
… urging [the international military force] and other international forces to continue to undertake
enhanced efforts to prevent civilian casualties, including the increased focus on protecting the [National]
population as a central element of the mission, and noting the importance of conducting continuous
reviews of tactics and procedures and after-action reviews and investigations in cooperation with the
[National] Government in cases where civilian casualties have occurred and when the [National]
Government finds these joint investigations appropriate, as well as continuing cooperation with the
[National security forces] towards the further institutionalization of protection of civilians,

S/RES/2206 (2015),
op. 3
S/RES/2147 (2014),
op. 5 (d)

S/RES/2120 (2013),
pp.26

S/RES/2100 (2013),
op. 26

S/RES/2069 (2012),
pp. 25

E. Small arms and light weapons, including mines and explosive remnants of war, and the indiscriminate use of weapons
Express concern at
the widespread
circulation and
availability of, and
condemn the
illicit trade in, small
arms and light
weapons

15-20840

Reiterating its deep regret that civilians continue to account for the vast majority of casualties in
situations of armed conflict and recalling with grave concern that the illicit transfer, destabilizing
accumulation and misuse of small arms and light weapons fuel armed conflicts and have a wide range
of negative human rights, humanitarian, development and socioeconomic consequences, in particular
on the security of civilians in armed conflict, including the disproportionate impact on violence
perpetrated against women and girls and exacerbating sexual and gen der-based violence
… expressing grave concern at the threat to peace and security in [affected country] arising from the
illicit transfer, destabilizing accumulation and misuse of small arms and light weapons, and the use of
such weapons against civilians affected by armed conflict
Condemns the continued violations of the measures contained in [paragraphs of relevant resolutions
providing for a Security Council arms embargo] and directs the Committee [established by the
Security Council to oversee the implementation of the relevant sanctions regime], in line with its
mandate and guidelines, to consult as soon as possible with any Member State about which the
Committee deems there is credible information that provides reasonable grounds to believe the State is
facilitating such violations or any other acts of non -compliance with these measures
Recalling its resolution 2117 (2013) and expressing concern at the threat to peace and security in
[affected area] arising from the illicit transfer, destabilizing accumulation and misuse of small arms
and light weapons, and the use of such weapons against civilians affected by armed conflict, and the
continued threats to civilians posed by unexploded ordnance
Condemning the illicit flow of weapons within and into [affected country], including their recirculation to
and between armed groups, in violation of [Security Council resolutions providing for, and renewing,
arms embargo], and declaring its determination to continue to monitor closely the implementation of the
arms embargo and other measures set out by its resolutions concerning [affected country]

S/RES/2220 (2015),
pp. 6

S/RES/2217 (2015),
pp. 15
S/RES/2200 (2015),
op.10

S/RES/2200 (2015),
pp.9
S/RES/2198 (2015),
pp.12

See also, for example,
S/RES/2238 (2015), pp.
11; S/RES/2228 (2015),
pp. 9; S/RES/2220 (2015),
pp.1, pp. 5, and op. 2;
S/RES/2205 (2015), pp.
21; S/RES/2187 (2014),
pp. 21; S/RES/2182
(2014), pp. 4; S/RES/2173
(2014), pp. 7 and op. 13;
S/RES/2117 (2013),
pp.10; S/RES/2095
(2013), op. 12;
S/RES/2085 (2012), pp. 5;
S/RES/2078 (2012), pp. 7;
S/RES/2111 (2013), pp. 5;
S/RES/2104 (2013), pp.
25; S/RES/2063 (2012),
op. 20; S/RES/2040
(2012), pp. 9; S/RES/2021
(2011), pp. 6; S/RES/2017
(2011), pp. 7; S/RES/1944
(2010), pp. 12;

15-20840

Remind parties and
Member States of
their obligations
under, and call for
compliance with,
international
measures on small
arms and light
weapons

S/RES/2164 (2014),
pp.17
S/RES/2144 (2014),
pp.15

S/RES/1919 (2010),
op. 15; S/RES/1296
(2000), op. 21;
S/RES/1265 (1999),
op. 17.

S/RES/2142 (2014),
pp.9

S/RES/1894 (2009),
op. 29
S/RES/1261 (1999),
op. 14
S/RES/2143 (2014),
pp. 10
S/RES/2142 (2014),
pp.12
S/RES/2142 (2014),
pp. 5
S/RES/2117 (2013),
op.2

See also, for example,
S/RES/2144 (2014),
pp. 16; S/RES/2079
(2012), op. 8; S/RES/2004
(2011), pp. 8; S/RES/1952
(2010), pp. 7; S/RES/1937
(2010), pp. 6; S/RES/1209
(1998), op. 3.

S/RES/1460 (2003),
op. 7

S/RES/1209 (1998),
op. 3

55/98

S/PRST/2015/23

Remaining seriously concerned over the … insecurity which hinders humanitarian access, exacerbated
by … the presence of landmines as well as the continued proliferation of weapons from within and
outside the region that threatens the peace, security, and stability of States in this region
Expressing concern at the threat posed by unsecured arms and ammunition in [affected country] and
their proliferation, which poses a risk to stability in [affected country] and the region, including
through transfer to terrorist and violent extremist groups and underlining the importance of
coordinated international support to [affected country] and the region to address t hese issues
Noting with concern the [reports of the Monitoring Group established to assist the relevant Security
Council sanctions Committee] reports of diversions of arms and ammunition, including to [armed
group listed by the relevant Security Council sanctions Committee], which has been cited as a
potential recipient of diverted arms and ammunition, and further noting that, pursuant to [relevant
paragraph of resolution imposing sanctions], all Member States are required to tak e the necessary
measures to prevent the direct or indirect supply, sale or transfer of weapons and military equipment to
designated individuals and entities, which includes [armed group listed by the relevant Security
Council sanctions Committee]
Notes that the excessive accumulation and destabilizing effect of small arms and light weapons pose a considerable
impediment to the provision of humanitarian assistance and have a potential to exacerbate and prolong conflicts, endanger
civilians and undermine security and the confidence required for a return to peace and stability …
Recognizes the deleterious impact of the proliferation of arms, in particular small arms, on the security of civilians,
including refugees and other vulnerable populations, particularly children, and, in this regard, recalls resolution 1209 (1998)
of 19 November 1998 …
Acknowledging the adoption of the Arms Trade Treaty and noting that in line with the provisions in
Article 7(4) of the Treaty exporting States Parties shall take into account the risk of covered
conventional arms or items being used to commit or facilitate serious acts of violence against children,
Reiterating the need for all Member States to respect and implement, in accordance with relevant
Security Council resolutions, their obligations with respect to preventing unauthorized deliveries of
weapons and military equipment to [affected country] … in violation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions,
Underlining the imperative need for the … Government of [affected country] to improve its
compliance with its requirements under the partial suspension of the arms embargo,
Reminds Member States of their obligation to fully and effectively comply with Cou ncil-mandated
arms embargoes and to take appropriate measures, including all legal and administrative means against
any activity that violates such arms embargoes, and including, in accordance with relevant Council
resolutions, through cooperating with all relevant United Nations entities; by making available to
relevant sanctions committees all pertinent information on any alleged violations of arms embargoes;
by acting on credible information to prevent the supply, sale, transfer or export of small arms a nd light
weapons in contravention of Council mandated arms embargoes; by facilitating unhindered access by
relevant Council mandated personnel in accordance with Council mandates; and by applying relevant
international standards such as the International Tracing Instrument;
Urges Members States, in accordance with the United Nations Programme of Action on Small Arms and Lights Weapons
to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons, to take effective action through, inter
alia, conflict resolution and the development and implementation of national legislation, in a manner which is consistent
with existing responsibilities of States under relevant international law, to control the illicit trade of small arms to parties in
armed conflict that do not respect fully the relevant provisions of applicable international law relating to the rights and
protection of children in armed conflict …
Stresses the importance of all Member States, and in particular States involved in manufacturing and marketing of
weapons, restricting arms transfers which could provoke or prolong armed conflicts or aggravate existing tensions or armed
conflicts …

15-20840

Urges the Government of [affected country] to prioritize and expedite the adoption and implementation of appropriate arms
and ammunition management legislation and take other necessary and appropriate steps to establish the necessary legal and
administrative framework to combat the illicit trafficking of arms and ammunition
Calls upon the [national] authorities, with the assistance of [UN Mission], consistent with [paragraph of resolution], and
international partners, to address the issue of the proliferation and illicit trafficking of small arms and light weapons in
accordance with the ECOWAS Convention on Small Arms and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition and Other Related
Materials and the United Nations Programme of Action on Small Arms and Light Weapons, in order to ensure the safe and
effective management, storage and security of their stockpiles of small arms and light weapons and the collection and/or
destruction of surplus, seized, unmarked or illicitly held weapons, and further stresses the importance of the full
implementation of its [thematic resolutions on small arms and lights weapons]
Decides that the mandate of [UN Mission] shall be the following: … (d) Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme (DDR) and collection of weapons … To assist the national authorities, including [relevant administrative
body], in collecting, registering, securing and disposing of weapons and in clearing explosive remnants of war, as
appropriate, in accordance with [relevant resolution]; – To coordinate with the Government in ensuring that the collected
weapons are not disseminated or re-utilized outside a comprehensive national security strategy, as referred to in
[resolution]; … (f) Monitoring of the arms embargo – To monitor the implementation of the measures imposed by
[paragraph of Security Council resolution imposing arms embargo in relation to the situation in affected country], in
cooperation with the Group of Experts established [to assist the relevant Security Council sanctions Committee], including
by inspecting, as they deem it necessary and when appropriate without notice, all weapons, ammunition and related
materiel regardless of location, consistent with [relevant Security Council resolution]; – To collect, as appropriate, arms and
any related materiel brought into [affected country] in violation of the measures imposed by [paragraph of Security Council
resolution imposing arms embargo in relation to the situation in affected country], and to dispose of such arms and related
materiel as appropriate …
Encourages all Member States that have not yet done so to consider acceding to and to implement the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocols, including the Protocol against the Illicit
Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, Their Parts and Components and Ammunitions
Urges the Government of [affected country] to allow the Group of Experts [established to support the relevant Security
Council sanctions Committee] and [UN Mission] access to the exempted arms and lethal materiel at the time of import and
before the transfer to the end user takes place, welcomes the efforts of [relevant ad hoc governmental body] to mark the
arms and related lethal materiel when received in the territory of [affected country] and encourages it to continue such
efforts, urges the Government of [affected country] to maintain a registry of all arms and materiel present in the country,
with a specific attention to small arms and light weapons, including any private arms caches, with a clear process delineated
for how the Government of [affected country] intends to track the movement of weapons
Decides that the mandate of [UN Mission] shall include the following immediate priority tasks: … (b) Support for the
implementation of the transition process, the extension of State authority and the preservation of territorial integrity … (viii)
To actively seize, confiscate and destroy, as appropriate, the weapons and ammunitions of armed elements, including all
militias and non-state armed groups, who refuse or fail to lay down their arms … Decides that the mandate of [UN
MISSION] shall include the following immediate priority tasks: … (g) Disarmament, Demobilization, Reintegration
(DDR) and Repatriation (DDRR) … (iv) To … destroy, as appropriate, the weapons and ammunitions of disarmed
combatants in keeping with its effort to seize and collect arms and related materiel the supply, sale or transfer of which
violate the measures imposed by [paragraph of resolution imposing arms embargo]
Calls upon Member States, in particular States neighbouring [affected country], to inspect, in accordance with their national
authorities and legislation and consistent with international law, in particular the law of the sea and relevant international
civil aviation agreements, all cargo to [affected country], in their territory, including seaports and airports, if the State
concerned has information that provides reasonable grounds to believe the cargo contains items the supply, sale, or transfer
of which is prohibited by [paragraph of resolution establishing arms embargo on affected country] for the purpose of
ensuring strict implementation of those provisions
Calls on the Government of [affected country] to enhance stockpile security, accountability and management of arms and
ammunition, with the assistance of international partners, to address urgently reports of diversion to armed groups, as
necessary and requested, and to urgently implement a national weapons marking program, in particular for state-owned
firearms, in line with the standards established by the Nairobi Protocol and the Regional Centre on Small Arms

S/RES/2237 (2015),
op. 7
S/RES/2227 (2015),
op. 34

S/RES/2226 (2015),
op. 19 (d) and (f)

S/RES/2220 (2015),
op. 24
S/RES/2219 (2015),
op. 10

S/RES/2217 (2015),
op. 32 (b), (vii), and
(g), (iv)

S/RES/2216 (2015),
op. 15

S/RES/2198 (2015),
op. 18

See also, for example,
S/RES/2220 (2015), pp.
23; S/RES/2219 (2015),
pp.9 and op. 22;
S/RES/2217 (2015),
pp. 37, op. 34 (c) and (d),
and op. 37; S/RES/2200
(2015), op. 8; S/RES/2198
(2015), op. 28;
S/RES/2190 (2014), op. 7;
S/RES/2185 (2014), op.
24; S/RES/2182 (2014),
op. 6 and 7; S/RES/2153
(2014), op. 10, 21 and 29;
S/RES/2149 (2014), op.
31 (d) and (e), and 33;
S/RES/2117 (2013), op.
19; S/RES/2144 (2014),
op. 6 (c); S/RES/2142
(2014), pp. 9; S/RES/2140
(2014), op. 30;
S/RES/2138 (2014), op. 6;
S/RES/2136 (2014), op.
15 and 16; S/RES/2134
(2014), op. 9; S/RES/2126
(2013), op. 10;
S/RES/2112 (2013), op. 6;
S/RES/2098 (2013), op.
12; S/RES/2095 (2013),
op. 7 and op. 11;
S/RES/2070 (2013), op.
23; S/RES/2063 (2012),
op. 20; S/RES/2021
(2012), op. 11 and op. 16;
S/RES/1959 (2010), op. 9;
S/RES/1946 (2010),
op. 12

S/PRST/2015/23

56/98

Role of United
Nations peacekeeping
missions and other
relevant actors, in
mitigating the
widespread
circulation and
availability of, and
preventing the illicit
trade in, small arms
and light weapons

15-20840

Targeted and
graduated measures
to reduce the
circulation and
availability of, and
the illicit trade in,
small arms and light
weapons

S/RES/2196 (2015),
op. 3

S/RES/2179 (2014),
op. 11
S/RES/1919 (2010),
op. 15

S/RES/2219 (2015),
op. 11

S/RES/2216 (2015),
op. 14

See also, for example,
S/RES/2216 (2015),
op. 19; S/RES/2182
(2014), op. 8; S/RES/2153
(2014), op. 4 (a) and (b);
S/RES/2144 (2014), op. 8;
S/RES/1946 (2010), op. 6;
S/RES/1907 (2009), op. 5
and op. 12; S/RES/1904
(2009), op. 1 (c);
S/RES/1521 (2003), op. 2
(a); and S/RES/1379
(2001), op. 6.

S/RES/2213 (2015),
op. 16
S/RES/2198 (2015),
op. 1

S/RES/2182 (2014),
pp. 15
S/RES/2142 (2014),
op. 2
S/RES/2134 (2014),
op. 37 (a)

S/PRST/2015/23

57/98

Reiterates its call upon [national authorities], with the assistance of [UN Mission] and international partners, to address the
illicit transfer, destabilizing accumulation and misuse of small arms and light weapons in [affected country], and to ensure
the safe and effective management, storage, and security of their stockpiles of small arms and light weapons and the
collection and/or destruction of surplus, seized, unmarked, or illicitly held weapons and ammunition and further stresses the
importance of incorporating such elements into SSR and DDRRR programmes
Requests that [UN Mission], consistent with its mandate and within its existing capabilities, observe, document and report
on the movement of weapons into [affected area] and the presence of weapons within [affected area] as part of the
Secretary-General’s regular reporting cycle
Recognizes the detrimental impact of the proliferation of arms, in particular small arms, on the security of civilians by fuelling
armed conflict, encourages [the mission] to continue its efforts in providing assistance to the Government of [the affected area]
with regard to the civilian disarmament process, in particular by strengthening the capacity of local authorities to deter intercommunal conflicts and by monitoring forced civilian disarmament initiatives in an effort to avert disarmament operations that
could exacerbate insecurity in [the affected area].
Decides to review by the end of the period mentioned in [paragraph of resolution] the measures decided in [paragraph of
resolution providing for arms embargo and exemptions thereto], with a view to possibly further modifying or lifting all or part
of the remaining measures, in light of the progress achieved in the stabilization of [affected country], in accordance with
progress achieved in relation to DDR and SSR, national reconciliation and the fight against impunity, bearing in mind in this
regard the significance of peaceful, credible and transparent election process and the effective management of arms and related
materiel as described in [paragraph of resolution]
Decides that all Member States shall immediately take the necessary measures to prevent the direct or indirect supply, sale or
transfer to, or for the benefit of [specifically identified individuals], and the individuals and entities designated by the Committee
established [to oversee the implementation of the relevant sanctions regime] (hereinafter referred to as “the Committee”)
pursuant to [previous paragraph of resolution], the individuals and entities listed in the annex of this resolution, and those acting
on their behalf or at their direction in [affected country], from or through their territories or by their nationals, or using their flag
vessels or aircraft, of arms and related materiel of all types, including weapons and ammunition, military vehicles and
equipment, paramilitary equipment, and spare parts for the aforementioned, and technical assistance, training, financial or other
assistance, related to military activities or the provision, maintenance or use of any arms and related materiel, including the
provision of armed mercenary personnel whether or not originating in their territories
Stresses that arms and related materiel, including related ammunition and spare parts, that are supplied, sold or transferred as
security or disarmament assistance to the … government [of affected country] in accordance with [paragraph of relevant
resolution providing for exemptions to arms embargo], should not be resold to, transferred to, or made available for use by
parties other than the designated end user
Decides to renew until [date] the measures on arms imposed by [paragraph of Security Council resolution imposing arms
embargo] and reaffirms the provisions of [paragraphs of Security Council resolution providing for exceptions to the arms
embargo and associated procedure] further decides that the measures on arms imposed by [paragraph of Security Council
resolution imposing arms embargo and specific procedure for exceptional shipments of arms to affected country, as authorized
by the Security Council] shall not apply to the supply of arms and related materiel, as well as assistance, advice or training,
intended solely for the support of or use by [UN Mission] or [relevant regional task force]
Recalling the arms embargo on [affected country], and in particular the need for all supplies of weapons and military equipment
destined for [security forces of affected country] to be notified to the Committee established [by the Security Council to oversee
the implementation of the relevant sanctions regime], and further recalling that improved arms and ammunition management in
[affected country] is a fundamental component of greater peace and stability for the region
Decides that until [date] the arms embargo on [affected country] shall not apply to deliveries of weapons, ammunition or
military equipment or the provision of advice, assistance or training, intended solely for the development of the Security Forces
of the … Government of [affected country], to provide security for the … people [of the affected country], except in relation to
deliveries of the items set out in the annex of [relevant resolution]
Further decides in this regard that the measures contained in [paragraphs of the resolution providing for individual restrictive
measures] shall also apply to the individuals and entities designated by the Committee as: (a) acting in violation of the arms
embargo established in [relevant paragraph of previous resolution], or as having directly or indirectly supplied, sold, or
transferred to armed groups or criminal networks in [affected country], or as having been the recipient of arms or any related
materiel, or any technical advice, training, or assistance, including financing and financial assistance, related to violent activities
of armed groups or criminal networks in [affected country]

S/PRST/2015/23

58/98

International and
regional cooperation
in preventing the
circulation and
availability of, and
the illicit trade in,
small arms and light
weapons

15-20840

Decides that, for an initial period of one year from the date of adoption of this resolution, all Member States shall immediately
take the necessary measures to prevent the direct or indirect supply, sale or transfer to the [targeted country], from or through
their territories or by their nationals, or using their flag vessels or aircraft, of arms and related materiel of all types, including
weapons and ammunition, military vehicles and equipment, paramilitary equipment, and spare parts for the aforementioned,
and technical assistance, training, financial or other assistance, related to military activities or the provision, maintenance or use
of any arms and related materiel, including the provision of armed mercenary personnel whether or not originating in their
territories …
Acknowledging the important contribution of Council-mandated arms embargoes in countering the
illicit transfer of small arms and light weapons, mitigating the intensity of conflict and creating
conditions conducive to the peaceful resolution of situations that threaten or breach international peace
and security, and acknowledging also the contribution Council -mandated arms embargoes make in
supporting conflict prevention, post-conflict peacebuilding, disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration and security sector reform,
Decides … that the arms embargo shall not apply to the supplies of non -lethal equipment intended
solely to enable the [national] security forces to use only appropriate and proportionate force while
maintaining public order, as approved in advance by the Sanction s Committee;
[R]eaffirms its intention to consider imposing, through country-specific resolutions, targeted and graduated measures, such
as, inter alia, a ban on the export and supply of small arms and light weapons and of other military equipment and on
military assistance, against parties to situations of armed conflict which are on the Security Council’s agenda and are in
violation of applicable international law relating to the rights and protection of children in armed conflict.
Urges Member States, relevant United Nations entities, intergovernmental, regional and subregional organizations, in a
position to do so and where appropriate, to cooperate and share information on suspected traffickers and trafficking routes,
suspect financial transactions and brokering activities for, or diversions of, small arms or light weapons, and other
information relevant to the illicit transfer, destabilizing accumulation or misuse of small arms and light weapons, with
potentially affected States and with relevant United Nations entities, including experts groups assisting sanctions
committees and peacekeeping operations
Emphasizes that Member States, United Nations peacekeeping operations and other Council-mandated entities, where
appropriate and mandated, and intergovernmental, regional and subregional organizations, may be in a position to assist in
capacity-building of governments upon request to ensure the safe and effective management, storage, security, marking,
record-keeping and tracing of stockpiles of small arms and light weapons, and collection and/or destruction of surplus,
seized, unmarked, or illicitly held weapons and ammunition and encourages Member States and intergovernmental,
regional and subregional organizations in a position to do so to render assistance upon request in implementing these tasks,
including through examining technologies that would improve the tracing and detection of illicit transfer in small arms and
light weapons, as well as measures to facilitate the transfer of such technologies
Welcomes efforts made by Member States, regional and subregional organizations in addressing the illicit transfer,
destabilizing accumulation and misuse of small arms and light weapons, and encourages the establishment or
strengthening, where appropriate, of subregional and regional cooperation, coordination and information sharing
mechanisms, in particular, transborder customs cooperation and networks for information-sharing, with a view to
preventing, combating, and eradicating illicit transfer, destabilizing accumulation and misuse of small arms and light
weapons
Urges further in this context that all … parties [in affected country] and all States, particularly those in the region, ensure: –
the safety of the members of the Group of Experts [established to assist the relevant Security Council sanctions
Committee]; – unhindered access by the Group of Experts, in particular to persons, documents and sites in order for the
Group of Experts to execute its mandate
Urges all States, relevant United Nations bodies and other organizations and interested parties, to cooperate fully with
[relevant Security Council sanctions Committee], the Group of Experts [established to assist the relevant Security Council
sanctions Committee], [UN Mission] and [Security Council-authorized military operation], in particular by supplying any
information at their disposal on possible violations of the measures imposed by [paragraphs of previous resolutions
imposing targeted sanctions on individuals and entities in relation to the situation in affected country, including arms
embargo], and further requests the Group of Experts to coordinate its activities as appropriate with all political actors and to
implement their mandate in accordance with the Report of the Informal Working Group of the Security Council on General
Issues of Sanctions (S/2006/997)

S/RES/2127 (2013),
op. 54

S/RES/2117 (2013),
pp.12

S/RES/1946 (2010),
op. 5
S/RES/1612 (2005),
op. 9
S/RES/2220 (2015),
op. 11

S/RES/2220 (2015),
op. 5

S/RES/2220 (2015),
op. 1

S/RES/2219 (2015),
op. 37
S/RES/2219 (2015),
op. 35

See also, for example,
S/RES/1973 (2011), op.
13; S/RES/1946 (2010),
op. 16; S/RES/1945
(2010), op. 5; and
S/RES/1896 (2009), op.
12.

15-20840

Express concern at,
and condemn, the
indiscriminate use of
weapons, including
mines and explosive
remnants of war

Calls upon all Member States, in order to ensure strict implementation of the arms embargo established by [relevant
paragraphs of previous resolution] and modified by subsequent resolutions, to inspect in their territory, including seaports
and airports, in accordance with their national authorities and legislation and consistent with international law, in particular
the law of the sea and relevant international civil aviation agreements, vessels and aircraft bound to or from [affected
country], if the State concerned has information that provides reasonable grounds to believe that the cargo contains items
the supply, sale, transfer, or export of which is prohibited by [paragraphs of previous resolution establishing arms embargo],
as modified by [relevant paragraphs of successive resolutions] for the purpose of ensuring strict implementation of those
provisions, and calls upon all flag States of such vessels and aircraft to cooperate with such inspections
Expresses its full support to the UN Group of Experts of the [relevant Security Council sanctions Committee] and calls for
enhanced cooperation between all States, particularly those in the region, [UN Mission], relevant UN bodies and the Group
of Experts, encourages further that all parties and all States ensure cooperation with the Group of Experts by individuals
and entities within their jurisdiction or under their control and reiterates its demand that all parties and all States ensure the
safety of its members and its support staff, and that all parties and all States, including [affected State] and countries of the
region, provide unhindered and immediate access, in particular to persons, documents and sites the Group of Experts
deems relevant to the execution of its mandate;
Encourages enhanced cooperation between all States, particularly those in the region, [the mission]
and the Group of Experts [informing the sanction Committee] and encourages further that all parties
and all States ensure cooperation with the Group of Experts [informing the sanction Committee] by
individuals and entities within their jurisdiction or under their control;
Requests the Governments of the [affected State] and of all States, particularly those in the region, the United Nations
Organization Mission in the [affected State] and the Group of Experts to cooperate intensively, including by exchanging
information regarding arms shipments, trading routes and strategic mines known to be controlled or used by armed groups,
flights from the … region to the [affected State] and from the [affected State] to the … region, the illegal exploitation and
trafficking in natural resources, and activities of individuals and entities designated by the [Sanction] Committee pursuant
to paragraph 4 of resolution 1857 (2008).
Calls upon the countries of the region to reinforce their cooperation with the Security Council’s Committee and with the
Group of Experts … in enforcing the arms embargo in [the affected State] and to combat cross-border trafficking of illicit
small arms, light weapons and illicit natural resources as well as the movement of combatants, and reiterates its demand
that [States in the region] take measures to prevent the use of their respective territories in support of the activities of armed
groups present in the region.
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that his [Special Representatives for neighbouring countries] coordinate the
activities of [their respective missions], share military information at their disposal, in particular concerning cross-border
movements of armed elements and arms trafficking, and pool their logistic and administrative resources, to an extent that
does not affect the ability to carry out their respective mandates, in order to maximize efficiency and cost-effectiveness.
Condemning the use of heavy weapons by [both parties to conflict] in the ongoing … conflict [in affected country] in
[specific area], including the use of tanks by [parties to conflict] during clashes
… expressing concern at evidence, collected by [AU/UN Mission], of two air-delivered cluster bombs near [locality],
taking note that [AU/UN Mission] disposed of them safely, and reiterating the Secretary-General’s call on the Government
of [affected country] to immediately investigate the use of cluster munitions,
Noting with serious concern reports made by the United Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS) in [area in affected
country] in [month/year], of the indiscriminate use of cluster munitions and urging all parties to refrain from similar such
use in the future, and further expressing serious concerns about increased level of unexploded ordnance
Expressing also concern with the serious threat that anti-personnel mines, remnants of war and improvised explosive
devices pose to the civilian population, and stressing the need to refrain from the use of weapons and devices prohibited by
international law

59/98

Condemning the use of heavy weapons by both the … armed forces [of affected country] and armed members of the
opposition in the ongoing … conflict in the area of separation, including the use of tanks by the … armed forces [of
affected country] and opposition during clashes
… condemning the increased use by elements of the … opposition [to the Government] and other groups of improvised
explosive devices in the [UN Mission] area of operation,

S/RES/2198 (2015),
op. 8

S/RES/1952 (2010),
op. 17
S/RES/1896 (2009),
op. 10

S/RES/1653 (2006),
op. 16

S/RES/1545 (2004),
op. 20
S/RES/2229 (2015),
pp. 8
S/RES/2228 (2015),
pp. 7
S/RES/2223 (2015),
pp. 29

See also, for example,
S/RES/2200 (2015), pp. 9;
S/RES/2192 (2014), pp. 8;
S/RES/2104 (2013), pp.
26; S/RES/2096 (2013),
pp. 30; S/RES/1986
(2011), pp. 15

S/RES/2210 (2015),
pp. 27
S/RES/2209 (2015),
op. 1
S/RES/2163 (2014),
pp. 8
S/RES/2163 (2014),
pp. 7

S/PRST/2015/23

Condemns in the strongest terms any use of any toxic chemical, such as chlorine, as a weapon in [affected country]

S/RES/2213 (2015),
op. 19

Role of United
Nations peacekeeping
operations and other
relevant missions and
actors in preventing
the indiscriminate
use of weapons,
including mines and
explosive weapons of
war, and mitigating
the impact on
civilians

The Security Council expresses deepest worry at the presence in very high numbers of unexploded ordnance in [the region
of the affected country], including cluster munitions. It deplores the death and injury of dozens of civilians, as well as of
several de-miners, caused by those munitions since the cessation of hostilities. It supports in this context the SecretaryGeneral’s request to [the party to the conflict] to provide to the United Nations detailed data on its use of cluster munitions
in [the territory of the affected State].
Reiterates that no party in [affected country] should use, develop, produce, acquire, stockpile, retain, or transfer chemical
weapons
Recalls its decision that [affected country] shall not use, develop, produce, otherwise acquire, stockpile or retain chemical
weapons, or, transfer, directly or indirectly, chemical weapons to other States or non-State actors
Urges States to consider ratifying or acceding to the Arms Trade Treaty as soon as possible and encourages States,
intergovernmental, regional and subregional organizations that are in a position to do so to render assistance in capacitybuilding to enable States Parties to fulfil and implement the Treaty’s obligations
Welcomes the achievements to date in the implementation of the Mine Action Programme of [affected country], and
encourages the Government of [affected country], with the support of the United Nations and all the relevant actors, to
continue its efforts towards the removal and destruction of anti-personnel landmines, anti-tank landmines and explosive
remnants of war in order to reduce the threats posed to human life and peace and security in the country, and expresses the
need to provide assistance for the care, rehabilitation, and economic and social reintegration of victims, including persons
with disabilities
Demands that the Government of [affected country] and the Government of [affected country] continue to facilitate the
deployment of the United Nations Mine Action Service to ensure … the identification and clearance of mines in [affected
area] …
Decides that the mandate of [UN Mission] shall focus on the following priority tasks: (c) Support to the re-establishment of
State authority throughout the country, the rebuilding of the [national] security sector, the promotion and protection of
human rights and the support for humanitarian assistance … (iii) To assist the [national] authorities, through training and
other support, for the removal and destruction of mines and other explosive devices and weapons and ammunition
management
Urges relevant United Nations entities to continue to take concrete steps to reduce the impact of mines, unexploded
ordnance and cluster munition and explosive remnants of war on children by prioritizing mine clearance, risk education and
risk reduction activities
Calls for continued national efforts to address the threat posed by all weapons, including explosive weapons and small arms
and light weapons, to stability and security in [affected country], including inter alia through ensuring the safe and effective
management, storage and security of their stockpiles of small arms and light weapons and explosive weapons, and the
collection and/or destruction of explosive remnants of war and surplus, seized, unmarked, or illicitly held weapons and
ammunition, and further stresses the importance of incorporating such elements into security sector reform
Decides that the mandate of [UN Mission] shall be reinforced and updated as follows: (d) Support for the stabilization of
the security situation: – To support the stabilization of the security situation by advising on and providing technical
assistance in support of … mine action, including clearance of explosive remnants of war
Notes, in this regard, that multidimensional peacekeeping missions may be mandated by the Security
Council, inter-alia, to: (d) Provide for rapid response in mine action as well as advisory services and
training tailored to needs of national authorities, upon request, with a view to enabling risk reduction,
victim assistance, demining and stockpile management and disposal;
Noting the ratification of the Convention on Cluster Munitions by [the affected country],

15-20840

[C]alls on parties to armed conflict to take all feasible precautions to protect the civilian population, including children,
from the effects of landmines and other explosive remnants of war, and in this regard, encourages the international
community to support country efforts in clearing landmines and other explosive remnants of war and to provide assistance
for the care, rehabilitation and economic and social reintegration of victims, including persons with disabilities.
Welcomes the continued contribution of [the peacekeeping mission] to operational de-mining …, encourages further
assistance in mine action by the United Nations to [the affected State] in support of both the continued development of its
national mine action capacity and emergency de-mining activities …, commends donor countries for supporting these

S/PRST/2015/23

60/98

Expressing concern at the … continued threats to civilians posed by unexploded ordnance

S/RES/2148 (2014),
pp. 7
S/PRST/2007/12

S/RES/2235 (2015),
op. 3
S/RES/2235 (2015),
op. 2
S/RES/2220 (2015),
op. 21
S/RES/2210 (2015),
op. 30

S/RES/2205 (2015),
op. 21
S/RES/2164 (2014),
op. 13 (c), (iii)

S/RES/2143 (2014),
op. 23
S/RES/2140 (2014),
op. 30

S/RES/2134 (2014),
op. 2 (d)
S/RES/2086 (2013),
op. 8
S/RES/2011 (2011)
(pp. 22)
S/RES/1894 (2009),
op. 29
S/RES/1525 (2004),
op. 9

See also, for example,
S/RES/2227 (2015), op.
14 (d), (iv); S/RES/2145
(2014), op. 30;
S/RES/2086 (2013), op. 8;
S/RES/2075 (2012), op.
12; S/RES/2047 (2012),
op. 10; and S/RES/1917
(2010), op. 19.

15-20840

efforts through financial and in-kind contributions and encourages further international contributions, takes note of the
communication to [the affected State] and [the peacekeeping mission] of maps and information on the location of mines
and stresses the necessity to provide [the affected State] and [the peacekeeping mission] with any additional maps and
records on the location of mines.

F. Compliance, accountability and the rule of law
Dissemination of, and
training on,
international
humanitarian law
and human rights
law standards

Promoting
compliance through
targeted and
graduated measures

S/RES/2226 (2015),
op. 19 (e)
S/RES/2226 (2015),
op. 17
S/RES/2217 (2015),
op. 45
S/RES/2182 (2014),
op. 33
S/RES/2162 (2014),
op. 17

See also, for example,
S/RES/2222 (2015), op.
11; S/RES/2211 (2015),
pp. 12 and op. 15;
S/RES/2147 (2014), pp.
20; S/RES/2112 (2013),
op. 24; S/RES/2066
(2012), pp. 9; S/RES/2062
(2012), op. 17;
S/RES/2053 (2012), pp.
12; S/RES/1265 (1999),
pp. 8 and op. 5.

S/RES/2085 (2012),
op. 7
S/RES/1894 (2009),
op. 5
S/RES/1894 (2009),
op. 7 (a), (b) and (d)

S/RES/2217 (2015),
pp. 17

S/RES/2206 (2015),
op. 7 (c) and (d)

See also, for example,
S/RES/2226 (2015), op.
19 (g); S/RES/2213
(2015), op. 11 (a);
S/RES/2206 (2015), op. 8
and 21; S/RES/2100
(2013), op. 6; S/RES/2091
(2013), op. 7; S/RES/2035
(2012), op. 9; S/RES/2002
(2011), op. 1; S/RES/1988
(2011), op. 1; S/RES/1975
(2011), op. 12;
S/RES/1970 (2011), op. 9;
S/RES/1946 (2010), op. 6;

S/PRST/2015/23

61/98

Decides that the mandate of [UN Mission] shall be the following: … (e) Reconstitution and reform of security institutions
… to facilitate the provision of training, within its current resources and as requested by the Government and in close
coordination with other international partners, in human rights, child protection and protection from sexual and genderbased violence to the security and law enforcement institutions …
recalls the importance of training in human rights, child protection and sexual- and gender-based violence for security and
law-enforcement agencies
recalls the importance of training [to ensure that UN Mission and other international actors carry out their mandate in full
compliance with applicable international humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee law]
Underlines the need for [AU Mission] troops to continue to receive appropriate information and pre-deployment training in
relation to human rights principles, including gender equality and sexual violence, and for [AU Mission] personnel to be
properly informed of the accountability mechanisms in place should any abuse be committed
Welcomes the continued cooperation between, and the conduct of coordinated activities by, [UN Mission] and [national
army] and calls for strict adherence by [national army] to international humanitarian, human rights and refugee laws and in
this context, recalls the importance of training in human rights, child protection and sexual- and gender-based violence for
security and law-enforcement agencies
Urges Member States, regional and international organizations to provide coordinated assistance,
expertise, training, including on human rights and international humanitarian law, and capacity building support to the [National Defence and Security Forces], consistent with their domestic
requirements …
Reiterates its call on States that have not already done so to consider signing, ratifying or acceding to the relevant
instruments of international humanitarian, human rights and refugee law, and to take appropriate legislative, judicial and
administrative measures to implement their obligations under these instruments.
Calls upon all parties concerned, (a) to ensure the widest possible dissemination of information about international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law; (b) to provide training for public officials, members of armed forces and
armed groups, personnel associated to armed forces, civilian police and law enforcement personnel, and members of the
judicial and legal professions; and to raise awareness among civil society and the civilian population on relevant
international humanitarian, human rights and refugee law, as well as on the protection, special needs and human rights of
women and children in conflict situations, to achieve full and effective compliance; (d) to seek, where appropriate, support
from United Nations peacekeeping and other relevant missions, as well as United Nations Country Teams and the
International Committee of the Red Cross and, where appropriate, other members of the International Red Cross and Red
Crescent Movement, on training and awareness raising on international humanitarian, human rights and refugee law.
Emphasizing that the targeted sanctions renewed by [relevant Security Council resolution] aim at, inter alia, individuals and
entities designated by the Committee [established by the Security Council to oversee the implementation of the relevant
sanctions regime] as engaging in or providing support for acts … that fuel violence and at individuals and entities
designated by the Committee as involved in planning, directing, or committing acts that violate international human rights
law or international humanitarian law or that constitute human rights abuses or violations
Underscores that such actions or policies [the direct or indirect involvement in constitutes a criterion for listing by the
relevant Security Council sanctions Committee] may include, but are not limited to: … (c) Planning, directing, or
committing acts that violate applicable international human rights law or international humanitarian law, or acts that
constitute human rights abuses, in [affected country]; (d) The targeting of civilians, including women and children, through
the commission of acts of violence (including killing, maiming, torture, or rape or other sexual violence), abduction,
enforced disappearance, forced displacement, or attacks on schools, hospitals, religious sites, or locations where civilians
are seeking refuge, or through conduct that would constitute a serious abuse or violation of human rights or a violation of
international humanitarian law …

S/RES/2200 (2015),
op. 15

S/RES/1807 (2008), op. 9;
and S/RES/1727 (2006),
op. 12.

S/RES/2174 (2014),
op. 4 (a)

S/RES/2134 (2014),
op. 38

S/RES/1980 (2011),
op. 10

S/RES/1970 (2011),
op. 17

S/RES/2227 (2015),
pp. 22

S/RES/2222 (2015),
pp. 11

15-20840

See also, for example,
S/RES/2223 (2015), pp.
17; S/RES/2219 (2015),
pp. 18; S/RES/2217
(2015), pp. 12 and op. 15;
S/RES/2213, pp. 7 and op.
5; S/RES/2206 (2015), pp.
21; S/RES/2201 (2015),
pp. 11; S/RES/2196

S/PRST/2015/23

62/98

Accountability and
fight against
impunity

… expresses its intention to impose targeted sanctions against individuals and entities [designated by the relevant Security
Council sanctions Committee as impeding the peace process, constituting a threat to stability in the affected area and the
region, committing violations of international humanitarian or human rights law or other atrocities, or being responsible for
offensive military overflights], and encourages the Panel of Experts, in coordination with the Joint African Union/United
Nations Mediation, to provide to the Committee when appropriate the names of any individuals, groups, or entities that
may meet the listing criteria
Reaffirms that [Security Council sanctions targeting individuals and entities in relation to the situation in affected country],
apply to individuals and entities designated under [relevant Security Council resolutions] and by the Committee established
pursuant to [paragraph of relevant resolution establishing a Security Council sanctions Committee to oversee the
implementation of the relevant sanctions regime], decides that they shall also apply to individuals and entities determined
by the Committee to be engaging in or providing support for other acts that threaten the peace, stability or security of
[affected country], or obstruct or undermine the successful completion of its political transition, and decides that such acts
may include but are not limited to: (a) planning, directing, or committing, acts that violate applicable international human
rights law or international humanitarian law, or acts that constitute human rights abuses, in [affected country]
Expresses grave concern over reports that some [national] political figures have provided support and direction to [armed
groups] planning violence and serious human rights violations and abuses against the civilian population of the [affected
country], demands that these figures and all others cease any such activities immediately, and directs the [relevant sanctions
Committee] to consider, as a matter of urgency, designating such figures for targeted sanctions if they engage in any of the
activities [that constitute criteria for the imposition of restrictive measures, as provided for by the resolution]
Underlines that it is fully prepared to impose targeted measures against persons to be designated by
the [sanction] Committee … who are determined to be, among other things: (a) A threat to the peace
and national reconciliation process in [the affected country], in particular by blocking the
implementation of the peace process, as referred to in the [relevant Political Agreement]; (b) Attacking
or obstructing the action of [the Mission], of the [national armed forces] which support it and of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in [the affected country]; (c) Responsible for
obstacles to the freedom of movement of [the Mission] and of the … forces which support it; (d)
Responsible for serious violations of human rights and international humanitarian law committed in
[the affected country]; (e) Inciting publicly hatred and violence; (f) Acting in violation of the measure s
imposed by [paragraphs imposing an arms embargo];
Decides that all Member States shall freeze without delay all funds, other financial assets and
economic resources which are on their territories, which are owned or controlled, directly or
indirectly, by the individuals or entities listed in [annex of the resolution imposing sanctions] or
[designated by the sanction Committee and involved in or complicit in ordering, controlling, or
otherwise directing, the commission of serious human rights abuses against persons in the [affected
State], including by being involved in or complicit in planning, commanding, ordering or conducting
attacks, in violation of international law, including aerial bombardments, on civilian popu lations and
facilities; or by individuals or entities acting on their behalf or individuals and entities acting for such
individuals or on their behalf or at their direction], and decides further that all Member States shall
ensure that any funds, financial assets or economic resources are prevented from being made available
by their nationals or by any individuals or entities within their territories, to or for the benefit of the
individuals or entities listed in [annex of the resolution imposing sanctions ] or individuals designated
by the Committee.
Reiterating … that all perpetrators of [abuses and violations of human rights and violations of
international humanitarian law] must be held accountable and that some … acts referred to in the
paragraph above may amount to crimes under the Rome Statute and taking note that, acting upon the
referral of [national authorities of affected country] dated [date], the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court opened, on [date], an investigation into alleged crimes committed on the territory of
[affected country] since [month/year] …
Emphasizing that there are existing prohibitions under international humanitarian law against attacks
intentionally directed against civilians, as such, which in situations of armed conflict constitute war
crimes, and recalling the need for States to end impunity for such criminal acts

15-20840

S/RES/2211 (2015),
pp. 17

… stressing the importance of investigating [alleged human rights abuses and violations of
international humanitarian law], including those that occurred throughout the … crisis, committed by
all parties, irrespective of their status or political affiliation, reaffirming that those responsible for

S/RES/2112 (2013),
pp. 11

S/RES/2198 (2015),
pp. 19
S/RES/2191 (2014),
pp. 17

S/RES/2174 (2014),
pp. 6
S/RES/2171 (2014),
pp. 19

S/RES/2149 (2014),
pp. 11

S/RES/2147 (2014),
pp. 27

S/RES/2144 (2014),
op. 2
S/RES/2138 (2014),
pp. 22
S/RES/2136 (2014),
pp. 19
S/RES/2127 (2013),
pp. 6

(2015), pp. 16;
S/RES/2174 (2014), op. 2;
S/RES/2173 (2014), op.
15; S/RES/2121 (2013),
pp.5; S/RES/2155 (2014),
pp. 12; S/RES/2153
(2014), pp. 16;
S/RES/2140 (2014), pp.
15; S/RES/2139 (2014),
op. 13; S/RES/2136
(2014), op. 12;
S/RES/2134 (2013), pp.
16; S/RES/2127 (2013),
op. 14; S/RES/2113
(2013), pp21; S/RES/2111
(2013), pp. 6; S/RES/2109
(2013), pp. 9; S/RES/2102
(2013), op. 8; S/RES/2098
(2013), pp. 19;
S/PRST/2013/2 (2013),
par. 8; S/RES/2091
(2013), pp. 17;
S/RES/2078 (2012), pp.
10 and op. 19;
S/RES/2071 (2012), pp.
14; S/RES/2067 (2012),
pp. 17 and op. 15;
S/RES/2063 (2012), pp. 5;
S/RES/2027 (2011), op.
10; S/RES/2000 (2011),
pp. 15; S/RES/1975
(2011), pp. 11;
S/RES/1959 (2010), op.
11S/RES/1952 (2010), op.
12; S/RES/1906 (2009),
op. 3; S/RES/1902 (2009),
pp. 11 and op. 18;
S/RES/1863 (2009), pp.
10; S/RES/1828 (2008),
pp. 8; S/RES/1826 (2008),
pp. 9; S/RES/1816 (2008),
op. 11; S/RES/1769
(2007), pp. 12;
S/RES/1674 (2006), op. 8
and op. 11; S/RES/1591
(2005), pp. 5; S/RES/1577
(2004), op. 2; S/RES/1565
(2004), op. 19;
S/RES/1564 (2004), pp. 9
and op. 7; S/RES/1556
(2004), pp. 10 and op. 6;
S/RES/1479 (2003), op. 8;

S/PRST/2015/23

63/98

Recalling the importance of fighting against impunity within all ranks of [national army and police],
commending [national] authorities for recent prosecutions and condemnations of [national army]
officers for crimes against humanity and war crimes, and stressing the need for the Government of
[affected country] to continue to ensure the increased professionalism of its security forces,
Calling for all those responsible for violations of international humanitarian law and violations or
abuses of human rights including those involving violence or abuses against children and acts of
sexual and gender-based violence, to be swiftly apprehended, brought to justice and held accountable
Noting with grave concern that impunity in [affected country] contributes to widespread violations and
abuses of human rights and violations of international humanitarian law, stressing the need to end
impunity for these violations and abuses, and re -emphasizing in this regard the need that those who
have committed or are otherwise responsible for such violations and abuses in [affected country] must
be brought to justice
Reaffirming the importance of holding accountable those responsible for violations or abuses of
human rights or violations of international humanitarian law, including those involved in attacks
targeting civilians
Stressing the importance of accountability in preventing future conflicts, avoiding the recurrence of
serious violations of international law, including international humanitarian law and human rights law,
and enabling sustainable peace, justice, truth and reconciliation and emphasizing in this context the
responsibility of States to comply with their relevant obligations to end impunity and, to that end, to
thoroughly investigate and prosecute persons responsible for genocide, crimes against humanity, war
crimes, or other serious violations of international humanitarian law and international human rights
law
Stressing the urgent and imperative need to end impunity in [affected country] and to bring to justice
perpetrators of violations of international humanitarian law and of abuses and violations of human
rights, underlining in this regard the need to bolster national accountability mechanisms and
underlining its support for the work of the Independent Expert on human rights in [affected country]
and of the International Commission of Inquiry [mandated by the Security Council to investigate
allegations of international humanitarian and human rights law violations and human rights abuses
committed by all parties in affected country during the crisis]
Recalling the Secretary-General’s call to the Council to reject any endorsement of amnesty for
genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity or gross violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law, and welcoming in this regard the promulgation of the Amnesty law in [affected
country], excluding those who have committed genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity or
gross violations of human rights and international humanitarian law, and urging the government of
[affected country] to follow through by undertaking the necessary judicial reform to ensure that the
[affected country] effectively addresses impunity
… calls for those responsible for serious violations of international humanitarian law and human rights
law, including sexual violence and violations and abuses against children, to be held accountable in
accordance with international standards, and urges all Member States to cooperate closely with the …
government [of the affected country] in its efforts to end impunity for such violations
Calling on the Government of [affected country] to fulfil all its commitments, including …
undertaking effective efforts to ensure accountability for violations and abuses of human rights and
violations of international humanitarian law, by whomsoever perpetrated
… reiterating its condemnation of any attacks against peacekeepers, and emphasizing that those
responsible for such attacks must be brought to justice
Further expressing concern at the insufficient capacity of the police, justice and corrections
institutions to hold perpetrators of [international humanitarian and human rights law] violations and
[human rights] abuses accountable

Establishment of, and
collaboration with,
ad hoc judicial or
quasi-judicial
mechanisms and
commissions of
inquiry

15-20840

Stresses that all those responsible for human rights violations and abuses must be held accountable,
and underlining the need for a comprehensive, independent and impartial investigation consistent with
international standards into alleged human rights abuses and violations, to prevent impunity and
ensure full accountability;
… stressing that those responsible for or complicit in attacks targeting the civilian population,
including aerial and naval attacks, must be held to account,
Affirms its strong opposition to impunity for serious violations of international humanitarian law and human rights law and
emphasizes in this context the responsibility of States to comply with their relevant obligations to end impunity and to
thoroughly investigate and prosecute persons responsible for war crimes, genocide, crimes against humanity or other
serious violations of international humanitarian law in order to prevent violations, avoid their recurrence and seek
sustainable peace, justice, truth and reconciliation.
Strongly condemns the acts of violence systematically perpetrated against civilians, including the massacres, as well as
other atrocities and violations of international humanitarian law and human rights, in particular, sexual violence against
women and girls, stresses the need to bring to justice those responsible, including those at the command level, and urges all
parties, including [the affected State], to take all necessary steps to prevent further violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law, in particular those committed against civilians.
Reaffirms that all parties to the conflict are bound to comply with their obligations under international humanitarian law
and in particular the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and that persons who commit or order the commission of
grave breaches of the Conventions are individually responsible in respect of such breaches.
Requests further that after the Security Council has authorised [mechanism to identify individuals, entities, groups, or
governments who were perpetrators, organisers, sponsors or otherwise involved in the use of chemicals as weapons in
affected country] that the United Nations Secretary-General, in coordination with the OPCW Director-General, undertake
without delay the steps, measures, and arrangements necessary for the speedy establishment and full functioning of [the
mechanism], including recruiting impartial and experienced staff with relevant skills and expertise in accordance with
Terms of Reference and notes due regard should be paid to the importance of recruiting the staff on as wide of a
geographical basis as is practicable
… encouraging the publication by the Government of [affected country] of the final report and recommendations provided
by [national reconciliation mechanism], welcoming the establishment of [national commission for reparation to victims of
conflict in affected country], encouraging the full implementation of its mandate, and underlining the importance of
including all [nationals of affected country] in the reconciliation process at the national and local levels
Decides that the mandate of [UN MISSION] shall include the following immediate priority tasks: … (g) Special Criminal
Court (i) To assist [national authorities] and facilitate other bilateral and multilateral support to [national authorities] in the
establishment of the national Special Criminal Court (SCC) consistent with [affected country] laws and jurisdiction and in
line with the [affected country]’s international humanitarian law and international human rights law obligations with the
aim of supporting the extension of State authority; (ii) To provide technical assistance and capacity building for [national
authorities], in order to facilitate the functioning of the SCC, in particular in the areas of investigations, arrests, detention,
criminal and forensic analysis, evidence collection and storage, recruitment and selection of personnel, and the
establishment of a legal aid system, as appropriate, as well as, within existing resources, to provide security for magistrates,
and take measures to enhance the security of victims and witnesses as conditions allow, in line with the [affected country]’s
international human rights obligations, including with respect to fair trials, and due process
Welcoming in this regard [national authorities]’ efforts, in particular the adoption of the relevant legislation, to establish a
Special Criminal Court within the national judicial system, with jurisdiction over serious violations of human rights and of
international humanitarian law, consistent with [affected country]’s international humanitarian law and international human
rights law obligations
Recognizing the work of [regional commission of inquiry] in investigating and documenting violations as well as abuses of
international human rights law and international humanitarian law in [affected country], anticipating with interest its
findings and recommendations, encouraging the public release of its final report as soon as possible, and welcoming the
further engagement of [regional organization] to ensure justice and accountability, as well as healing and reconciliation for
[affected country]

S/RES/2051 (2012),
op. 7

S/RES/1468 (2003), op. 2;
S/RES/1296 (2000), op.
17; S/RES/1291 (2000),
op. 15; and S/RES/1289
(2000), op. 17.

S/RES/1973 (2011),
pp. 14
S/RES/1894 (2009),
op. 10

S/RES/1493 (2003),
op. 8

S/RES/1193 (1998),
op. 12
S/RES/2235 (2015),
op. 6

S/RES/2226 (2015),
pp. 13
S/RES/2217 (2015),
op. 32 (g), (i) and (ii)

S/RES/2217 (2015),
pp. 13
S/RES/2206 (2015),
pp. 22

See also, for example,
S/RES/2227 (2015), op.
14 (b), (iii); S/RES/2222
(2015), pp. 16; S/Res/2196
(2015), pp. 16; S/Res/2175
(2014), pp. 9; S/RES/2150
(2014), pp. 11;
S/RES/2143 (2014),
pp. 11; S/RES/2134
(2014), op. 19;
S/RES/2112 (2013),
op. 16; S/RES/2097
(2013), pp. 8; S/RES/2090
(2013), pp. 8;
S/PRST/2013/2 (2013),
par. 8 and 9; S/RES/2051
(2012), op. 10;
S/RES/2027 (2011),
op. 12; S/RES/2014
(2011), pp. 7; S/RES/1948
(2010), op. 3; S/RES/1902
(2009), op. 17;
S/RES/1888 (2009), pp. 8;
S/RES/1674 (2006), op. 7,
and S/RES/1564 (2004),
op. 12.

S/PRST/2015/23

64/98

such violations must be held accountable and brought to justice irrespective of their political
affiliation, while respecting the rights of those in detention …, urging the Government to increase and
expedite its efforts to combat impunity,

15-20840

S/RES/2171 (2014),
pp. 20
S/RES/2164 (2014),
op. 9
S/RES/2137 (2014),
op. 15
S/RES/2137 (2014),
pp. 10

S/RES/2127 (2013),
op. 24

S/RES/2025 (2011),
pp. 11
S/RES/1975 (2011),
op. 8

S/RES/1966 (2010),
op. 9

S/RES/1894 (2009),
op. 11

S/RES/1265 (1999),
op. 6
S/RES/955 (1994),
op. 1
S/RES/827 (1993),
op. 2

65/98

S/PRST/2015/23

Stressing that the fight against impunity and to ensure accountability for genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and
other egregious crimes has been strengthened through the work on and prosecution of these crimes in the international
criminal justice system, ad hoc and mixed tribunals as well as specialized chambers in national tribunals …
Welcomes the establishment of the Truth, Justice and Reconciliation Commission on [date], and calls on the [national]
authorities to take the necessary steps to ensure the neutrality, impartiality, transparency and independence of the
Commission and to enable it to commence its work to benefit all [people of affected country] as soon as possible
Calls upon the Government of [affected country] to work with international partners and [UN Mission] for the
establishment of transitional justice mechanisms, including a credible and consensual Truth and Reconciliation
Commission to help foster an effective reconciliation of all [nationals of the affected country] and durable peace in [affected
country], in accordance with … [relevant Security Council resolution] as well as the [peace agreement]
Underscoring the importance of transitional justice mechanisms in promoting lasting reconciliation among all the people of
[affected country], taking note that no significant progress has been made towards the establishment of a Truth and
Reconciliation Commission since the draft law was submitted to Parliament …, and recalling in this context the
commitment of the Government of [affected country] to establishing transitional justice mechanisms consistent with …
[relevant] Security Council resolution … as well as [relevant peace agreement]
Requests that the Secretary-General rapidly establish an international commission of inquiry for an initial period of one
year, including experts in both international humanitarian law and human rights law, in order immediately to investigate
reports of violations of international humanitarian law, international human rights law and abuses of human rights in [the
affected country] by all parties since [date], to compile information, to help identify the perpetrators of such violations and
abuses, point to their possible criminal responsibility and to help ensure that those responsible are held accountable, and
calls on all parties to cooperate fully with such a commission
Expressing concern about the violent events of [date] and welcoming the Government …’s
establishment of a Special Independent Commission of Inquiry to investigate the events and determine
the facts and circumstances through independent and impartial proceedings that meet international
standards, in order to hold accountable those responsible,
Calls upon all parties to fully cooperate with the independent international commission of inquiry put
in place by the Human Rights Council [date] to investigate the facts and circumstances surrounding
the allegations of serious abuses and violations of human rights committed in [the affected country]
…, and requests the Secretary-General to transmit this report to the Security Council and other
relevant international bodies
Decides that all States shall cooperate fully with the [ad hoc judicial mechanism] … and that
consequently all States shall take any measures necessary under their domestic law to impleme nt the
provisions of the … resolution [instituting the ad hoc judicial mechanism] and the Statute of the
Mechanism, including the obligation of States to comply with requests for assistance or orders issued
by the Mechanism pursuant to its Statute;
Recalls that accountability for … serious crimes must be ensured by taking measures at the national level, and by
enhancing international cooperation in support of national mechanisms, draws attention to the full range of justice and
reconciliation mechanisms to be considered, including national, international and “mixed” criminal courts and tribunals,
and truth and reconciliation commissions, as well as national reparation programs for victims and institutional reforms; and
underlines the Security Council’s role in ending impunity.
Emphasizes the responsibility of States to end impunity and to prosecute those responsible for genocide, crimes against
humanity and serious violations of international humanitarian law, affirms the possibility, to this end, of using the
International Fact-Finding Commission established by Article 90 of the First Additional Protocol to the Geneva
Conventions …
Decides hereby, having received the request of [the affected State], to establish an international tribunal for the sole purpose
of prosecuting persons responsible for genocide and other serious violations of international humanitarian law committed in
the territory [of the affected State] and citizens [of the affected State] responsible for genocide and other such violations
committed in the territory of neighboring States between [dates] ….
Decides hereby to establish an international tribunal for the sole purpose of prosecuting persons responsible for serious
violations of international humanitarian law committed in the territory of [the affected State] between [dates] ….

15-20840

Calls upon the … government [of affected country] to cooperate fully with and provide any necessary assistance to the
International Criminal Court and the Prosecutor as required by [relevant resolution]
Recalling its decision in [previous Security Council resolution] to refer the situation in [affected country] to the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court (ICC), noting the decision of the Pre-Trial Chamber dated [date], and also noting the
request of the Prosecutor to the Pre-Trial Chamber dated [date] that [affected country] immediately surrender [national of
affected country] to the Court
Urges [national] authorities to further combat impunity and, in this regard, to ensure that all perpetrators of violations and
abuses of human rights and violations of international humanitarian law, including those involving sexual violence, are held
accountable, and also urges [national] authorities to continue to cooperate with the International Criminal Court, in
accordance with [affected country]’s obligations under the Rome Statute
Authorizes [UN Mission], in pursuit of the objectives described in [previous paragraph], to take all necessary measures to
perform the following tasks, bearing in mind that these are mutually reinforcing tasks; … (d) Support and work with the
authorities of [affected country] to arrest and bring to justice those allegedly responsible for genocide, war crimes and
crimes against humanity and violations of international humanitarian law and violations or abuses of human rights in the
country, including leaders of armed groups, including through cooperation with States of the region and the ICC
Reiterating that all perpetrators of [human rights violations and abuses and international humanitarian law violations] must
be held accountable and that some of those acts may amount to crimes under the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), to which [affected country] is a State party, noting in this regard the opening by the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court on [date] of an investigation following the request of the national authorities on alleged crimes
committed since [year] and welcoming the ongoing cooperation by [national authorities of affected country] in this regard
Stressing that the fight against impunity and to ensure accountability for genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and
other egregious crimes has been strengthened through the work on and prosecution of these crimes in the international
criminal justice system, ad hoc and mixed tribunals as well as specialized chambers in national tribunals; and recognizing
in this regard the contribution of the International Criminal Court, in accordance with the principle of complementarity to
national criminal jurisdictions as set out in the Rome Statute, towards holding accountable those responsible for [genocide,
crimes against humanity, war crimes and other egregious crimes], and reiterating its call on the importance of State
cooperation with these courts and tribunals in accordance with the States’ respective obligations
… notes the relevance of the guidance on contacts with persons who are the subject of arrest warrants or summonses issued
by the International Criminal Court
Recalling that [affected state] is a State Party to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court since [date], and has
undertaken obligations to fight impunity for crimes falling within the jurisdiction of the Court, and emphasizing that the
International Criminal Court is complementary to the national criminal jurisdictions
Stresses the importance of the Government of [affected country] actively seeking to hold accountable those responsible for
war crimes and crimes against humanity in the country and of regional cooperation to this end, including through its
ongoing cooperation with the International Criminal Court, encourages [UN Mission] to use its existing authority to assist
the government of [affected country] in this regard, and calls on all signatories of the [regional agreement] to continue to
implement their commitments and cooperate fully with one another and the Government of [affected country], as well as
[UN Mission] to this end
Decides that the … authorities [of the affected country] shall cooperate fully with and provide any
necessary assistance to the Court and the Prosecutor pursuant to [resolution referring the situation to
the ICC] and, while recognizing that States not party to the Rome Statute have no obligation under the
Statute, urges all States and concerned regional and other international organizations to cooperate fully
with the Court and the Prosecutor;
Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, Decides to refer the situation … to the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court; Decides that [the affected State] and all other parties to the conflict … shall cooperate fully
with and provide any necessary assistance to the Court and the Prosecutor pursuant to this resolution and, while
recognizing that States not party to the Rome Statute have no obligation under the Statute, urges all States and concerned
regional and other international organizations to cooperate fully; Invites the Court and [relevant regional organizations] to
discuss practical arrangements that will facilitate the work of the Prosecutor and of the Court, including the possibility of
conducting proceedings in the region, which would contribute to regional efforts in the fight against impunity.

S/RES/2238 (2015),
op. 10
S/RES/2238 (2015),
pp. 13
S/RES/2227 (2015),
op. 5
S/RES/2211 (2015),
op. 9 (d)

S/RES/2196 (2015),
pp. 13

S/RES/2175 (2014),
pp. 9

S/RES/2149 (2014),
op. 38
S/RES/2137 (2014),
pp. 11
S/RES/2136 (2014),
op. 11

S/RES/1970 (2011),
op. 5

S/RES/1593 (2005),
op. 1-3

See also, for example,
S/RES/2222 (2015), pp.
16; S/RES/2217 (2015),
op. 33 (a), (iii), 16, and 43;
S/RES/2217 (2015), op.
16; S/RES/2213 (2015),
op. 7; S/RES/2198 (2015),
op. 16; S/RES/2174
(2014), pp. 5; S/RES/2171
(2014), pp. 20;
S/RES/2164 (2014), pp.
20; S/RES/2150 (2014),
pp. 11; S/RES/2149
(2014), op. 12;
S/RES/2112 (2013), pp.
13; S/RES/2101 (2013),
pp. 16; S/RES/2100
(2013), pp. 10;
S/RES/2098 (2013), pp.
20; S/RES/2095 (2013),
pp. 6 and op. 4;
S/PRST/2013/2 (2013),
par. 9; S/RES/2078
(2012), op. 19;
S/RES/1991 (2011), op.
19; S/RES/1970 (2011),
op. 4; S/RES/1925 (2010),
pp. 12; S/RES/1906
(2009), pp. 10.

S/PRST/2015/23

66/98

Referral of situations
involving genocide,
crimes against
humanity or war
crimes to, and
cooperation with, the
International
Criminal Court

15-20840

Restoration of the
rule of law

Disarmament,
demobilization and
reintegration, and
disarmament,
demobilization,
repatriation,
resettlement and
reintegration

S/RES/2232 (2015),
op. 10
S/RES/2226 (2015),
op. 13
S/RES/2157 (2014),
pp. 7
S/RES/2151 (2014),
pp. 15

S/RES/2147 (2014),
pp. 28
S/RES/2145 (2014),
op. 38

See also, for example,
S/RES/2140 (2014), op. 8;
S/RES/2121 (2013), op.3;
S/RES/2120 (2013),
pp.28; S/RES/2116
(2013), op.19;
S/RES/2070 (2012), pp.
25; S/RES/2067 (2012),
op. 11; S/RES/2066
(2012), op. 8 and op. 18;
S/RES/2012 (2011), pp.
21 and pp. 23;
S/RES/1917 (2010),
op. 33; S/RES/1906
(2009), op. 3; S/RES/1896
(2009), pp. 11;
S/RES/1892 (2009), pp. 7
and pp. 9; and
S/RES/1868 (2009), pp.
15 and op. 23.

S/RES/2134 (2013),
op. 4
S/RES/2134 (2013),
pp. 3
S/RES/2041 (2012),
op. 37
S/RES/2012 (2011),
pp. 18
S/RES/2226 (2015),
pp. 11

S/RES/2198 (2015),
op. 13

S/RES/2162 (2014),
pp. 11

See also, for example,
S/RES/2217 (2015), pp.
28; S/RES/2198 (2015),
pp. 10; S/RES/2196
(2015), pp. 19;
S/RES/2134 (2014), pp.
15; S/RES/2101 (2013),
pp. 8; S/RES/2088 (2013),
op.12; S/RES/2062
(2012), pp. 6; S/RES/2053
(2012), op. 22;
S/RES/2031 (2011), op. 7;
S/RES/1991 (2011), op.
15

S/PRST/2015/23

67/98

Underlines that it is essential that military operations are followed immediately by national efforts to establish or improve
governance structures in recovered areas and by the delivery of basic services, including security
… calls on the Government to create the enabling environment to ensure that the work of the [national] judicial system is
impartial, credible, transparent and consistent with internationally agreed standards and, in this regard, welcomes the
renewal of [ad hoc national judiciary cell], and encourages the Government to continue to provide it with the support it
needs to conduct its investigations
Expressing concern at the lack of effective civilian control and oversight over the defence and security forces, which
hampers the political process and effective functioning of State institutions, as a result of collusion between some political
actors and the military leadership
Reiterating the importance of the rule of law as one of the key elements of conflict prevention, peacekeeping, conflict
resolution and peacebuilding and reiterating the statement by its President of 21 February 2014 (S/PRST/2014/5), and
recalling that security sector reform must take place within a broad framework of the rule of law, and noting in this regard
the contribution that effective, professional and accountable police services, that provide security to the population, can
make in building trust between State authorities and communities and restoring the rule of law in post-conflict countries
Urging the Government of [affected country] to remain fully committed … to protecting the civilian population through the
swift establishment of professional, accountable and sustainable security forces, the deployment of an accountable
[national] civil administration, in particular the police, judiciary, prison and territorial administration and the consolidation
of rule of law and promotion and protection of human rights
Reiterates the importance of completing the [national justice reform programme], by all the relevant [national] institutions
and other actors in view of accelerating the establishment of a fair and transparent justice system, eliminating impunity and
contributing to the affirmation of the rule of law throughout the country
Recalls the need for the [national] Authorities to restore state authority over the whole territory of the country and
underlines in this context the importance of [UN Mission]’s further expansion in the provinces
Expressing deep concern at the continuing deterioration of the security situation in [affected country], characterized by a
total breakdown in law and order, the absence of the rule of law, religiously motivated targeted killings and arson, and
further expressing its grave concern about the consequences of instability in [affected country], on [affected] region and
beyond, and stressing in this regard the need for the international community to respond swiftly
Reiterates the importance of the full, sequenced, timely and coordinated implementation of [national
justice programs], by all the relevant [national] institutions and other actors in view of accelerating the
establishment of a fair and transparent justice system, eliminating impunity and contributing to the
affirmation of the rule of law throughout the country;
Recognizing that strengthening national human rights institutions and respect for human rights, due
process, combating criminality and sexual and gender based violence, and putting an end to impunity
are essential to ensuring the rule of law and security in [the affected country],
Taking note of the final framework on disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR) adopted by [relevant national
administrative body] of more than [X] former combatants, welcoming the initiative to enroll all former combatants in the
disarmament and demobilization program by [date] and underlining the need to continue efforts to include former
combatants associated with the previous government, taking note of the continuing work of [relevant national
administrative body], with the support of [UN Mission], in this regard, and emphasizing the need to implement post-June
2015 reinsertion activities in a coordinated manner, including through the designation by the Government of [affected
country] of a lead institution to achieve this objective
Demands that the Government of [affected country], per its commitments …, accelerate the implementation of its
Disarmament, Demobilisation and Reintegration programme, in coordination with neighbouring countries where former
[armed group] combatants have found refuge and the United Nations and international organizations, and stresses the
importance of overcoming obstacles to the repatriation of these ex-combatants, ensuring that the DDRRR programme is
fully funded and implemented, particularly those programmes necessary to support the successful demobilisation and
reintegration of former [armed group] combatants, that [armed group] does not regroup and resume military activities, and
that its members do not join or support other armed groups, in line with [affected country’s commitment] and relevant UN
Security Council resolutions
Taking note of the final framework on disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR) adopted by [relevant
Governmental agency] and the successful disarmament and demobilization of more than [X] former combatants while

S/PRST/2015/23

68/98

Security sector
reform

15-20840

expressing concern at the low ratio of former combatants associated with the previous government that has been processed
through the DDR programme and the [X] former combatants that remain armed and unemployed
Recalling the need for an inclusive and effective disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process (DDR) as well as
repatriation (DDRR) in the case of foreign fighters while respecting the need to fight against impunity
Decides that the measures referred to in [paragraph of the resolution providing for individual targeted measures] shall apply
to the following individuals, and, as appropriate, entities, as designated by the Committee: (b) Political and military leaders
of foreign armed groups operating in [affected country] who impede the disarmament and the voluntary repatriation or
resettlement of combatants belonging to those groups; (c) Political and military leaders of [national] militias, including
those receiving support from outside [affected country], who impede the participation of their combatants in disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes; … (h) Individuals or entities acting on behalf of or at the direction of a
designated individual or entity, or acting on behalf of or at the direction of an entity owned or controlled by a designated
individual or entity; … (j) Individuals or entities providing financial, material, or technological support for, or goods or
services to, or in support of a designated individual or entity
[S]tressing … the urgency of implementing comprehensive security sector reform and of achieving as appropriate the
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration (DDR) of [national] armed groups, and the disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation, resettlement and reintegration (DDRRR) of foreign armed groups for the long-term stabilization of the
[affected country], considering the need to create the security conditions for ensuring sustainable economic development,
and stressing the importance of the contribution made by international partners in these fields.
[S]tressing the importance of permanently disarming, demobilizing, resettling or repatriating, as appropriate, and
reintegrating [national] and foreign armed groups for the long-term stabilization of the [affected country], and of the
contribution made by international partners in this field.
Decides that the measures imposed by [paragraph of resolution providing for arms embargo in relation to the situation in
affected country] shall not apply to: … (c) supplies of arms and related lethal materiel to [national security forces], intended
solely for the support of or use in the [national] process of SSR, as notified in advance to the Committee established by [the
Security Council to oversee the implementation of the relevant sanctions regime], except for those arms and related lethal
materiel which are set out in the Annex of this resolution, which require the advance approval of the Committee established
[the Security Council to oversee the implementation of the relevant sanctions regime]
Reiterates the importance of increasing, in a comprehensive framework, the functionality, professionalism and
accountability of the [national] security sector through appropriate vetting procedures, training, including on child rights,
mentoring, equipping and empowerment efforts, for both women and men, in order to accelerate progress towards the goal
of self-sufficient, ethnically balanced and women-inclusive [national] security forces providing security and ensuring the
rule of law throughout the country, and stresses the importance of the long-term commitment by the international
community to ensure a capable, professional and sustainable [national security forces] and notes in this context the
establishment of the non-combat, train, advise and assist [international Mission], based on the bilateral agreements between
NATO and [affected country] and at the invitation of [affected country]
Emphasizing that good governance and oversight of policing and law enforcement services, within the framework of a
functional justice and corrections system, are important in ensuring that those services are accountable, responsive and
capable of serving the population
Underlining the importance of capacity-building of the [security forces of affected country], and in this regard reaffirming
the importance of re-establishing training, equipping and retention in the [security forces of affected country], which is vital
for the long-term stability and security of [affected country], expressing its support for the ongoing [international training
mission] and other capacity-building programmes, and emphasizing the importance of increased coordinated, timely and
sustained support from the international community
… underscoring the importance of … civilian control and oversight of [national security forces], reiterating that the
training, consolidation and redeployment of the [national security forces] are vital to ensure [affected country]’s long-term
security and stability and to protect the people of [affected country], and stressing the importance of [national security
forces] assuming full responsibility for providing security throughout the [national] territory
Underscores … the importance of accelerating the deployment of the police and gendarmerie to take over public order
tasks currently performed by [national army] and other groups, including by equipping the police and gendarmerie with
standard policing weapons and ammunition following the partial lifting of the arms embargo pursuant to [relevant
resolution]

S/RES/2149 (2014),
pp. 24
S/RES/2136 (2014),
op. 4 (b), (c), (h),
and (i)

S/RES/1925 (2010),
pp. 4

S/RES/1906 (2009),
pp. 3
S/RES/2219 (2015),
op. 4 (c)

S/RES/2210 (2015),
op. 24

S/RES/2185 (2014),
pp. 22
S/RES/2182 (2014),
pp. 10

S/RES/2164 (2014),
pp. 21
S/RES/2162 (2014),
op. 10

See also, for example,
S/RES/2227 (2015), pp.
24; S/RES/2226 (2015),
pp. 12; S/RES/2210
(2015), pp. 19;
S/RES/2196 (2015), op. 1
(f); S/RES/2151 (2014),
pp. 7; S/RES/2147 (2014),
pp. 28; S/RES/2145
(2014), pp. 21;
S/RES/2121 (2013),
op.17; S/RES/2120
(2013), pp.12;
S/RES/2112 (2013), pp. 9
and pp. 10; S/RES/2111
(2013), op. 6; S/RES/2103
(2013), op. 9; S/RES/2096
(2013), op. 24;
S/RES/2093 (2013), pp. 6
and 12; S/RES/2090
(2013), op. 11;
S/RES/2076 (2012), op.
17; S/RES/2069 (2012),
pp. 12, op. 4 and op. 6;
S/RES/2031 (2011), op. 9;
S/RES/2030 (2011), op. 5;
S/RES/2000 (2011), pp. 9;
S/RES/1991 (2011), op. 2;
S/RES/1974 (2010), pp.
22; S/RES/1959 (2010),

15-20840

Role of United
Nations Security
Council authorized
peace operations and
other relevant actors,
in restoring the rule
of law, promoting
accountability and
fighting impunity

S/RES/2153 (2014),
pp. 7

S/RES/2151 (2014),
op. 5
S/RES/2137 (2014),
op. 18

op. 8; S/RES/1949 (2010),
pp. 7; S/RES/1925 (2010),
op. 5; S/RES/1906 (2009),
pp. 3. op. 3 and op. 4;
S/RES/1896 (2009),
pp. 10; and S/RES/1872
(2009), pp. 9.

S/RES/2053 (2012),
op. 9

S/RES/2048 (2012),
pp. 12
S/RES/2012 (2011),
op. 10
S/RES/2232 (2015),
op. 29
S/RES/2227 (2015),
op. 14 (e), (i) and (ii)

S/RES/2226 (2015),
op. 16
S/RES/2226 (2015),
op. 12

S/RES/2222 (2015),
pp. 15

See also, for example,
S/RES/2226 (2015), pp.
16 and op. 19 (g);
S/RES/2222 (2015), op. 5;
S/RES/2220 (2015), pp.
10; S/RES/2211 (2015),
op. 29; S/RES/2203
(2015), op. 3 (b) and (c);
S/RES/2200 (2015), op.
21;S/Res/2198 (2015), op.
16 and 19; S/RES/2190
(2014), op. 7; S/RES/2186
(2014), pp. 11 and op. 2;
S/RES/2175 (2014), pp. 8;
S/RES/2164 (2014), op.
13 (b), (vi) and (vii);
S/RES/2162 (2014), op.
16 and 19 (g);
S/RES/2158 (2014), op. 1
(d), (iv), and 14;
S/RES/2157 (2014), op. 1
(b) to (d); S/RES/2155

S/PRST/2015/23

69/98

Welcoming the efforts made toward the security reform agenda and especially the increasing cooperation between the
National Security Council and the local authorities while expressing concern about the delays in the implementation of the
national strategy for security sector reform, in particular beyond [capital] and urging an acceleration of efforts to reform the
security sector, including by putting in place an effective chain of command, a system of military justice and appropriate
budgetary allocations
Stresses that security sector reform is critical to addressing impunity for violations and abuses of human rights and
violations of international humanitarian law, where applicable, and contributes to the rule of law
Underscores the importance of security sector reform … and urges all international partners, together with [UN Mission],
to continue supporting [affected country]’s efforts to professionalize and enhance the capacity of the national security
services and the police, in particular through vetting for human rights violations, training on human rights and sexual and
gender-based violence and promoting strong civilian oversight and monitoring, with the view to consolidating security
sector governance
Underlines the need for an overall [National] SSR strategy that focuses on the professionalization of
security sector institutions, including oversight bodies, and that helps to ensure coherence and
efficiency and avoid duplications or gaps, encourages at the same time the Government of [the
affected country], to engage in a new strategic partnership with [the mission] in the area of SSR in
order to identify the priorities of each component of the security sector and possible new approaches
for [the mission] to support [National] authorities in the area of SSR to build the capacity of the
military, police, justice and other security institutions to consolidate [National] State authority, and
requests the Secretary- General to report on these priorities and approaches in an annex to his report in
[date of the report];
Stressing the importance of Security Sector Reform implementation, including effective and
responsible civilian control over the security forces, as a crucial element for long term stability in [the
affected country], as envisaged in [the relevant document] and underlining the responsibility of police
forces in [the affected country] to protect state institutions and the civilian population,
We l c o m e s the resumption of training and promotions of recruits for the … National Police,
stresses the necessity of accountability and a robust vetting process and underscores the vital
importance of maintaining and increasing the international community’s s upport for capacity-building
of the [national police], particularly through enhanced mentoring and training of specialized units;
… encourages [national Government] to finalise its Human Rights Roadmap and establish its National Human Rights
Commission and to pass legislation including legislation aimed at protecting human rights and ensuring investigations and
prosecutions of perpetrators of human rights violations
Decides that [UN Mission] shall perform the following tasks: … (e) Promotion and protection of human rights (i) To assist
[national] authorities in their efforts to promote and protect human rights, including to support, as feasible and appropriate,
the efforts of [national] authorities, without prejudice to their responsibilities, to bring to justice those responsible for serious
abuses or violations of human rights or violations of international humanitarian law, in particular war crimes and crimes
against humanity in [affected country], taking into account the referral by [national authorities] of the situation in their
country since [month/year] to the International Criminal Court; (ii) To monitor, help investigate and report to the Security
Council and publicly, as appropriate, on violations of international humanitarian law and on violations and abuses of human
rights, including violations and abuses against children and sexual violence in armed conflict committed throughout
[affected country] and to contribute to efforts to prevent such violations and abuses
… calls upon [UN Mission], where consistent with its authorities and responsibilities, to continue to support national and
international efforts to bring to justice perpetrators of serious violations and abuses of human rights and violations of
international humanitarian law in [affected country], irrespective of their status or political affiliation
Strongly urges the Government of [affected country] to ensure in the shortest possible time frame that, irrespective of their
status or political affiliation, all those responsible for serious violations and abuses of human rights and violations of
international humanitarian law … are brought to justice in accordance with its international obligations and that all
detainees receive clarity about their status in a transparent manner, and urges the Government to continue its cooperation
with the ICC
Recalling that States Parties to the Geneva Conventions have an obligation to search for persons alleged to have committed,
or to have ordered to be committed a grave breach of these Conventions, and an obligation to try them before their own

Reiterates its demand to the security and defence services to submit themselves fully to civilian control

15-20840

Decides that the measures imposed by [paragraph of previous resolution imposing travel ban on individuals and entities
listed by the relevant Security Council sanctions Committee] shall not apply as per the criteria set out in [paragraph of
previous resolution providing for the possibility for the relevant Security Council sanctions Committee to authorize listed
individuals to travel by way of exception, on a case by case basis, inter alia when it determines that the travel is for the
purpose of participating in efforts to bring to justice perpetrators of grave violations of human rights or international
humanitarian law]
Calls upon the Government of [affected country] to move forward expeditiously and transparently to complete the
investigations of allegations of human rights violations and abuses consistent with international standards, to hold to
account all those responsible for violations and abuses of human rights and violations of international humanitarian law,

S/RES/2217 (2015),
op. 33 (a), (i) to (iii)

S/RES/2217 (2015),
op. 32 (f), (i)

S/RES/2217 (2015),
op. 32 (e), (i)
S/RES/2211 (2015),
op. 15 (f)

S/RES/2211 (2015),
op. 13 (e)

S/RES/2211 (2015),
op. 9 (d)

S/RES/2203 (2015),
op. 5
S/RES/2198 (2015),
op. 4

S/RES/2187 (2014),
op. 21

(2014), op. 19;
S/RES/2150 (2014),
pp. 10; S/RES/2149
(2014), op. 30 (e), (i) and
(ii), op. 30 (f), (i) to (iii),
and op 40; S/RES/2147
(2014), op. 5 (k) and 25;
S/RES/2144 (2014), op. 6
(b); S/RES/2136 (2014),
op. 11;S/RES/2127
(2013), op. 18;
S/RES/2121 (2013),
op.10; S/RES/2112
(2013), op. 15;
S/RES/2119 (2013),
op.14; S/RES/2109
(2013), op. 15 and op. 22;
S/RES/2103 (2013), op. 6;
S/RES/2102 (2013), op. 2;
S/RES/2100 (2013), op.
16 and op. 27;
S/RES/2098 (2013), op.
12; S/RES/2095 (2013),
op. 7; S/RES/2090 (2013),
op. 7; S/RES/2066 (2012),
op. 8; S/RES/2063 (2012),
op. 13; S/RES/2062
(2012), op. 13;
S/RES/2027 (2011), op. 9
and op. 11; S/RES/1996
(2011), op. 3 and op. 18;
S/RES/1959 (2010), op. 3;
S/RES/1936 (2010), pp. 7;
S/RES/1925 (2010), op.
12 (c), (d), (l), (o) and (p);
S/RES/1927 (2010), op. 6;
S/RES/1923 (2010), op. 8;
S/RES/1906 (2009),
op. 39; S/RES/1892
(2009), op. 10;
S/RES/1890 (2009), op. 4;
S/RES/1880 (2009), op.
26; S/RES/1872 (2009),
op. 9; S/RES/1868 (2009),
op. 4; S/RES/1756 (2007),
op. 3; S/RES/1702 (2006),
op. 14; S/RES/1589
(2005), op. 9; S/RES/1564
(2004), op. 9; S/RES/1547
(2004), op. 4; and
S/RES/1528 (2004), op. 6;

S/PRST/2015/23

70/98

courts, regardless of their nationality, or may hand them over for trial to another concerned State provided this State has
made out prima facie case against the said persons
Further authorises [UN mission] to use its capacities to assist [national authorities] for, and, where relevant, implement, the
following essential tasks: (a) Support for national and international justice and the rule of law (i) To help build the
capacities, including through technical assistance, of the national judicial system and of the national human rights
institutions and assist with national reconciliation efforts, coordinating with the Independent Expert on human rights as
appropriate; (ii) To provide support and to coordinate international assistance to the policing, justice and correctional
institutions to reinstate the criminal justice system, within the framework of the United Nations global focal point on rule of
law, including through assistance in the maintenance of public safety and basic law and order, in a manner that emphasizes
civilian oversight, impartiality and the protection of human rights; (iii) to support the restoration and maintenance of public
safety and the rule of law including through the presence and assistance of United Nations police authorized in [paragraph
of resolution], including through arresting and handing over to [national authorities] those responsible for serious human
rights violations and abuses and serious violations of international humanitarian law in the country so that they can be
brought to justice, and through cooperation with States of the region as well as the ICC in cases of crimes falling within its
jurisdiction
Decides that the mandate of [UN Mission] shall include the following immediate priority tasks: (f) Urgent temporary
measures (UTMs) (i) To continue to adopt, within the limits of its capacities and areas of deployment, at the formal request
of [national authorities] and in areas where national security forces or judicial authorities are not present or operational,
urgent temporary measures on an exceptional basis and without creating a precedent and without prejudice to the agreed
principles of peacekeeping operations, which are limited in scope, time bound and consistent with the objectives set out in
[relevant paragraphs of the resolution], to arrest and detain in order to maintain basic law and order and fight impunity
Decides that the mandate of [UN Mission] shall include the following immediate priority tasks: … (e) Promotion and
protection of human rights (i) … to contribute to efforts to identify and prosecute perpetrators, and to prevent such
violations and abuses, including through the deployment of human rights observers
Authorizes [UN Mission], in support of [national] authorities and their efforts to deliver the reforms called by [regional
agreement] and stabilisation in [area of affected country], to contribute to the following tasks, in coordination with the
United Nations Country Team (UNCT) and other actors, including through the SRSG’s good offices; … (f) Provide good
offices, advice and support to the Government of [affected country] for the development of a national justice strategy, and
the implementation of justice and prison sector reform, in order to develop independent, accountable and functioning
justice and security institutions
Authorizes [UN Mission], in support of [national] authorities and their efforts to stabilize [area in affected country], to
contribute to the following tasks, including through the SRSG’s good offices; … (e) Provide good offices, advice and
support to the Government of [affected country] to promote human rights and political rights and to fight impunity,
including through the implementation of the Government’s “zero tolerance policy” with respect to discipline and human
rights and international humanitarian law violations, committed by elements of the security sector
Authorizes [UN Mission], in pursuit of the objectives described in [previous paragraph], to take all necessary measures to
perform the following tasks, bearing in mind that these are mutually reinforcing tasks; … (d) Support and work with the
authorities of [affected country] to arrest and bring to justice those allegedly responsible for genocide, war crimes and
crimes against humanity and violations of international humanitarian law and violations or abuses of human rights in the
country, including leaders of armed groups, including through cooperation with States of the region and the ICC

15-20840

and S/RES/1265 (1999),
op. 15
S/RES/2186 (2014),
op. 3
S/RES/2164 (2014),
op. 13 (c), (i) and (ii)

S/RES/2157 (2014),
op. 3
S/RES/2149 (2014),
op. 30 (e), (iii)
S/RES/2137 (2014),
op. 14
S/RES/2134 (2014),
op. 2 (e)

S/PRST/2014/28,
para. 23
SPRST/2014/5,
para. 12

SPRST/2014/5,
para. 11
SPRST/2014/5,
para. 7

S/PRST/2015/23

71/98

and to ensure that all victims of sexual violence have equal protection under the law and equal access to justice, and to
safeguard equal respect for the rights of women and girls in these processes
Urges the authorities of [affected country] to take all necessary measures to protect human rights, put an end to impunity,
initiate investigations to identify the perpetrators of human rights violations and abuses and bring them to justice and take
action to protect witnesses in order to ensure due process
Decides that the mandate of [UN Mission] shall focus on the following priority tasks: (c) Support to the re-establishment of
State authority throughout the country, the rebuilding of the [national] security sector, the promotion and protection of
human rights and the support for humanitarian assistance (i) To support the [national] authorities to extend and re-establish
State administration throughout the country, especially in [area in affected country], in line with [peace agreement] and the
ceasefire agreement of [date]; (ii) To support national, and to coordinate international, efforts towards rebuilding the
[national] security sector, especially the police and gendarmerie through technical assistance, capacity-building, co-location
and mentoring programmes, as well as the rule of law and justice sectors, within its capacities and in close collaboration
with other bilateral partners, donors and international organizations, including the EU, engaged in these fields, including
through enhancing information sharing and joint strategic planning among all actors
… urges the authorities of [affected country] to take all necessary measures to protect human rights, put an end to impunity,
initiate investigations to identify the perpetrators of such acts and bring them to justice and take action to protect witnesses
in order to ensure due process; also urges them to take steps to mitigate the climate of fear resulting from restrictions on
freedom of expression and freedom of assembly
Decides that the mandate of [UN Mission] shall initially focus on the following priority tasks: (e) Promotion and protection
of human rights (iii) To support the International Commission of Inquiry [mandated by the Security Council to investigate
international humanitarian law and human rights law violations, and human rights abuses, committed in the affected
country during the crisis] and the implementation of its recommendations
Calls upon the Government of [affected country] to take measures to fight impunity and support thorough, credible,
impartial and transparent investigations, including by reinforcing the protection of victims, of their relatives and of
witnesses, and to intensify efforts to ensure that those responsible for human rights violations and abuses as well as
restrictions on civil liberties are held accountable
Decides that the mandate of [UN Mission] shall be reinforced and updated as follows: (e) Promotion and protection of
human rights: To help strengthen the capacities, including through technical assistance, of the national judicial system,
including transitional justice mechanisms, and of the national human rights institutions and assist with national
reconciliation efforts, coordinating with the International Commission of Inquiry [mandated by the Security Council to
investigate international humanitarian law and human rights law violations, and human rights abuses, committed in the
affected country during the crisis] as well as the Independent Expert [on the situation of human rights in the affected
country], as appropriate
The Security Council calls for cooperation between all relevant institutions and mechanisms contributing to investigations
and prosecutions of crimes involving violations of international humanitarian law and violations and abuses of human
rights
The Security Council recognizes the contribution of national justice systems to fight against impunity for serious violations
of international humanitarian law and human rights law and underlines the importance of strengthening national
accountability mechanisms with full respect for due process and the rights of the defence, including building investigative,
prosecutorial and witness protection capacities, in post-conflict countries. The Council also highlights that regional and
subregional organizations and arrangements can contribute to accountability through support for enhancing the capacity of
national justice systems
… The Council emphasizes the responsibility of States to comply with their relevant obligations to end impunity and to
thoroughly investigate and prosecute persons responsible for war crimes, genocide and crimes against humanity in order to
prevent these crimes, avoid their recurrence and seek sustainable peace, justice, truth and reconciliation. The Council
welcomes concerted efforts at the national and international levels to this end.
The Security Council, with respect to activities in the rule of law field that may be a part of mandates of peacekeeping
operations and special political missions: … –notes the important role that the police components of peacekeeping
operations can play in strengthening the rule of law in conflict and post- conflict situations, by, inter alia, providing
operational support to national police and other law enforcement agencies and supporting the reform, restructuring and
rebuilding of such agencies, including through technical assistance, co-location, training and mentoring programmes; … –
emphasizes that mission planning processes for mandated rule of law activities undertaken by peacekeeping operations and

S/PRST/2015/23

72/98

Role of United
Nations Security
Council authorized
peace operations and
other relevant actors,
in disarmament,
demobilization and
reintegration
programmes, and in
security sector
reforms

special political missions should give full consideration to supporting national efforts to build rule of law institutions, taking
into account the host country’s specific needs
Encourages the Government of [the affected country] to ratify and implement key international human
rights treaties and conventions, including those related to women and children, refugees, and
statelessness, and requests [the mission], with other United Nations actors, to advise and assist the
Government of [the affected country] in this regard;
Requests [the mission] to continue to provide interim law enforcement and ensure the maintenance of
public security in those districts and units in which the [national police] has yet to resume primary
policing responsibilities, and, following [national police’s] resumption of primary policing
responsibilities, to provide operational support to the [national police] …
Decides that the mandate of [UN Mission] shall be the following: … (d) Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme (DDR) and collection of weapons – To assist the Government, in close coordination with other bilateral and
international partners, in implementing, at the national and local levels, the national programme for the DDR of former
combatants and dismantling of militias and self-defence groups, taking into account the rights and needs of the distinct
categories of persons to be disarmed, demobilized and reintegrated, including children and women; – To support the
registration and screening of former combatants and assist in assessing and verifying the reliability of the listings of former
combatants; – To support the disarmament and repatriation of foreign armed elements, where relevant in cooperation with
[UN Mission in neighboring country] and United Nations Country Teams in the region; (e) Reconstitution and reform of
security institutions – To assist the Government in implementing, without delay and in close coordination with other
international partners, its comprehensive national security strategy; – To support the Government in providing effective,
transparent and harmonized coordination of assistance, including the promotion of a clear division of tasks and
responsibilities, by international partners to the security sector reform (SSR) process; – To advise the Government, as
appropriate, on SSR and the organization of the future national army, to facilitate the provision of training, within its current
resources and as requested by the Government and in close coordination with other international partners, in human rights,
child protection and protection from sexual and gender-based violence to the security and law enforcement institutions, as
well as capacity-building support by providing technical assistance, co-location and mentoring programmes for [national
security forces] and to contribute to restoring their presence throughout [affected country] and to promote trust and
confidence within and between the security and law enforcement agencies and to offer support to the development of a
sustainable vetting mechanism for personnel that will be absorbed into security sector institutions
Calls upon the Government of [affected country] to accelerate the implementation of the national security sector reform
strategy adopted in [month/year] and updated in [year] with a view to setting up inclusive and accountable security forces
that include an effective chain of command, a system of military justice and adequate and sustainable budgetary allocations
Decides that [national authorities] shall submit biannual reports to the Committee [established by the Security Council to
oversee the implementation of the relevant sanctions regime] by [date] and by [date] on progress achieved in relation to
DDR and SSR
… re-emphasizing that the Government of [affected country] must provide sufficient financial resources and develop viable
reintegration opportunities for former combatants in order to complete the DDR process before [deadline] in accordance
with the objective announced by the President of [affected country], and stressing the necessity for continued efforts to
target unregistered combatants and to follow up on DDR efforts after [deadline] in order to ensure their sustainability
Decides that the mandate of [UN Mission] shall include the following immediate priority tasks: … (g) Disarmament,
Demobilization, Reintegration (DDR) and Repatriation (DDRR) (i) To support [national authorities] in developing and
implementing a revised strategy for the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR) and, in case of foreign
elements, Repatriation (DDRR), of former combatants and armed elements to reflect new realities on the ground, while
paying specific attention to the needs of children associated with armed forces and groups; (ii) To support [national
authorities] in implementing the revised strategy for reintegration of former combatants in line with the wider SSR; (iii) To
support [national authorities] in developing and implementing community violence reduction programmes; (iv) To regroup
and canton combatants in accordance with [relevant article of applicable cessation of hostilities agreement] and in
cooperation with [national authorities] and destroy, as appropriate, the weapons and ammunitions of disarmed combatants
in keeping with its effort to seize and collect arms and related materiel the supply, sale or transfer of which violate the
measures imposed by [paragraph of resolution imposing arms embargo]

S/RES/2057 (2012),
op. 13
S/RES/1969 (2011),
op. 8
S/RES/2226 (2015),
op. 19 (d) and (e)

S/RES/2226 (2015),
op. 9
S/RES/2219 (2015),
op. 8
S/RES/2219 (2015),
pp. 8
S/RES/2217 (2015),
op. 32 (g), (i) to (iv)

See also, for example,
S/RES/2226 (2015), op. 8;
S/RES/2217 (2015). Op.
33 (b), (i) and (ii);
S/RES/2211 (2015), op.
16, 26, 27 and 34;
S/RES/2203 (2015), pp. 8;
S/RES/2185 (2014), op. 5
and 6; S/RES/2164
(2014), op. 5 and 13 (b),
(iii) and (iv); S/RES/2162
(2014), op. 7, 8 and 19 (d);
S/RES/2149 (2014), op.
13 and 30 (g);
S/RES/2147 (2014), op. 5
(a), (g) and (i), and op. 21;
S/RES/2137 (2014), op.
18; S/RES/2136 (2014),
op. 9; S/RES/2134 (2014),
op. 2 (d) and 8;
S/RES/2127 (2013), op.
11, 12, and 22;
S/RES/2121 (2013),
op.10; S/RES/2112
(2013), op. 6 (c) and (d),
op. 8, op. 11 and op. 12;
S/RES/2109 (2013), op.
24; S/RES/2100 (2013),
op. 22 and op. 23;
S/RES/2098 (2013), op.
15; S/RES/2085 (2012),
op. 8 and op. 9;
S/RES/2053 (2012), op. 8,
op. 9, op. 10, op. 11 and
op. 22; S/RES/2040
(2012), op. 6; S/RES/2030
(2011), op. 6; S/RES/2027
(2011), op. 6; S/RES/2012
(2011), op. 9; S/RES/2000
(2011), op. 7 e) and f);

15-20840

15-20840

S/RES/2217 (2015),
op. 10

Authorizes [UN Mission], in support of [national] authorities and their efforts to deliver the reforms called by [regional
agreement] and stabilisation in [area of affected country], to contribute to the following tasks, in coordination with the
United Nations Country Team (UNCT) and other actors, including through the SRSG’s good offices; … (c) Provide good
offices, advice and support to the Government of [affected country] to encourage and accelerate national ownership of
security sector reform by the Government of [affected country], including through developing a national strategy for the
establishment of effective and accountable security institutions, as well as the development of a clear and comprehensive
SSR implementation roadmap including benchmarks and timelines, and play a leading role in coordinating the support for
SSR provided by international and bilateral partners and the United Nations system; (d) Provide good offices, advice and
support to the Government of [affected country], in compliance with the HRDDP, for army reform that would enhance its
accountability, efficiency, self-sustainability and effectiveness, including, the support of a vetted, well-trained and
adequately equipped [special force] within [national army] which should form the nucleus for a professional, accountable,
well-sustained and effective national defence force, while noting that any support provided by the United Nations,
including in the form of rations and fuel, should be subject to appropriate oversight and scrutiny; (e) Provide good offices,
advice and support to the Government of [affected country] for the reform of the police, including by contributing, in
compliance with the HRDDP, to the provision of training to units of [national police] and including human rights training
Authorizes [UN Mission], in support of [national] authorities and their efforts to stabilize [area in affected country], to
contribute to the following tasks, including through the SRSG’s good offices; … (c) Provide good offices, advice and
support to the Government of [affected country], in close cooperation with other international partners, in the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) of … combatants [from affected country] not suspected of genocide, war crimes,
crimes against humanity or abuses of human rights, into a peaceful civilian life in line with a community-based approach
that is coordinated …, while paying specific attention to the needs of children formerly associated with armed forces and
groups; (d) Provide support to the disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, resettlement and reintegration (DDRRR)
process to return and reintegrate foreign combatants not suspected of genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity or
abuses of human rights and their dependents to a peaceful civilian life in their country of origin, or a receptive third country
while paying specific attention to the needs of children formerly associated with armed forces and groups
Affirms the importance of the role that United Nations Police Components can play, where mandated, in … helping to
build and reform policing and law enforcement institutions of the host State so they are able to sustainably and consistently
protect civilians
… requests the Secretary-General to consider, as appropriate, security sector reform, including reform of policing and other
law enforcement institutions, in the overall strategic planning of peacekeeping operations and special political missions in
each country-specific context, and to work with Member States to enhance the capabilities and expertise of United Nations
Police Components in relation to capacity development and institution building, including in the areas of: a. operational
policing, including community-oriented policing and information-based policing; b. administration, management and
leadership; c. governance, oversight and evaluation; d. policy formulation and strategic planning; and e. coordination with
partners
Welcoming the progress made in the overall security situation and efforts to address security challenges while expressing
concern at delays in implementation of security sector reform and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of former
combatants, welcoming efforts towards better monitoring and management of weapons through the [relevant national
commission], with the support of [UN Mission], and emphasizing the importance of continued efforts in this area, reemphasizing the necessity of the … Government [of affected country] to provide sufficient financial resources and to
develop viable reintegration opportunities for former combatants in order to ensure the achievement of the DDR process by
[month/year] at the latest
The Security Council, with respect to activities in the rule of law field that may be a part of mandates of peacekeeping
operations and special political missions: … – emphasizes the importance of a sector-wide approach for security sector
reform, which enhances the rule of law, including through the establishment of independent justice and correction systems,

S/RES/2211 (2015),
op. 15 (c) to (e)

S/RES/1996 (2011), op. 3;
S/RES/1991 (2011), op.
11 and op. 12;
S/RES/1964 (2010), op. 6,
op. 8, op. 11 and op. 12;
S/RES/1919 (2010), op.
17; S/RES/1910 (2010),
op. 12; and S/RES/1880
(2009), op. 27.

S/RES/2211 (2015),
op. 13 (c) and (d)

S/RES/2185 (2014),
op. 18
S/RES/2185 (2014),
op. 9

S/RES/2153 (2014),
pp. 8

S/PRST/2014/5,
para. 7

S/PRST/2015/23

73/98

Urges [national authorities], with the support of [UN Mission] and [international assistance Mission], to adopt a strategy for
a comprehensive reform of [national army] and [national security forces] in order to put in place professional, ethnically
representative and regionally balanced national defence and internal security forces, including through the adoption of
appropriate human rights vetting procedures of all defence and security personnel as well as measures to absorb elements
of armed groups meeting, rigorous selection and vetting criteria, and requests the Secretary-General to report to the Council
on progress taken in this regard

S/PRST/2015/23

74/98

and reaffirms that effective security sector reform requires developing a professional, effective and accountable security
sector that is under the civilian oversight of a democratic government
… urges all international partners, together with [the Mission], to continue supporting [the affected
country]’s efforts to professionalize and enhance the capacity of the national security services and the
police, in particular through vetting for human rights violations, training on human rights and sexual
and gender-based violence and promoting strong civilian oversight and monitoring, with the view to
consolidating security sector governance;
Urges the [National] Government to develop and implement expeditiously a national DDR
programme, with clear and strict eligibility criteria, new secure and transparent database, the creation
of a central authority to oversee all DDR aspects, and find solutions f or sustained social and economic
integration of former combatants, further encourages the United Nations Country Team to facilitate the
planning and the implementation of programmes which support this process, in consultation with the
[National] Government and close collaboration with all international partners;
Reaffirms the importance that the Government of [the affected country] continues the review and
reform of the security sector in [the affected country], in particular the need to delineate between the
roles and responsibilities of [the national security forces of the affected country], to strengthen legal
frameworks, and to enhance civilian oversight and accountability mechanisms of both security
institutions, supports the efforts of the SRSG to promote Security Sector professionalization and
requests [the mission] to continue to support the Government of [the affected country], as requested,
in its efforts in the country;
Reiterates that future reconfigurations of [the mission] should be determined on the basis of the
evolution of the situation on the ground and on the achievement of the following objectives to be
pursued by the Government of the [affected country] and the United Nations Mission: … (b) An
improved capacity of the Government … to effectively protect the population through the
establishment of professional, accountable and sustainable security forces with a view to progressively
taking over [the mission]’s security role.
Encourages [the mission] to work closely with the [national] Armed Forces … to reinvigorate the disarmament,
demobilization, and reintegration (DDR) process and to assist in voluntary disarmament and weapons collection and
destruction efforts in implementation of DDR … and to ensure the timely provisions of sustainable reintegration
programmes, which will help to promote continued and enhanced funding support from donors for the reintegration phase,
and to coordinate with local authorities and with the United Nations agencies programmes and funds, initiatives that
strengthen DDR with the creation of economic opportunities for reintegrated individuals and further urges donors to
respond to calls for assistance to the DDR process, in particular the reintegration phase, and calls on donors to honour all
obligations and pledges of assistance, and takes note in this context of the need to also assist the victims in conflict-affected
communities.
Further requests [the mission] to provide military training, including in the area of human rights, international humanitarian
law, child protection and the prevention of gender-based and sexual violence, to the [armed forces] …, as part of broader
international efforts to support security sector reform.
Requests [the mission] … to also continue to contribute … to assist the Government of [the affected country] in restoring a
civilian policing presence throughout [the affected country], and to advise the Government of [the affected country] on the
restructuring of the internal security services and in re-establishing the authority of the judiciary and the rule of law
throughout [the affected country].

S/RES/2090 (2013),
op. 11

S/RES/2062 (2012),
op. 7

S/RES/2037 (2012),
op. 4

S/RES/1991 (2011),
op.4

S/RES/1919 (2010),
op. 18

S/RES/1906 (2009),
op. 31
S/RES/1880 (2009),
op. 27

G. Media and information
Protection of
journalists

15-20840

Recalls in this regard that journalists, media professionals and associated personnel engaged in dangerous professional
missions in areas of armed conflict shall be considered as civilians and shall be respected and protected as such, provided
that they take no action adversely affecting their status as civilians. This is without prejudice to the right of war
correspondents accredited to the armed forces to the status of prisoners of war provided for in article 4.A.4 of the Third
Geneva Convention
Condemns all violations and abuses committed against journalists, media professionals and associated personnel in
situations of armed conflict, and calls upon all parties to armed conflict to bring an end to such practices

S/RES/2222 (2015),
op. 3

S/RES/2222 (2015),
op. 1

See also, for example,
S/RES/2222 (2015), pp. 4,
6, 7, and op. 4, 6, 7, 8, and
13; S/RES/2145 (2014),
op. 42; S/RES/2096
(2013), op. 42;
S/PRST/2013/2 (2013),

15-20840

Countering
incitement to violence

S/RES/2222 (2015),
pp. 10
S/RES/2165 (2014),
pp. 12

par. 16; S/RES/1975
(2011), op. 9; and
S/RES/1738 (2006), p.p.
11, op. 1 and op. 2.

S/RES/2139 (2014),
op. 11
S/RES/2093 (2013),
op. 30
S/RES/1973 (2011),
pp. 6
S/RES/1738 (2006),
op. 3
S/RES/1738 (2006),
op. 6
S/RES/2226 (2015),
op. 19 (i)

S/RES/2223 (2015),
pp. 20

See also, for example,
S/RES/2206 (2015), pp.
23; S/RES/2187 (2014),
pp. 15; S/RES/2162
(2014), op. 19 (i);
S/RES/2155 (2014), pp.
14; S/RES/2126 (2013),
op. 11; S/RES/1962
(2010), op. 12;
S/RES/1727 (2006), op.
12.

S/RES/2222 (2015),
pp. 14
S/RES/2187 (2014),
pp. 5
S/RES/2046 (2012),
op.1
S/RES/1975 (2011),
pp. 8
S/RES/1946 (2010),
op. 6
S/RES/1933 (2010),
op. 10

S/RES/1738 (2006),
op. 4

S/PRST/2015/23

75/98

Deeply concerned at the frequency of acts of violence in many parts of the world against journalists, media professionals,
and associated personnel in armed conflict, in particular deliberate attacks in violation of international humanitarian law
… recalling … its demand that all parties to armed conflict comply fully with the obligations applicable to them under
international law related to the protection of civilians in armed conflict, including journalists, media professionals and
associated personnel
demands … the release of all arbitrarily detained persons starting with women and children, as well as sick, wounded and
elderly people and including United Nations personnel and journalists;
Recalls the obligation of the … Government … with respect to the protection of journalists, the
prevention of violence against them, and the fight against impunity for perpetrators of such acts;
Further condemning acts of violence and intimidation committed by the authorities [of the affected
country] against journalists, media professionals and associated personnel and urging these authorities
to comply with their obligations under international humanitarian law as outlined in [relevant
resolution]
Recalls … that media equipment and installations constitute civilian objects, and in this respect shall not be the object of
attack or of reprisals, unless they are military objectives.
Urges States and all other parties to an armed conflict to do their utmost to prevent violations of international humanitarian
law against civilians, including journalists, media professionals and associated personnel.
Decides that the mandate of [UN Mission] shall be the following: … (i) Public information – … To
monitor any public incidents of incitement to hatred, intolerance and violence, and bring to the
attention of the Council all individuals identified as instigators of political violen ce, and to keep the
Committee established [by the Security Council to oversee the implementation of sanctions regime in
relation to the situation in affected country] informed of any significant developments in this regard,
when appropriate
Strongly condemning the use of media to broadcast hate speech and transmit messages instigating
violence against a particular ethnic group, which has the potential to play a significant role in
promoting mass violence and exacerbating conflict, calling on the Government to ta ke the appropriate
measures in order to deter such activity, and further urging all parties to desist from these actions and
instead contribute to promoting peace and reconciliation among the communities
Reaffirming its condemnation of all incitements to violence against civilians in situations of armed
conflict, and condemning the use of the media to incite violence, genocide, crimes against humanity
and other serious violations of international humanitarian law
Strongly condemning … the incitement to commit [violations of international humanitarian law and
violations and abuses of human rights], further condemning harassment and targeting of … journalists
…
Decides that [affected States] shall take the following actions with immediate effect unless otherwise
specified below: (vi) Immediately cease hostile propaganda and inflammatory statements in the media
…
Condemning unequivocally all provocative action and statements that constitute incitement to
discrimination, hostility, hatred and violence made by any party,
Underlines that it is fully prepared to impose targeted measures against persons to be designated by the
[sanction] Committee … who are determined to be, among other things: … (e) Inciting publicly hatred
and violence …
Urges every [citizen of the affected State] to refrain from any call for hatred, intolerance and violence, notes with interest
that in his report … the Secretary-General encouraged the Security Council to impose targeted sanctions against media
actors who fan political tension and incite violence and reiterates that it is fully prepared to impose targeted measures …,
including among other things against persons who are determined to be a threat to the peace and national reconciliation
process in [the affected country] or to be publicly inciting hatred and violence.
Reaffirms its condemnation of all incitements to violence against civilians in situations of armed conflict, further reaffirms
the need to bring to justice, in accordance with applicable international law, individuals who incite such violence, and
indicates its willingness, when authorizing missions, to consider, where appropriate, steps in response to media broadcast
inciting genocide, crimes against humanity and serious violations of international humanitarian law.

S/PRST/2015/23

76/98

Accurate
management of
information on the
conflict

Decides that all States shall take the necessary measures, for a period of twelve months, to prevent the entry into or transit
through their territories of all persons … who constitute a threat to the peace and national reconciliation process in [the
affected State], [including] any other person who incites publicly hatred and violence … provided that nothing in this
paragraph shall oblige a State to refuse entry into its territory to its own nationals.
Reaffirms its condemnation of all incitements to violence against civilians in situations of armed conflict, further reaffirms
the need to bring to justice individuals who incite or otherwise cause such violence, and indicates its willingness, when
authorizing missions, to consider, where appropriate, steps in response to media broadcasts inciting genocide, crimes
against humanity and serious violations of international humanitarian law.
Recalls also that media equipment and installations constitute civilian objects, and in this respect shall not be the object of
attack or of reprisals, unless they are military objectives
Urges all parties involved in situations of armed conflict to respect the professional independence and rights of journalists,
media professionals and associated personnel as civilians
Affirms that the work of a free, independent and impartial media constitutes one of the essential foundations of a
democratic society, and thereby can contribute to the protection of civilians
Recognizing that journalists, media professionals and associated personnel can play an important role in protection of
civilians and conflict prevention by acting as an early warning mechanism in identifying and reporting potential situations
that could result in genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity
Affirms that, where appropriate, United Nations peacekeeping missions should include a mass-media component that can
disseminate information about international humanitarian law and human rights law, including peace education and
children’s protection, while also giving objective information about the activities of the United Nations, and further affirms
that, where appropriate, regional peacekeeping operations should be encouraged to include such mass-media components.

S/RES/1572 (2004),
op. 9
S/RES/1296 (2000),
op. 17
S/RES/2222 (2015),
op. 10
S/RES/2222 (2015),
op. 9
S/RES/2222 (2015),
op. 2
S/RES/2222 (2015),
pp. 13

See also, for example,
S/RES/1738 (2006), op. 8

S/RES/1296 (2000),
op. 18

II. SPECIFIC PROTECTION CONCERNS ARISING FROM SECURITY COUNCIL DISCUSSIONS ON CHILDREN
AFFECTED BY ARMED CONFLICT
Express concern at
acts, threats or
situations of violence
against children, and
condemn violations
of international
humanitarian law
involving children

15-20840

Strongly condemns all violations of applicable international law involving the recruitment and use of children by parties to
armed conflict as well as their re-recruitment, killing and maiming, rape and other forms of sexual violence, abductions,
attacks against schools and hospitals as well as denial of humanitarian access by parties to armed conflict and all other
violations of international law, including international humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee law, committed
against children in situations of armed conflict and demands that all relevant parties immediately put an end to such
practices and take special measures to protect children
Expressing grave concern over the abduction of children in situations of armed conflict, the majority of which are
perpetrated by non-State armed groups, recognizing that abductions occur in a variety of settings, including schools,
further recognizing that abduction often precedes or follows other abuses and violations of applicable international law
against children, including those involving recruitment and use, killing and maiming, as well as rape and other forms of
sexual violence, which may amount to war crimes or crimes against humanity, and calling on all Member States to hold
perpetrators of abductions accountable
Gravely concerned by the detrimental effects of the illicit transfer, destabilizing accumulation and misuse of small arms
and light weapons on children in armed conflict, in particular due to recruitment and use of children by parties to armed
conflict, as well as their re-recruitment, killing and maiming, rape and other sexual violence, abductions, and attacks on
schools and hospitals in violation of international law
Expresses its strong concern about the recruitment and use of children by [armed groups] in [affected country] as well as
the killing and maiming of children as a result of the conflict, reiterates its strong condemnation of the recruitment and use
of child soldiers in violation of applicable international law and all other violations and abuses committed against children
in situations of armed conflict, in particular those involving attacks against schools, education and health-care facilities,
including the burning and forced closure of schools, and the intimidation, abduction and killing of education personnel,
particularly those attacks targeting girls’ education by illegal armed groups, including [armed group], and noting, in this
context, the listing of [armed group] in the annex of the report of the Secretary-General on Children and Armed Conflict
[ref.], and the use of children in suicide attacks, and calls for those responsible to be brought to justice
Expressing grave concern over reports of the use of child soldiers by [armed groups in affected country] and government
forces

S/RES/2225 (2015),
op. 1

S/RES/2225 (2015),
pp. 12

S/RES/2220 (2015),
pp. 7
S/RES/2210 (2015),
op. 31

S/RES/2201 (2015),
pp. 7

See also, for example,
S/RES/2225 (2015), pp.
15; S/RES/2223 (2015),
op. 22; S/RES/2217
(2015), pp. 24;
S/RES/2198 (2015), op.
10; S/RES/2190 (2014),
pp.17; S/RES/2169
(2014), pp. 13;
S/RES/2158 (2014), op.
13; S/RES/2145 (2014),
op. 32; S/RES/2143
(2014), pp. 6 and 7, and
op. 1, 17 and 18;
S/RES/2140 (2014), op. 7;
S/RES/2139 (2014), pp. 3
and op. 1; S/RES/2120
(2013), pp.24;
S/RES/2109 (2013), op.
14; S/RES/2096 (2013),
op. 32; S/RES/2095
(2013), pp. 7; S/RES/2078
(2012), pp. 9; S/RES/2069
(2012), pp. 24;
S/RES/2068 (2012), pp. 7,
op. 2; S/RES/2060 (2012),

15-20840

Remind parties of
their obligations
under, and call for
compliance with,
applicable
international
humanitarian law
and human rights
law, and relevant
Security Council
resolutions

S/RES/2182 (2014),
op. 35

S/RES/2164 (2014),
pp. 19
S/RES/2155 (2014),
op. 18

S/RES/2147 (2014),
pp. 18

pp. 7; S/RES/2057 (2012),
op. 10; S/RES/2051
(2012), op. 8; S/RES/2041
(2012), op. 32;
S/RES/2012 (2011), op.
16; S/RES/1998 (2011),
pp. 11 and op. 1;
S/RES/1964 (2010), op.
16; S/RES/1944 (2010),
op. 14; S/RES/1892
(2009), op. 19;
S/RES/1882 (2009), op. 1;
S/RES/1868 (2009), op.
29; S/RES/1840 (2008),
op. 21; S/RES/1806
(2008), op. 14;
S/RES/1780 (2007),
op. 17; S/RES/1612
(2005), op. 1; S/RES/1539
(2004), op. 1; and
S/RES/1493 (2003), op.
13.

S/RES/2143 (2014),
op. 17
S/RES/2227 (2015),
pp. 21

S/RES/2225 (2015),
pp. 17

S/RES/2225 (2015),
pp. 5

See also, for example,
S/RES/2225 (2015), pp.
14 and 19; S/RES/2205
(2015), op. 23;
S/RES/2143 (2014), pp. 4,
and op. 1, 5, and 17;
S/RES/2088 (2013), pp. 11
and op. 14; S/RES/1998
(2011), pp. 3 and op. 4;
S/RES/1923 (2010),
op. 24; S/RES/1906
(2009), op. 15;
S/RES/1479 (2003), op.
15; and S/RES/1296
(2000), op. 10.

S/RES/2187 (2014),
op. 19

S/RES/2127 (2013),
op. 20

S/PRST/2015/23

77/98

Condemns all violations and abuses committed against children by all parties in [affected country], calls for the immediate
cessation of such violations and abuses and for those responsible to be held to account, and requests [Government of
affected country] and [AU Mission] to protect and treat as victims those children who have been released or otherwise
separated from armed forces and armed groups, including through the full implementation of standard operating
procedures for the protection and handover of these children
Condemning strongly all abuses and violations of human rights and violations of international humanitarian law, including
those involving … killing, maiming, recruitment and use of children, attacks against schools and hospitals, and calling
upon all parties to bring an end to such violations and abuses and to comply with their obligations under applicable
international law
Further demands that all parties immediately cease all forms of violence, human rights violations and abuses, violations of
international humanitarian law, including gender-based violence, rape and other forms of sexual violence, and violations
and abuses against children in violation of applicable international law such as those involving their recruitment and use,
killing and maiming, abduction and attacks against schools and hospitals, strongly urges the Government to the fully and
immediately implement its action plan to end and prevent child recruitment signed on [date] further strongly urges the
opposition forces to fully and immediately implement their commitment to end grave violations against children signed on
[date], and calls for specific and time bound commitments to combat sexual violence in accordance with resolutions 1960
and 2106
Remaining greatly concerned by the humanitarian situation that continues to severely affect the civilian population, in
particular in [area in affected country], and the persistent high levels of violence and violations and abuses of human rights
and violations of international law, condemning in particular those involving … widespread sexual and gender-based
violence, systematic recruitment and use of children by certain parties to the conflict, … and recognizing their deleterious
effect on the stabilization, reconstruction and development efforts in [affected country]
Reiterates its deep concern about attacks as well as threats of attacks in contravention of applicable international law
against schools and/or hospitals, and protected persons in relation to them as well as the closure of schools and hospitals in
situations of armed conflict as a result of attacks and threats of attacks and urges all parties to armed conflict to refrain from
actions that impede children’s access to education and to health services
Strongly condemning all abuses and violations of human rights and violations of international
humanitarian law, including those involving … sexual and gender -based violence, as well as killing,
maiming, recruitment and use of children, attacks against schools and hospitals, calling on all parties to
respect the civilian character of schools as such in accordance with international humanitarian law and
to cease unlawful and arbitrary detention of all children, and calling upon all parties to bring an end to
such violations and abuses and to comply with their obligations under applicable international law
Recalling the obligations of all parties to armed conflict applicable to them under international
humanitarian law and human rights law, emphasizing that no child should be deprived of his or her
liberty unlawfully or arbitrarily and calling on all Parties to conflict to cease unlawful or arbitrary
detention as well as torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment imposed on
children during their detention
Recalling that all parties to armed conflict must comply strictly with the obligations applicable to
them under international law for the protection of children in armed conflict, including those
contained in the Convention on the Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocol on the involvement
of Children in armed conflict, as well as the Geneva Conventions o f 12th August 1949 and the
Additional Protocols of 1977
Further demands that all parties immediately cease all forms of violence, human rights violations and
abuses, violations of international humanitarian law, including rape a nd other forms of sexual and
gender-based violence, and violations and abuses against children in violation of applicable
international law such as those involving their recruitment and use, killing and maiming, abduction
and attacks against schools and hospitals …
Reiterates its demands that all armed groups, in particular [armed groups] elements, prevent and end
the recruitment and use of children, that all parties protect and consider as victims those children who
have been released or otherwise separated from armed forces and armed groups, and emphasizes the
need to pay particular attention to the protection, release and reintegration of all children associated
with armed groups

S/PRST/2015/23

78/98

Accountability for
perpetrators of
grave violations
against children

15-20840

… The Council calls upon all parties to armed conflict to put an end to [attacks against schools,
threats and attacks against teachers and other protected persons in relation to schools, and the use of
schools for military purposes] and to refrain from attacks against t eachers and other protected persons
in relation to schools, provided that they take no action adversely affecting their status of civilians.
Recalling that international humanitarian law affords general protection to women and children as part
of the civilian population during armed conflicts and special protection due to the fact that they can be
placed particularly at risk,
[D]emands … that all armed groups … immediately stop recruiting and using children and release all children associated
with them.
Calls upon all parties concerned to abide by the international obligations applicable to them relating to the protection of
children affected by armed conflict as well as the concrete commitments they have made to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, to UNICEF and other United Nations agencies and to cooperate
fully with the United Nations peacekeeping missions and United Nations country teams … in the follow-up and
implementation of these commitments.
[R]eiterates its call on parties to armed conflict [listed in the relevant Secretary-General’s report] that have not already done
so to prepare and implement, without further delay, concrete time-bound action plans to halt recruitment and use of
children in violation of applicable international law, and to address all violations and abuses against children in close
cooperation with the [Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Children and Armed Conflict], as well as with
UNICEF and the UN Country Task Forces on Monitoring and Reporting.
Emphasizes the responsibility of all States to put an end to impunity and to investigate and prosecute those responsible for
genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and other egregious crimes perpetrated against children and highlights in
this regard the contribution of the International Criminal Court, in accordance with the principle of complementarity to
national criminal jurisdictions as set out in the Rome Statute
Recalling the responsibility of all Member States to comply with their respective obligations to end impunity and to
investigate and prosecute those responsible for genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and other egregious crimes
perpetrated against children and noting that the fight against impunity for the most serious crimes of international concern
committed against children has been strengthened through the work on and prosecution of these crimes by the
International Criminal Court, ad hoc and mixed tribunals and specialized chambers in national tribunals
Calls upon all parties to armed conflict in [affected country], including [armed group] elements and [armed group]
elements, to issue clear orders prohibiting all violations and abuses committed against children, in violation of applicable
international law, including those involving their recruitment and use, rape and sexual violence, killing and maiming,
abductions and attacks on schools and hospitals and further calls upon [national authorities] to investigate swiftly alleged
violations and abuses in order to hold perpetrators accountable and to ensure that those responsible for such violations and
abuses are excluded from the security sector
calls for those responsible for serious violations of international humanitarian law and human rights law, including sexual
violence and violations and abuses against children, to be held accountable in accordance with international standards, and
urges all Member States to cooperate closely with the … government [of the affected country] in its efforts to end impunity
for such violations
… Urges Member States to ensure that attacks on schools in contravention of international humanitarian law are
investigated and those responsible duly prosecuted
Stresses the need to exclude genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and other egregious crimes perpetrated against
children from amnesty laws and other similar provisions and strongly encourages concerned States to establish a vetting
mechanism to ensure that those responsible for such crimes are not included in the ranks of the army or other security
forces
… The Council recognizes the importance of ending impunity for [violations and abuses against children in situations of
armed conflict] through strengthened police, justice and corrections capacity, and the incorporation of gender and child
protection perspectives in all rule of law programmes, including through justice sector reform and sexual, child protection
and gender based violence training. The Council recalls in this regard resolutions 1325 (2000), 1612 (2005), 1820 (2008),
1882 (2009), 1888 (2009), 1889 (2009), 1960 (2010), 1998 (2011), 2068 (2012), 2106 (2013) and 2122 (2013). …
The Security Council stresses further that the fight against impunity and to ensure accountability for genocide, crimes
against humanity, war crimes and other egregious crimes perpetrated against children has been strengthened through the
work on and prosecution of these crimes in the international criminal justice system, ad hoc and mixed tribunals as well as

S/PRST/2013/2
(2013), PoC, par. 15
S/RES/1960 (2010),
pp. 10
S/RES/1794 (2007),
op. 3
S/RES/1612 (2005),
op. 15

S/PRST/2008/6

S/RES/2225 (2015),
op. 14
S/RES/2225 (2015),
pp. 10

S/RES/2217 (2015),
op. 17

S/RES/2144 (2014),
op. 2
S/RES/2143 (2014),
op. 18 (c)
S/RES/2143 (2014),
op. 11
S/PRST/2014/5,
para. 9

S/PRST/2013/8,
para. 15

See also, for example,
S/RES/2211 (2015), op.
29; S/RES/2149 (2014),
op. 13; S/RES/2147
(2014), pp. 25; S/Res/2145
(2014), op. 32S/RES/2098
(2013), pp. 19;
S/RES/2078 (2012), pp.
10; S/RES/2068 (2012),
op. 3; S/RES/2067 (2012),
op. 18; S/RES/2062
(2012), pp. 8; S/RES/1998
(2011), pp. 8 and op. 11;
S/PRST/2010/10

15-20840

Role of United
Nations Security
Council authorized
peace operations and
other relevant
missions and actors

S/RES/2068 (2012),
pp. 10
S/RES/1998 (2011),
op. 11

S/RES/2228 (2015),
op. 25

S/RES/2225 (2015),
op. 18
S/RES/2225 (2015),
op. 13

S/RES/2225 (2015),
op. 6
S/RES/2225 (2015),
op. 5

S/RES/2225 (2015),
op. 3

S/RES/2223 (2015),
op. 4 (a), (i)
S/RES/2217 (2015),
op. 17

See also, for example,
S/RES/2227 (2015), op.
14 (d), (iii); S/RES/2225
(2015), op. 1, 6 and 17;
S/RES/2223 (2015), op.
22; S/RES/2217 (2015),
op. 5, 32 (a), (ii) and (e),
(ii), and op. 39;
S/RES/2121 (2013),
op.15; S/RES/2216
(2015), op. 1 (g);
S/RES/2190 (2014), op.
10 (e), (i); S/RES/2187
(2014), op. 4 (a), (i);
S/RES/2185, pp. 28;
S/RES/2164 (2014), op.
13 (a), (iii) and (c), (vi);
S/RES/2162 (2014), op.
19 (g); S/RES/2158
(2014), op. 1 (e), (ii);
S/RES/2155 (2014), op. 4
(b), (ii); S/RES/2149
(2014), op. 13, 30 (a), (ii)
and (e), (ii), and 34;
S/RES/2147 (2014), op. 5
(l), 26 and 28; S/RES/2145
(2014), op. 33;
S/RES/2143 (2014), pp.
12 and 15, and op. 2, 13,
18 (a) to (d), 20, 21, and
24; S/RES/2140 (2014),
op. 7; S/RES/2134 (2014),
op. 2 (e) and 22;
S/RES/2127 (2013), op.
20 and 22; S/RES/2113
(2013), op. 26;
S/RES/2102 (2013), op. 2;

S/PRST/2015/23

79/98

specialised chambers in national tribunals. The Security Council highlights in this regard the contribution of the
International Criminal Court, in accordance with the principle of complementarity to national criminal jurisdictions as set
out in the Rome Statute, towards holding accountable those responsible for such crimes. In this regard, the Security
Council reiterates its call on the importance of State cooperation with these courts and tribunals in accordance with the
States’ respective obligations.
Stressing the need for alleged perpetrators of crimes against children in situations of armed conflict to
be brought to justice through national justice systems and, where applicable, international justice
mechanisms and mixed criminal courts and tribunals in order to end impunity,
[C]alls upon concerned Member States to take decisive and immediate action against persistent perpetrators of violations
and abuses committed against children in situations of armed conflict, and further calls upon them to bring to justice those
responsible for such violations that are prohibited under applicable international law, including with regard to recruitment
and use of children, killing and maiming, rape and other sexual violence, attacks on schools and/or hospitals, attacks or
threats of attacks against protected persons in relation to schools and/or hospitals through national justice systems, and,
where applicable, international justice mechanisms and mixed criminal courts and tribunals, with a view to ending
impunity for those committing crimes against children.
… requests the Secretary-General to ensure: (a) continued monitoring and reporting of the situation of children in [affected
area]; and (b) continued dialogue with the parties to the conflict towards the development and implementation of the
aforementioned action plans [to be developed by parties to conflict in order to end and prevent the recruitment and use of
children in violation of applicable international law], in accordance with resolution 1612 (2005) and subsequent resolutions
on children and armed conflict
Reiterates its requests to the Secretary-General to continue to submit comprehensive annual reports to the Council on the
implementation of its resolutions and Presidential statements on children and armed conflict and to ensure that in all his
reports on country-specific situations the matter of children and armed conflict is included as specific aspect of the report
Urges concerned Member States, when undertaking security sector reforms, to mainstream child protection, such as the
inclusion of child protection in military training and standard operating procedures, including on the handover of children
to relevant civilian child protection actors, the establishment of child protection units in national security forces, and the
strengthening of effective age assessment mechanisms to prevent underage recruitment, while stressing in the latter regard
the importance of ensuring universal birth registration, including late birth registration which should remain an exception
Encourages Member States to consider non-judicial measures as alternatives to prosecution and detention that focus on the
rehabilitation and reintegration for children formerly associated with armed forces and armed groups taking into account
that deprivation of liberty of children should be used only as a measure of last resort and for the shortest appropriate period
of time, as well as to avoid wherever possible the use of pretrial detention for children;
Urges for the immediate, safe and unconditional release of abducted children by all Parties to conflict and encourages
Member States, United Nations entities, and regional and sub-regional organizations to undertake relevant efforts to obtain
the safe release of abducted children, including through establishing standard operating procedures on the handover of
children to relevant civilian child protection actors, as well as to seek to ensure their family reunification, rehabilitation and
reintegration
Recalls paragraph 16 of its resolution 1379 (2001) and requests the Secretary-General also to include in the annexes to his
reports on children and armed conflict those parties to armed conflict that engage, in contravention of applicable
international law, in patterns of abduction of children in situations of armed conflict, bearing in mind all other violations
and abuses against children, and notes that the present paragraph will apply to situations in accordance with the conditions
set out in paragraph 16 of its resolution 1379 (2001)
Decides that the mandate of [UN Mission] shall be as follows, and authorizes [UN Mission] to use all necessary means to
perform the following tasks: (a) Protection of civilians: (i) To protect civilians under threat of physical violence,
irrespective of the source of such violence, within its capacity and areas of deployment, with specific protection for women
and children, including through the continued use of the Mission’s Child Protection and Women Protection Advisers
Calls upon all parties to armed conflict in [affected country], including [armed group] elements and [armed group]
elements, to issue clear orders prohibiting all violations and abuses committed against children, in violation of applicable
international law, including those involving their recruitment and use, rape and sexual violence, killing and maiming,
abductions and attacks on schools and hospitals and further calls upon [national authorities] to investigate swiftly alleged
violations and abuses in order to hold perpetrators accountable and to ensure that those responsible for such violations and
abuses are excluded from the security sector

S/RES/2211 (2015),
op. 11

S/RES/2187 (2014),
op. 4 (b), (ii)

S/RES/2158 (2014),
op. 1 (d), (ii) and
(iv), and (e), (ii)

S/RES/2151 (2014),
op. 6

S/RES/2143 (2014),
op. 25

S/RES/2143 (2014),
op. 21
S/RES/2143 (2014),
op. 20

S/RES/2143 (2014),
op. 14

S/RES/2109 (2013),
op. 17

S/RES/2098 (2013), op.
12; S/RES/2068 (2012),
pp. 4 and pp. 8;
S/RES/2063 (2012), op.
22; S/RES/2057 (2012),
op. 12; S/RES/2003
(2011), op. 23;
S/RES/2000 (2011), op. 7;
S/RES/1998 (2011), op.
14; S/RES/1996 (2011),
op. 3; S/RES/1952 (2010),
op. 13; S/RES/1923
(2010), op. 23;
S/RES/1917 (2010), op.
22; S/RES/1882 (2009),
op. 10, 11 and 12;
S/RES/1828 (2008), op.
14; S/RES/1806 (2008),
op. 14; S/RES/1780
(2007), op. 17;
S/RES/1612 (2005),
op. 12, 13, 17 and 18;
S/RES/1565 (2004),
op. 5(g); S/RES/1509
(2003), op. 3; S/RES/1460
(2003), op. 15;
S/RES/1296 (2000), op. 9;
and S/RES/1265 (1999),
op. 13.

S/PRST/2015/23

80/98

Requests [UN Mission] to take fully into account child protection as a cross-cutting issue throughout its mandate and to
assist the Government of [affected country] in ensuring that the protection of children’s rights is taken into account, inter
alia, in DDR processes and in SSR as well as during interventions leading to the separation of children from [national
army] and armed groups in order to end and prevent violations and abuses against children, including those involving
detention, including temporary, of children by [national army]
Decides that the mandate of [UN Mission] shall be as follows, and authorizes [UN Mission] to use all necessary means to
perform the following tasks: (b) Monitoring and investigating human rights: … (ii) To monitor, investigate, verify and
report specifically and publicly on violations and abuses committed against children and women, including all forms of
sexual and gender-based violence in armed conflict by accelerating the implementation of monitoring, analysis and
reporting arrangements on conflict-related sexual violence and by strengthening the monitoring and reporting mechanism
for grave violations against children
Decides to extend [UN Mission]’s mandate for a period of [duration] as follows: … (d) To help build the capacity of the …
Government of [affected country] to: … (ii) Promote child protection and to implement the relevant … Government action
plans on children and armed conflict, including through the provision of Child Protection Advisers; (iv) Strengthen
[affected country]’s justice institutions and to help ensure accountability in particular with respect to crimes against women
and children (e) To monitor, help investigate and report to the Council on, and help prevent: (ii) Any violations or abuses
committed against children in [affected country]
Encourages Member States, when undertaking security sector reforms, to mainstream child protection, such as the
inclusion of child protection in military training and standard operating procedures, as well as in military guidance as
appropriate, the establishment of child protection units in national security forces, of effective age assessment mechanisms
to prevent underage recruitment, of vetting mechanisms to ensure that those responsible for violations and abuses against
children are not included in the ranks of national security forces and of measures to protect schools and hospitals from
attack and to prevent the military use of schools in contravention of applicable international law
Encourages pertinent regional and subregional organizations and arrangements to help address the widespread impact of
armed conflict on children, invites them to continue the mainstreaming of child protection into their advocacy, policies,
programmes and mission planning, the development and expansion of guidelines to protect children affected by armed
conflict as well as the training of personnel and the inclusion of child protection staff in their peacekeeping and field
operations, and reiterates its call for the establishment of child protection mechanisms within their secretariats, including
through the appointment of child protection focal points
Urges all United Nations entities, including peacekeeping missions, political missions, peacebuilding offices, United
Nations offices, agencies, funds and programmes to give full attention to violations against children in the application of
the human rights due diligence policy on United Nations support to non-United Nations security forces
Recommends that Member States include child protection in military training and standard operating procedures, as well
as in military guidance as appropriate; recommends further that United Nations entities and United Nations peacekeeping
troop and police-contributing countries undertake targeted and operational trainings for the preparation of United Nations
mission personnel including troop and police contingents on their contribution in preventing violations against children so
as to give all mission personnel the ability to effectively recognize, report and respond to violations and abuses committed
against children and to successfully support child protection activities for better implementation of their respective
mandates
Urges further all parties concerned, including Member States, United Nations entities, as well as financial institutions to
support, as appropriate, bearing in mind national ownership, the development and strengthening of the capacities of
national institutions and local civil society networks for advocacy, protection and rehabilitation of children affected by
armed conflict as well as national accountability mechanisms, including building investigative and prosecutorial capacities
and the adoption of legislation criminalizing violations and abuses committed against children affected by armed conflict
… further requests the Secretary-General to strengthen child protection in United Nations system
activities in the [affected country] including through the continued deployment of child protection
advisors within [the Mission], and ensure continued monitorin g and reporting of the situation of
children, and welcomes the work of the United Nations country task force on the monitoring and
reporting mechanism established in [month / year];

15-20840

15-20840

Action plans and
specific, time-bound
commitments

S/PRST/2013/8,
para. 18

S/RES/1998 (2011),
op. 3

S/RES/1882 (2009),
op. 8

S/RES/1882 (2009),
op. 9
S/RES/1882 (2009),
op. 17
S/PRST/2008/28

S/RES/2211 (2015),
op. 13 (f)

S/RES/2198 (2015),
op. 14

S/RES/2187 (2014),
op. 19

See also, for example,
S/RES/2228 (2015), op.
25; S/RES/2225 (2015),
op. 4; S/RES/2211 (2015),
op. 32; S/RES/2158
(2014), op. 13;
S/RES/2155 (2014), op.
18; S/RES/2147 (2014),
op. 5 (l) and 26;
S/RES/2143 (2014), op. 7;
S/RES/2136 (2014), op.
10; S/RES/2113 (2013),
op. 26; S/RES/2098
(2013), op. 22;
S/RES/2093 (2013), op.
32; S/RES/2088 (2013),
op. 14; S/RES/2063
(2012), op. 22;

S/PRST/2015/23

81/98

The Security Council reaffirms the important role being played by child protection advisers in peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and political missions deployed in line with the Council’s relevant country-specific resolutions and in
accordance with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations’ (DPKO) Policy Directive on Mainstreaming the Protection
Rights and Wellbeing of Children affected by Armed Conflict and in this regard expresses its intention to further strengthen
provisions for the protection of children in all mandates of relevant United Nations peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
political missions, including through ensuring the consistent deployment of child protection advisors.
Recalls paragraph 16 of its resolution 1379 (2001) and requests the Secretary -General to also include
in the annexes to his reports on children and armed conflict those parties to armed conflict that
engage, in contravention of applicable international law; (a) in recurrent attacks on schools and/or
hospitals (b) in recurrent attacks or threats of attacks against protected persons in relation to schools
and/or hospitals in situations of armed conflict, bearing in mind all other violations and abuses
committed against children, and notes that the present paragraph will apply to situations in accordan ce
with the conditions set out in paragraph 16 of its resolution 1379 (2001).
Stresses the responsibility of the United Nations country-level task forces on monitoring and reporting and United Nations
country teams, consistent with their respective mandates, to ensure effective follow-up to Security Council resolutions on
children and armed conflict, to monitor and report progress to the Secretary-General in close cooperation with his Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict and ensure a coordinated response to issues related to children and armed
conflict..
Requests the Secretary-General to include more systematically in his reports on children and armed conflict specific
information regarding the implementation of the [Security Council’s] Working Group [on Children And Armed Conflict]
recommendations.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take the necessary measures including, where applicable, to bring the
monitoring and reporting mechanism to its full capacity, to allow for prompt advocacy and effective response to all
violations and abuses committed against children and to ensure that information collected and communicated by the
mechanism is accurate, objective, reliable and verifiable.
The Security Council reiterates the need for stronger focus by all parties concerned, including Governments and the donor
community, on the long-term effects of armed conflict on children and the impediments to their full rehabilitation and
reintegration into their families and communities, through, inter alia, addressing the need for providing appropriate health
care, enhancing their exchange of information about programmes and best practices, and ensuring the availability of
adequate resources, funding and technical assistance to support national strategies or action plans in the area of child
protection and welfare, and community-based programmes, bearing in mind the ‘Paris principles to protect children from
unlawful recruitment by armed forces or groups’, with a view to ensuring the long-term sustainability and success of their
programmatic response to the release, rehabilitation and reintegration of all children associated with armed forces and
armed groups.
Authorizes [UN Mission], in support of [national] authorities and their efforts to stabilize [area in affected country], to
contribute to the following tasks, including through the SRSG’s good offices; … (f) Continue to collaborate with the
Government of [affected country] in the swift and vigorous implementation of the action plan to prevent and end the
recruitment and use of children and sexual violence against children by [national army], and continue dialogue with all
listed parties to obtain further commitments and work towards the development and implementation of action plans to
prevent and end violations and abuses against children
Welcomes the progress made to date by the Government of [affected country] on ending the recruitment and use of
children in armed conflict, urges the Government of [affected country] to continue the full implementation and
dissemination throughout the military chain of command, including in remote areas, of its commitments made in the action
plan signed with the United Nations detailing concrete, time -bound measures to release and reintegrate children associated
with the [national] armed forces and to prevent further recruitment, and for the protection of girls and boys from sexual
violence, and further calls upon the Government of [affected country] to ensure that children are not detained on charges
related to association with armed groups
strongly urges the Government to fully and immediately implement its revised action plan to end and prevent the
recruitment and use of children, as recommitted to on [date], and its military order of [date] prohibiting [national army] to
attack, occupy or use for any purposes schools, school buildings or property, takes note of the [date] national launch of the
campaign “Children, Not Soldiers” by the Government, and further strongly urges the opposition forces to fully and
immediately implement their commitment to end grave violations against children signed on [date]

S/RES/2173 (2014),
op. 25

S/RES/2149 (2014),
op. 13

S/RES/2145 (2014),
op. 33

S/RES/2140 (2014),
op. 7

S/RES/2067 (2012),
op. 17
S/RES/2010 (2011),
op. 24

S/RES/1998 (2011),
op. 6

S/RES/2057 (2012), op.
12; S/RES/2053 (2012),
pp. 11; S/RES/1991
(2011), op. 16;
S/RES/1974 (2010), op.
23; S/RES/1935 (2010),
op. 19; S/RES/1925
(2010), op. 12 (e);
S/RES/1919 (2010), op.
19; S/RES/1882 (2009),
op. 5 (a), (b), (c) and (d), 6,
and 13; and S/RES/1612
(2005), op. 7

S/PRST/2015/23

82/98
15-20840

Demands that the parties to the conflict immediately cease all violations and abuses against children, and develop and
implement concrete and time-bound action plans to end and prevent the recruitment and use of children in violation of
applicable international law, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure: (a) continued monitoring and reporting of the
situation of children in [affected area]; and (b) continued dialogue with the parties to the conflict towards the development
and implementation of the aforementioned action plans, in accordance with resolution 1612 (2005) and subsequent
resolutions on children and armed conflict
Calls upon all parties to armed conflict in [affected country], including [armed group] and [armed group] elements, to issue
clear orders prohibiting all violations and abuses committed against children, in violation of applicable international law,
including those involving their recruitment and use, rape and sexual violence, killing and maiming, abductions and attacks
on schools and hospitals and further calls upon [national authorities] to make and implement specific commitments on
timely investigation of alleged violations and abuses in order to hold perpetrators accountable and to ensure that those
responsible for such violations and abuses are excluded from the security sector
… stresses the importance of implementing Security Council resolution 1612 (2005) on children and armed conflict and
subsequent resolutions, supports the decree by the Minister of the Interior reaffirming the … Government’s commitment to
preventing violations of the rights of the child dated [date], welcomes the progress made on the implementation of the
Action Plan, and its annex, on children associated with the [national army], signed in [month / year], in particular the
establishment of the [national] Inter-Ministerial Steering Committee on Children and Armed Conflict, the appointment of a
focal point on child protection, and the endorsement by the … Government [of affected country] of a roadmap to
accelerate compliance with the Action Plan, calls for the full implementation of the provisions of the plan, in close
cooperation with [UN Mission], and requests the Secretary-General to continue to give priority to the child protection
activities and capacity of [UN Mission] and continue to include in his future reports the matter of children and armed
conflict in the country in line with the relevant Security Council resolutions
Expresses its concern that children continue to be recruited and used in violation of applicable international law by armed
groups, and the [national] Government forces, and calls for continued national efforts to end and prevent the recruitment
and use of children, including through the signing and implementation by the [national] Government of the action plan to
halt and prevent the recruitment and use of children in the government forces of [affected country], in line with the Security
Council resolutions 1612 (2005), 1882 (2009) and 1998 (2011), and urges armed groups to allow the United Nations
personnel safe and unhindered access to territories under their control for monitoring and reporting purposes
Welcomes the [date] signing of an action plan by the [National] authorities and the United Nations to
eliminate the killing and maiming of children, noting that this is the first such action plan to be
signed, and calls upon the [National] authorities to vigorously implement both this action plan and the
[date] action plan on the recruitment and use of child soldiers …
Recalls the conclusions endorsed by the Security Council Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict in [the affected country] …, calls on all parties to end grave violations and abuses committed
against children in [the affected country], urges the … Government to develop and implement a
concrete time-bound action plan to halt the recruitment and use of children, requests the SecretaryGeneral to continue his dialogue with the … Government in this regard, and reiterates its request to
the Secretary-General to strengthen the child protection component of [the Mission] and to ens ure
continued monitoring and reporting of the situation of children in [the affected country];
While noting that some parties to armed conflict have responded to its call upon them to prepare and
implement concrete time-bound action plans to halt recruitment and use of children in violation of
applicable international law; (a) Reiterates its call on parties to armed conflict listed in the annexes of
the Secretary-General’s report on children and armed conflict that have not alr eady done so to prepare
and implement, without further delay, action plans to halt recruitment and use of children and killing
and maiming of children, in violation of applicable international law, as well as rape and other sexual
violence against children; (b) Calls upon those parties that have existing action plans and have since
been listed for multiple violations to prepare and implement separate action plans, as appropriate, to
halt the killing and maiming of children, recurrent attacks on schools and/ or hospitals, recurrent
attacks or threats of attacks against protected persons in relation to schools and/or hospitals, in
violation of applicable international law, as well as rape and other sexual violence against children;
(c) Calls upon those parties listed in the annexes of the Secretary-General’s report on children and
armed conflict that commit, in contravention of applicable international law, recurrent attacks on

15-20840

Disarmament,
Demobilisation and
Reintegration of
children

S/RES/1996 (2011),
op. 10

S/RES/2227 (2015),
op. 24
S/RES/2220 (2015),
op. 18

S/RES/2217 (2015),
op. 32 (g), (i)

S/RES/2182 (2014),
op. 35

See also, for example,
S/RES/2217 (2015), op.
39; S/RES/2217 (2015),
pp. 28 and op. 18;
S/RES/2211 (2015), op.
11, and 13 (c) and (d);
S/RES/2198 (2014), op.
11; S/RES/2164 (2014),
op. 13 (b), (iv);
S/RES/2158 (2014), op.
13; S/RES/2149 (2014),
op. 14 and 34;
S/RES/2147 (2014), op.
28; S/RES/2134 (2014),
op. 8 and 23; S/RES/2127
(2013), op. 11 and 20;
S/RES/2100 (2013), op.
16; and S/RES/1919
(2010), op. 19

S/RES/2147 (2014),
pp. 16
S/RES/2143 (2014),
pp. 15

S/PRST/2014/8,
para. 16

S/RES/1998 (2011),
op. 18

S/PRST/2015/23

83/98

schools and/or hospitals, recurrent attacks or threats of attacks against protected p ersons in relation to
schools and/or hospitals, in situations of armed conflict, to prepare without delay, concrete time bound action plans to halt those violations and abuses; (d) Further calls upon all parties listed in the
annexes of the Secretary-General’s report on children and armed conflict, to address all other
violations and abuses committed against children and undertake specific commitments and measures
in this regard.
Calls upon the Government of the [affected country] and the [armed forces] to renew the action plan
(signed between the UN and the armed forces …) to end the recruitment and use of child soldiers that
expired in [date], and requests [the mission] to advise and assist the Government of the [affected
country] in this regard; further requests the Secretary-General to strengthen child protection in UN
system activities in the [affected country] and ensure continued monitoring and reporting of the
situation of children.
Requests [UN Mission] to take fully into account child protection as a cross -cutting issue throughout
its mandate and to assist [national] authorities in ensuring that the protection of children’s rights is
taken into account, inter alia, in disarmament, demobilization and reintegration processes and in
security sector reform in order to end and prevent violations and abuses against children
… calls upon all those involved in the planning for disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
justice and security sector reform efforts to take into account the particular needs of women and
children associated with armed forces and armed groups, with the participation of women, and to
provide for their full access to these programmes inter alia, through consultation with civil society,
including women’s organizations, as appropriate
Decides that the mandate of [UN Mission] shall include the following immediate priority tasks: … (g)
Disarmament, Demobilization, Reintegration (DDR) and Repatriation (DDRR) (i) To support
[national authorities] in developing and implementing a revised strategy for the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) and, in case of foreign elements, Repatriation (DDRR), of
former combatants and armed elements to reflect new realities on the ground, while paying specific
attention to the needs of children associated with armed forces and groups
… requests [Government of affected country] and [AU Mission] to protect and treat as victims those
children who have been released or otherwise separated from armed forces and armed groups,
including through the full implementation of standard operating procedures for the protection and
handover of these children
… encouraging the Government of [neighboring country], with the assistance of relevant UN and
international organizations, to continue to ensure that [those] combatants [who have fled to
neighboring country] are permanently demobilized and are dealt wit h according to relevant
international law including special attention to children and women among them
Recognizing the crucial role of child protection advisers in mainstreaming child protection and
leading monitoring, prevention and reporting efforts in relevant United Nations peacekeeping
missions, political missions and peacebuilding offices in accordance with their mandate, including
advice for and close cooperation and coordination between the missions, UNICEF and s pecialized
NGOs for child demobilization and integration and prevention of recruitment
The Security Council reiterates its call for the swift and full implementation of [relevant] conclusions
of the working group on children and armed conflict … In this regard, the Council encourages those
countries affected by [armed group] which have not yet done so to establish Standard Operating
Procedures for the reception and handover of [armed group] children to civilian child protection
actors
Stresses that effective disarmament, demobilisation and reintegration programmes for children,
building on best practices identified by UNICEF and other relevant child protection actors, including
the International Labour Organization, are crucial for the well-being of all children who, in
contravention of applicable international law, have been recruited or used by armed forces and groups,
are a critical factor for durable peace and security, and urges national Governments and donors to
ensure that these community-based programmes receive timely, sustained and adequate resources and
funding.

Children and peace
processes

15-20840

Decides that the mandate of [UN Mission] shall be the following: … (e) Reconstitution and reform of
security institutions … to facilitate the provision of training, within its current resources and as
requested by the Government and in close coordination with other international partners, in huma n
rights, child protection and protection from sexual and gender -based violence to the security and law
enforcement institutions
… recalls the importance of training in human rights, child protection and sexual - and gender-based
violence for security and law-enforcement agencies
Encourages police-contributing countries to provide all police personnel with adequate training to
carry out their responsibilities in relation to sexual and gender -based violence and child protection,
and further encourages relevant United Nations entities to make a vailable appropriate guidance and
training modules, including in particular the United Nations pre -deployment scenario-based training
on prevention of sexual and gender-based violence and on children and armed conflict
Reiterating that the protection of children in armed conflict should be an important aspect of any
comprehensive strategy to resolve conflict and build peace, reiterating in this regard the importance of
providing United Nations Police Components with specialized pre-deployment and in-mission training
on mission-specific child protection and on appropriate comprehensive child -sensitive prevention and
protection responses, as well as monitoring and reporting on violations and abuses committed against
children …
… invites [pertinent regional and subregional organizations and arrangements] to continue the
mainstreaming of child protection into their advocacy, policies, programmes and mission planning,
the development and expansion of guidelines to protect children affected by armed conflict as well as
the training of personnel and the inclusion of child protection staff in their peacekeeping and field
operations …
Encourages Member States, when undertaking security sector reforms, to mainstream child protection,
such as the inclusion of child protection in military training and standard operating procedures, as
well as in military guidance as appropriate …
Recommends that Member States include child protection in military training and standard operating
procedures, as well as in military guidance as appropriate; recommends further that United Nations
entities and United Nations peacekeeping troop and police-contributing countries undertake targeted
and operational trainings for the preparation of United Nations mission personnel including troop and
police contingents on their contribution in preventing violations against children so as to give all
mission personnel the ability to effectively recognize, report and respond to violations and abuses
committed against children and to successfully support child protection activities for better
implementation of their respective mandates
Underlining the importance of providing military, police and civilian peacekeepers with adequate pre deployment and in-mission training on mission-specific child protection issues and on appropriate
comprehensive prevention and protection responses
Continues to urge Member States, United Nations entities, regional and sub -regional organizations
and other parties concerned to ensure that child protection provisions, including those relating to the
release and reintegration of children formerly associated with armed forces or armed groups, are
integrated into all peace negotiations, ceasefire and peace agreements, and in provisions for ceasefire
monitoring
The Security Council underlines the importance of engaging armed forces and armed groups on child
protection concerns during peace talks and calls upon Member States, United Nations entities and
other parties concerned to ensure that child protection provisions, including those relating to the
release and reintegration of children formerly associated with armed forces or armed g roups, are
integrated into all peace negotiations and peace agreements.
Calls upon Member States, United Nations entities, including the Peacebuilding Commission and other parties concerned,
to ensure that the protection, rights, well-being and empowerment of children affected by armed conflict are integrated into
all peace processes and that post-conflict recovery and reconstruction planning, programmes and strategies prioritize issues
concerning children affected by armed conflict.

S/RES/2226 (2015),
op. 19 (e)

S/RES/2226 (2015),
op. 17
S/RES/2185 (2014),
op. 21

See also, for example,
S/RES/2210 (2015), op.
24; S/RES/2145 (2014),
op. 24; S/RES/1906
(2009), op. 31;
S/RES/1296 (2000), op.
19; S/RES/1265 (1999),
op. 14.

S/RES/2185 (2014),
pp. 28

S/RES/2167 (2014),
op. 10

S/RES/2151 (2014),
op. 6
S/RES/2143 (2014),
op. 20

S/RES/2143 (2014),
pp. 16
S/RES/2225 (2015),
op. 9

S/PRST/2013/8,
para. 16

S/RES/1998, (2011),
op. 19

See also, for example,
S/RES/2143 (2014), op. 9;
S/RES/1882 (2009), op.
15; S/RES/1826 (2008),
op. 6; S/RES/1674 (2006),
op. 11; and S/RES/1612
(2005), op. 14.

S/PRST/2015/23

84/98

Training for
peacekeeping
personnel and other
relevant actors

15-20840

Targeted and
graduated measures
in response to
violations of
applicable
international
humanitarian law
and human rights
law related to
children

Calls on all concerned parties to ensure that the protection of children is addressed in the implementation of the [peace
agreement], and requests the Secretary-General to ensure continued monitoring and reporting of the situation of children
and continued dialogue with parties to the conflict towards the preparations of time-bound action plans to end recruitment
and use of child soldiers and other violations against children.
Decides that [Security Council-imposed travel ban and financial sanctions] shall apply to individuals and entities as
designated by the [relevant Security Council sanctions Committee] for engaging in or providing support for acts that
undermine the peace, stability or security of [affected country], and decides that such acts include: … (d) recruiting or
using children in armed conflict in [affected country] in violation of applicable international law; (e) being involved in
planning, directing, or participating in the targeting of children or women in situations of armed conflict, including killing
and maiming, rape and other sexual violence, abduction, forced displacement, and attacks on schools and hospitals
Expresses deep concern that certain perpetrators persist in committing violations and abuses against
children in situations of armed conflict in open disregard of its resolutions on the matter, and in this
regard: … (b) Reiterates its readiness to adopt targeted and graduated measures against persistent
perpetrators, taking into account relevant provisions of its resolutions 1539 (2004), 1612 (2005), 1882
(2009) and 1998 (2011);
Reiterates its determination to ensure respect for its resolutions on children and armed conflict, and in this regard: (a)
Welcomes the sustained activity and recommendations of its Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict as called for
in paragraph 8 of its resolution 1612 (2005), and invites it to continue reporting regularly to the Security Council; (b)
Requests enhanced communication between the Working Group and relevant Security Council Sanctions Committees,
including through the exchange of pertinent information on violations and abuses committed against children in armed
conflict; (c) Reaffirms its intention to take action against persistent perpetrators in line with paragraph 9 of its resolution
1612 (2005).
[R]equests the Secretary-General also to include in the annexes to his reports on children and armed conflict those parties
to armed conflict that engage, in contravention of applicable international law, in patterns of killing and maiming of
children and/or rape and other sexual violence against children, in situations of armed conflict, bearing in mind all other
violations and abuses against children, and notes that the present paragraph will apply to situations in accordance with the
conditions set out in paragraph 16 of its resolution 1379 (2001).

S/RES/1769 (2007),
op. 17
S/RES/2198 (2015),
op. 5 (d) and (e)

S/RES/2068 (2012),
op. 3

See also, for example,
S/RES/2206 (2015), op. 8;
S/RES/2002 (2011), op. 1;
S/RES/2078 (2012), op. 4;
S/RES/1998 (2011), op. 9;
S/RES/1807 (2008), op. 9;
S/RES/1807 (2008),
op. 11; S/RES/1807
(2008), op. 13 (b) and (e)

S/RES/1882 (2009),
op. 7

S/RES/1882 (2009),
op. 3

III. SPECIFIC PROTECTION CONCERNS ARISING FROM SECURITY COUNCIL DISCUSSIONS ON WOMEN
AFFECTED BY ARMED CONFLICT
Express concern at
acts, threats or
situations of violence
against women and
girls, and condemn
violations of
international law
involving women
and girls

S/RES/2233 (2015),
pp. 12

S/RES/2217 (2015),
pp. 32
S/RES/2199 (2015),
pp. 14
S/RES/2187 (2014),
pp. 5

S/RES/2148 (2014),
pp. 8

See also, for example,
S/RES/2239 (2015), op. 8;
S/RES/2210 (2015), op.
42; S/RES/2139 (2014),
op. 1; S/RES/2096 (2013),
op. 43; S/RES/1974
(2010), op. 36;
S/RES/1960 (2010), op. 3;
S/RES/1917 (2010), op.
35; S/RES/1820 (2008),
pp. 8; and S/RES/1806
(2008), op. 28.

S/PRST/2015/23

85/98

Further expressing grave concern that the violent extremism and terrorism perpetrated by [armed group] in [affected
country] has frequently targeted women and girls, and that [armed group] has committed serious human rights abuses, and
violations of international humanitarian law against women and children, including those involving murder, kidnapping,
hostage taking, enslavement, their sale into or otherwise forced marriage, human trafficking, rape, sexual slavery and other
forms of sexual violence, and expressing grave concern at the recruitment and use of children by [armed group] and other
armed groups in violation of international law
Expressing its concern that children have continued to be victims of abuses committed by armed elements of [armed
groups], and that women continue to be violently targeted and victims of sexual and gender based violence in [affected
country],
Condemning in the strongest terms abductions of women and children, expressing outrage at their exploitation and abuse,
including rape, sexual abuse, forced marriage, committed by [armed groups], and other individuals, groups, undertakings
and entities associated with [armed group], and encouraging all state and non-state actors with evidence to bring it to the
attention of the Council, along with any information that human trafficking may support the perpetrators financially
Strongly condemning reported and ongoing human rights violations and abuses and violations of international
humanitarian law, including those involving … rape and other forms of sexual and gender-based violence, recruitment and
use of children, enforced disappearances, arbitrary arrests and detention, violence aimed at spreading terror among the
civilian population, and attacks on schools, places of worship, hospitals, … by all parties, including armed groups and
national security forces, as well as the incitement to commit such abuses and violations …
Expressing deep concern at the impact of deteriorating security on the civilian population, including the significant
increase in population displacements in [year], and the consequent increase in humanitarian and protection needs,
including related to sexual and gender-based violence …

S/RES/2145 (2014),
op. 43

S/PRST/2014/21,
para. 8
S/RES/2122 (2013),
pp. 7

S/RES/2112 (2013),
pp. 11

S/RES/2088 (2013),
op. 13
S/RES/2008 (2011),
pp. 15

S/RES/1996 (2011),
op. 9
S/RES/1889 (2009),
op. 3
S/RES/1888 (2009),
pp. 3

S/PRST/2015/23

86/98

Recognizes that despite progress achieved on gender equality, enhanced efforts, including on measurable and action
oriented objectives, are necessary to secure the rights and full participation of women and girls and to ensure all women
and girls in [affected country] are protected from violence and abuse, that perpetrators of such violence and abuse must be
held accountable, and that women and girls enjoy equal protection under the law and equal access to justice, emphasizes
the importance of maintaining adequate legislative protections for women, strongly condemns discrimination and violence
against women and girls, in particular violence aimed at preventing girls from attending schools, stresses the importance of
implementing Security Council resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009), 1889 (2009), 1960 (2010), 2106
(2013) and 2122 (2013), and notes the mainstreaming commitments introduced therein, and of ensuring that women
fleeing domestic violence are able to find safe and secure refuge
The Security Council reiterates with grave concern that the illicit transfer, destabilizing accumulation and misuse of small
arms and light weapons fuel armed conflicts and have a disproportionate impact on violence perpetrated against women
and girls, and exacerbate sexual and gender-based violence
Expressing deep concern at the full range of threats and human rights violations and abuses
experienced by women in armed conflict and post-conflict situations, recognizing that those women
and girls who are particularly vulnerable or disadvantaged may be specifically targeted or at increased
risk of violence, and recognizing in this regard that more must be done to ensure that transitional
justice measures address the full range of violations and abuses of women’s human rights, and the
differentiated impacts on women and girls of these violations and abuses as well as forced
displacement, enforced disappearances, and destruction of civilian infrastructure,
Expressing its concern about the continued reports, including those reported by the Secretary -General
in [relevant report], of human rights abuses and violations of international humanitarian law,
including against women and children and the reports of increased incidents of sexual violence in
particular those attributed to armed men, stressing the importance of investigating such alleged
violations and abuses … committed by all parties, irrespective of their status or political affiliation,
reaffirming that those responsible for such violations must be held accountable and brought to justice
irrespective of their political affiliation, while respecting the rights of those in detention …, urging the
Government to increase and expedite its efforts to combat impunity,
Strongly condemns the continued violations of international humanitarian and human rights law,
including … rape and sexual slavery and other forms of sexual and gender -based violence …
perpetrated by armed groups, and specifically [list of relevant armed groups] that threaten the
population as well as peace and stability of [the affected country] and the subregion …
Recalling its resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009), 1889 (2009), and 1960 (2010) on
women, peace, and security, concerned about the high incidence of sexual and gender -based violence,
welcoming the continuing efforts of [the Mission] and the Government … to promote and protect the
rights of civilians, in particular women and children, and reaffirming the importance of appropriate
gender expertise and training in missions mandated by the Security Coun cil
Demands that all parties … immediately cease all forms of violence and human rights abuses against
the civilian population in [the affected country], in particular gender -based violence, including rape
and other forms of sexual abuse … with a view to specific and time-bound commitments to combat
sexual violence in accordance with resolution 1960 …
Strongly condemns all violations of applicable international law committed against women and girls in situations of armed
conflicts and post-conflict situations, demands all parties to conflicts to cease such acts with immediate effect, and
emphasizes the responsibility of all States to put an end to impunity and to prosecute those responsible for all forms of
violence committed against women and girls in armed conflicts, including rape and other sexual violence.
Reiterating deep concern that, despite its repeated condemnation of violence against women and children including all
forms of sexual violence in situations of armed conflict, and despite its calls addressed to all parties to armed conflict for
the cessation of such acts with immediate effect, such acts continue to occur, and in some situations have become
systematic or widespread.

15-20840

15-20840

Remind parties of
their obligations
under, and call for
compliance with,
applicable
international
humanitarian law
and human rights
law, and relevant
Security Council
resolutions

Women and the
prevention and
resolution of conflict

S/RES/2191 (2014),
pp. 5

S/RES/2187 (2014),
op. 19
S/RES/2162 (2014),
op. 16

See also, for example,
S/RES/2121 (2013), op.
16; S/RES/2046 (2012),
op. 7; S/RES/2040 (2012),
op. 3; S/RES/1960 (2010),
pp. 4 and pp. 10;
S/RES/1889 (2009), op. 2;
and S/RES/1888 (2009),
pp. 10 and pp. 6.

S/RES/2145 (2014),
pp. 30

S/RES/1960 (2010),
pp. 4
S/RES/1960 (2010),
pp. 10
S/RES/1325 (2000),
op. 9

S/RES/2242 (2015),
pp.11

S/RES/2242 (2015),
pp.7
S/RES/2238 (2015),
pp. 8
S/RES/2233 (2015),
pp. 13

See also, for example,
S/RES/2232 (2015), op.
33; S/RES/2223 (2015),
op. 26; S/RES/2205
(2015), pp. 8; S/RES/2187
(2014), op. 22;
S/RES/2173 (2014), op.
24; S/RES/2171 (2014),
pp. 21 and op. 18;
S/RES/2162 (2014), pp.
14; S/RES/2155 (2014),
op. 20; S/RES/2145
(2014), op. 14 and 44;
S/RES/2144 (2014), pp. 5;
S/RES/2122 (2013), pp.
13; S/RES/2112 (2013),
pp. 12; S/RES/2096
(2013), op. 14;
S/RES/2086 (2013), pp.
12; S/RES/2067 (2012),
pp. 14 and op. 8;
S/RES/2062 (2012), pp.
13; S/RES/2061 (2012),

S/PRST/2015/23

87/98

Gravely concerned at the lack of effective implementation of [previous resolutions on affected country] by the parties to
the … domestic conflict [in affected country], recalling in this regard their legal obligations under international
humanitarian law and international human rights law, as well as all the relevant decisions of the Security Council,
including by ceasing all attacks against civilians and civilian objects, including those involving … the widespread use of
… sexual and gender-based violence
Further demands that all parties immediately cease all forms of violence, human rights violations and abuses, violations of
international humanitarian law, including rape and other forms of sexual and gender-based violence …
Calls on those responsible to cease committing acts of sexual and gender-based violence immediately, and further calls
upon [UN Mission], where consistent with its authorities and responsibilities, to continue to support national and
international efforts to bring to justice perpetrators of grave abuses of human rights and violations of international
humanitarian law in [affected country], irrespective of their status or political affiliation
Recalling its resolutions [references] on the protection of civilians in armed conflict, … reaffirming that all parties to armed
conflict must take all feasible steps to ensure the protection of affected civilians, especially women, children and displaced
persons, including from sexual violence and all other forms of gender based violence, and that perpetrators of such
violence must be held accountable, calling for all parties to comply with their obligations under international law including
international humanitarian law and human rights law and for all appropriate measures to be taken to ensure the protection
of civilians …
Reiterating the necessity for all States and non-State parties to conflicts to comply fully with their
obligations under applicable international law, including the prohibition on all forms of sexual
violence,
Recalling that international humanitarian law affords general protection to women and children as part of the civilian
population during armed conflicts and special protection due to the fact that they can be placed particularly at risk.
Calls upon all parties to armed conflict to respect fully international law applicable to the rights and protection of women
and girls, especially as civilians, in particular the obligations applicable to them under the Geneva Conventions
of 1949 and the Additional Protocols thereto of 1977, the Refugee Convention of 1951 and the Protocol thereto of 1967,
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women of 1979 and the Optional Protocol
thereto of 1999 and the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child of 1989 and the two Optional Protocols
thereto of … 2000, and to bear in mind the relevant provisions of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court.
Welcoming the emphasis placed on achieving gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls in the recent
adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, reaffirming that women’s and girls’ empowerment and gender
equality are critical to conflict prevention and broader efforts to maintain international peace and security, noting in this
regard the emphasis of the Report of the Independent High-level Panel on Peace Operations (S/2015/446), the Report of
the Advisory Group of Experts for the Review of the United Nations Peacebuilding Architecture (S/2015/490), and the
Global Study on the need, inter alia, to invest more in conflict prevention and women’s empowerment, and further
emphasizing that persisting barriers to the full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) will only be dismantled through
dedicated commitment to women’s participation and human rights, and through concerted leadership, consistent
information and action, and support, to build women’s engagement in all levels of decision-making,
Noting the substantial link between women’s meaningful involvement in efforts to prevent, resolve and rebuild from
conflict and those efforts’ effectiveness and long-term sustainability, as well as the need for greater resourcing,
accountability, political will and attitudinal change,
Urging the full, equal and effective participation of women in all activities relating to the democratic transition, conflict
resolution and peacebuilding in line with relevant Security Council resolutions, including resolutions 1325 (2000) and
2122 (2013), and in this regard welcoming the United Nations facilitation of meetings of women’s participation within the
framework of the ongoing Political Dialogue
Encouraging the Government of [affected country] to continue in its efforts to promote and protect the rights of women
and reaffirming its resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009), 1889 (2009), 1960 (2010), 2106 (2013), and 2122
(2013) on women, peace, and security and reiterating the need for the full, equal, and effective participation of women;
reaffirming the key role women can play in re -establishing the fabric of society and stressing the need for their full
political participation, including in peace processes, political decision making, and the development of national strategies,
in order to take into account their perspectives, and looking forward to the full implementation, including funding, of
[affected country’s action plan for the implementation of Security Council resolution 1325 on Women, Peace and Security]

S/RES/2228 (2015),
op. 24

S/RES/2227 (2015),
op. 23

S/RES/2217 (2015),
op. 32 (b), (iv)

S/RES/2210 (2015),
op. 43

S/RES/2185 (2014),
op. 19
S/RES/2185 (2014),
pp. 24
S/RES/2147 (2014),
op. 29
S/RES/2127 (2013),
pp. 14
S/RES/2126 (2013),
pp. 7
S/RES/2117 (2013),
op. 12

S/RES/2103 (2013),
pp. 16

pp. 9; S/RES/2041 (2012),
op. 14; S/RES/2009
(2011), op. 3; S/RES/1935
(2010), op. 3; S/RES/1889
(2009), op. 1 and 8;
S/RES/1888 (2009),
pp. 13, pp. 14 and op. 16;
S/RES/1880 (2009),
pp 12; S/RES/1826
(2008), op. 6; S/RES/1674
(2006), op. 11; and
S/RES/1325 (2000), op. 1
and op. 15.

S/PRST/2015/23

88/98

… requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the relevant provisions of resolution 1325 (2000), and subsequent
resolutions on women, peace and security, are implemented, including supporting the full and effective participation of
women during all stages of peace processes, particularly in conflict resolution, post-conflict planning and peacebuilding,
including women’s civil society organizations, and to include information on this in his reporting to the Council; and
further requests [AU-UN Mission] to monitor and assess the implementation of these tasks and requests the SecretaryGeneral to include information on this in his reporting to the Council
Requests [UN Mission] to take fully into account gender considerations as a cross-cutting issue throughout its mandate and
to assist [national] authorities in ensuring the full and effective participation, involvement and representation of women at
all levels and at an early stage of the stabilization phase, including the security sector reform and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes, as well as in reconciliation and electoral processes and further requests [UN
Mission] to assist the parties to ensure women’s full and active participation in the implementation of [peace agreement]
Decides that the mandate of [UN Mission] shall include the following immediate priority tasks: (b) Support for the
implementation of the transition process, the extension of State authority and the preservation of territorial integrity … (iv)
To assist [national authorities] in mediation and reconciliation processes at both the national and local levels, working with
relevant regional and local bodies and religious leaders, including through inclusive national dialogue, transitional justice
and conflict-resolution mechanisms, while ensuring the full and effective participation of women
… recalls that the promotion and protection of women’s rights are an integral part of peace, reintegration and
reconciliation, recalls that women play a vital role in the peace process, welcomes the [national] Government’s
commitment to developing, implementing and monitoring the [national action plan to implement resolution 1325 of 2000]
and identifying further opportunities to support participation of women in the [nationally]-led and [nationally]-owned
peace and reconciliation process …
Highlights the critical role that United Nations Police Components can play in facilitating the participation and inclusion of
women in dialogue on conflict resolution and peacebuilding, including on rule of law and security issues
Reaffirming the important role of women in the prevention and resolution of conflicts and in peacebuilding, stressing the
importance of their equal participation and full involvement in all efforts for the maintenance and promotion of peace and
security, and the need to increase their role in decision-making with regard to conflict prevention and resolution, including
in relation to policing and the rule of law
Calls upon all actors … to ensure the equal and full inclusion of women in the [regional agreement] and at all stages of
conflict resolution, reconstruction and the promotion of peace including through taking account of the call of [international
Declaration] for ensuring that benchmarks, indicators and follow-up measures of the plan of implementation for the
[regional agreement] are gender-sensitive
Stressing the importance that the [national] Authorities ensure women’s full and equal participation in all discussions
pertinent to the resolution of the conflict and in all phases of electoral processes
Emphasizing the importance of the full participation of women in the implementation of agreements and in the prevention
and resolution of conflict and peacebuilding more broadly
Urges Member States, United Nations entities, intergovernmental, regional and subregional
organizations, to take further measures to facilitate women’s full and meaningful participation in all
policymaking, planning and implementation processes to combat and eradicate the illicit transfer,
destabilizing accumulation and misuse of small arms and light weapons in all its aspects and calls
upon, in this regard, all those involved in the planning for disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration and justice and security sector reform efforts to take into account the particular needs of
women and children associated with armed forces and armed groups, with the participation of women,
and to provide for their full access to these programmes inter alia, through consultation with civil
society, including women’s organizations, as appropriate;
Emphasizing the important role of women in prevention and resolution of conflicts and in
peacebuilding, as recognized in resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and 1889 (2009),
welcoming the Mission’s work in this regard and underlining that a gender perspective must continue
to inform the implementation of relevant aspects of the mandate of [the Mission],

15-20840

15-20840

Express concern at,
and condemn, acts,
threats or situations
of conflict-related
sexual violence

S/RES/2033 (2012),
op. 12

S/RES/1889 (2009),
op. 10

S/RES/1888 (2009),
pp. 12
S/RES/1880 (2009),
op. 14
S/RES/1820 (2008),
op. 12
S/RES/1325 (2000),
op. 8

S/RES/2226 (2015),
pp. 15

S/RES/2225 (2015),
pp. 13
S/RES/2206 (2015),
pp. 20
S/RES/2200 (2015),
pp. 11
S/RES/2162 (2014),
pp. 15

S/RES/2149 (2014),
pp. 9
S/RES/2116 (2013),
pp. 14

See also, for example,
S/RES/2187 (2014), pp. 5;
S/RES/2116 (2013),
op.10; S/RES/2112
(2013), op. 17;
S/RES/2109 (2013), op.
14; S/RES/2098 (2013),
pp. 19; S/RES/2070
(2012), op.18;
S/RES/2066 (2012), pp.
10; S/RES/2063 (2012),
op. 21; S/RES/2062
(2012), pp. 8; S/RES/2057
(2012), op.10;
S/RES/2040 (2012), pp. 7;
S/RES/2035 (2012), pp. 8;
S/RES/2010 (2011), op.
25; S/RES/2009 (2011),
pp. 5; S/RES/1960 (2010),
pp. 3, op. 1 and op. 2;
S/RES/1944 (2010), pp.
12 and op. 14;
S/RES/1938 (2010), pp.

S/PRST/2015/23

89/98

Reaffirms the vital role of women in the prevention and resolution of conflicts, peace negotiations,
peacebuilding, peacekeeping, humanitarian response, and post -conflict reconstruction, and stresses the
need for the United Nations and the African Union to work to ensure that women and gender
perspectives are fully integrated into all peace and security efforts undertaken by the two
organizations, including by building the necessary capacity;
Encourages Member States in post-conflict situations, in consultation with civil society, including women’s organizations,
to specify in detail women and girls’ needs and priorities and design concrete strategies, in accordance with their legal
systems, to address those needs and priorities, which cover inter alia support for greater physical security and better socioeconomic conditions, through education, income generating activities, access to basic services, in particular health services,
including sexual and reproductive health and reproductive rights and mental health, gender-responsive law enforcement
and access to justice, as well as enhancing capacity to engage in public decision-making at all levels.
Emphasizing the importance of addressing sexual violence issues from the outset of peace processes and mediation efforts,
in order to protect populations at risk and promote full stability, in particular in the areas of pre-ceasefire humanitarian
access and human rights agreements, ceasefires and ceasefire monitoring, Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration
(DDR), Security Sector Reform (SSR) arrangements, justice and reparations, post-conflict recovery and development.
Calls upon all concerned parties to ensure that the protection of women and children is addressed in the implementation of
the [peace agreement] as well as the post-conflict reconstruction and recovery phases, including continued monitoring and
reporting of the situation of women and children and that all reported abuses are investigated and those responsible brought
to justice.
Urges the Secretary-General and his Special Envoys to invite women to participate in discussions pertinent to the
prevention and resolution of conflict, the maintenance of peace and security, and post-conflict peace building, and
encourages all parties to such talks to facilitate the equal and full participation of women at decision-making levels.
Calls on all actors involved, when negotiating and implementing peace agreements, to adopt a gender perspective,
including, inter alia: (a) The special needs of women and girls during repatriation and resettlement and for rehabilitation,
reintegration and post-conflict reconstruction; (b) Measures that support local women’s peace initiatives and indigenous
processes for conflict resolution, and that involve women in all of the implementation mechanisms of the peace
agreements; (c) Measures that ensure the protection of and respect for human rights of women and girls, particularly as
they relate to the constitution, the electoral system, the police and the judiciary.
… expressing its concern about the continued reports, including those reported by the Secretary-General in his report of
[date and reference], of human rights violations and abuses and violations of international humanitarian law, including
against women and children, in particular sexual violence, stressing the importance of investigating and prosecuting
[human rights violations and abuses and violations of international humanitarian law] … committed by all parties,
irrespective of their status or political affiliation
Gravely concerned by the human rights abuses and violations of international humanitarian law committed by non-state
armed groups, in particular violent extremist groups, including … rape and other forms of sexual violence such as sexual
slavery, particularly targeting girls, which can cause displacement and affect access to education and healthcare services,
and emphasizing the importance of accountability for such abuses and violations,
Expressing grave concern that, according to [UN Mission human rights report] there are reasonable grounds to believe that
crimes against humanity, including … rape and other acts of sexual violence, … and stressing the urgent and imperative
need to end impunity in [affected country] and to bring to justice perpetrators of such crimes
Demanding an immediate and complete cessation by all parties to the armed conflict of all acts of sexual violence against
civilians …
Expressing its concern about the continued reports, including those reported by the Secretary-General in his report of [date
/ reference], of human rights violations and abuses and violations of international humanitarian law, including against
women and children, in particular sexual violence, stressing the importance of investigating and prosecuting [alleged
human rights violations and abuses and violations of international humanitarian law] … by all parties, irrespective of their
status or political affiliation
Remaining seriously concerned by multiple violations of international humanitarian law and the widespread human rights
violations and abuses, including those involving … sexual violence against women and children, rape …. committed by
[armed groups]
Recognizing the significant challenges that remain across all sectors, including continuing problems
with violent crime, in particular the high rates of sexual and gender -based violence, especially

16; and S/RES/1935
(2010), op.18.
S/RES/2095 (2013),
pp.7
S/RES/1962 (2010),
op. 9

S/RES/2228 (2015),
op. 24

S/RES/2227 (2015),
op. 14 (d), (iii)
S/RES/2226 (2015),
op. 19 (d)

S/RES/2223 (2015),
op. 4 (b), (ii)

S/RES/2217 (2015),
op. 40

15-20840

See also, for example,
S/RES/2227 (2015), op.
14 (e), (ii); S/RES/2223
(2015), op. 4 (a), (vi);
S/RES/2223 (2015), op. 4
(a), (i); S/RES/2211
(2015), op. 10;
S/RES/2210 (2015), pp.
26; S/RES/2187 (2014),
op. 4 (a), (i), and (b), (ii),
and 21; S/RES/2182
(2014), op. 34;
S/RES/2173 (2014), op.
24; S/RES/2162 (2014),
op. 19 (g); S/RES/2155
(2014), op. 4 (b), (ii);
S/RES/2149 (2014), op.
15, 30 (a), (ii), and 35;
S/RES/2147 (2014), op. 4
(a), (iii), 27, and 29;
S/RES/2134 (2014), op. 2
(e) and 24; S/RES/2127
(2013), op. 23;
S/RES/2122 (2013), op.2
and op.5; S/RES/2120
(2013), pp.25;
S/RES/2116 (2013), op.10
and op.12; S/RES/2113
(2013), op. 25;
S/RES/2112 (2013), op. 6;
S/RES/2109 (2013), op.
40; S/RES/2106 (2013),
op. 6, op. 7 and op. 12;
S/RES/2102 (2013), op. 2;
S/RES/2100 (2013), op.
16 and op. 25;
S/RES/2098 (2013), pp.
18 and op. 12 a) iii);
S/RES/2093 (2013), op.
14 and op. 27;
S/RES/2086 (2013), op. 8
and op. 12; S/RES/2070

S/PRST/2015/23

90/98

Role of United
Nations Security
Council authorized
peace operations and
other relevant
missions and actors

involving children, recalling its resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009), 1889 (2009),
1960 (2010) and 2106 (2013) on women, peace and security …
Expressing deep concern about reports of sexual violence during the conflict in [the affected country]
against women, men and children including in prison facilities and detention centres …
Condemns the persistence of reported human rights and humanitarian law violations against civilians
in different parts of the country, including numerous acts of sexual violence met with impunity, calls
upon all parties [in the affected country], with the continued support of [the mission], to ensure the
protection of civilians, especially women, children and displaced persons, stresses that the
perpetrators must be brought to justice and calls upon all parties to take appropriate measures to
refrain from, prevent and protect civilians from all forms of sexual violence …
Demands that the parties to the conflict immediately cease all acts of sexual and gender-based
violence and make and implement specific and time -bound commitments to combat sexual violence,
in accordance with resolution 2106 (2013); urges the Government, with the support of the United
Nations and African Union, to develop a structured framework through which conflict related sexual
violence will be comprehensively addressed, and to allow access for service provision for sexual
violence survivors; requests [AU-UN Mission] to strengthen its reporting on sexual and gender-based
violence and actions taken to combat it, including through the swift deployment of Women Protection
Advisers; requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the relevant provisions of resolution 1325
(2000), and subsequent resolutions on women, peac e and security, are implemented, including
supporting the full and effective participation of women during all stages of peace processes,
particularly in conflict resolution, post-conflict planning and peacebuilding, including women’s civil
society organizations, and to include information on this in his reporting to the Council; and further
requests [AU-UN Mission] to monitor and assess the implementation of these tasks and requests the
Secretary-General to include information on this in his reporting to t he Council
Decides that [UN Mission] shall perform the following tasks: … (d) Protection of civilians and
stabilization … (iii) To provide specific protection for women and children affected by armed conflict,
including through Child Protection Advisors and Women Protection Advisors, and address the needs
of victims of sexual and gender-based violence in armed conflict
Decides that the mandate of [UN Mission] shall be the following: … (g) Support for compliance with
international humanitarian and human rights law – To contribute to the promotion and protection of
human rights in [affected country], with special attention to grave violations and abuses committed
against children and women, notably sexual- and gender-based violence, in close coordination with
the Independent Expert established under [relevant UN Human Rights Council resolution]; … To
support the efforts of the Government in combating sexual- and gender-based violence, including
through contributing to the implementation of a nationall y owned multisectoral strategy in
cooperation with UN Action Against Sexual Violence in Conflict entities; – To provide specific
protection for women affected by armed conflict to ensure gender expertise and training, as
appropriate and within existing resources, in accordance with resolutions 1888 (2009), 1889 (2009),
1960 (2010) and 2106 (2013)
Decides that the mandate of [UN Mission] shall be as follows, and authorizes [UN Mission] to use all
necessary means to perform the following tasks: … (b) Monitoring and investigating human rights: …
(ii) To monitor, investigate, verify and report specifically and publicly on violations and abuses
committed against children and women, including all forms of sexual and gender -based violence in
armed conflict by accelerating the implementation of monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements
on conflict-related sexual violence and by strengthening the monitoring and reporting mechanism for
grave violations against children
Requests [UN Mission] to take fully into account gender considerations as a cross -cutting issue
throughout its mandate and to assist the Government of [affected country] in ensuring the full and
effective participation, involvement and representation of women in all spheres and at all levels,
including in stabilization activities, security sector reform and DDR and DDR/R processes, as well as
in the national political dialogue and electoral processes, through, inter alia, the prov ision of gender
advisers, and further requests enhanced reporting by [UN Mission] to the Council on this issue

15-20840

S/RES/2217 (2015),
op. 19

S/RES/2211 (2015),
op. 9 (c)

S/RES/2210 (2015),
op. 26

S/RES/2190 (2014),
op. 10 (e), (i) and (ii)

(2012), op. 18;
S/RES/2066 (2012), op.
11; S/RES/2037 (2012),
op. 17; S/RES/2003
(2011), op. 22;
S/RES/1996 (2011), op.
24; S/RES/1960 (2010),
pp. 5; S/RES/1945 (2010),
op. 4; S/RES/1944 (2010),
op. 12; S/RES/1906
(2009), op. 18;
S/RES/1889 (2009),
pp. 14; S/RES/1888
(2009), op. 12;
S/RES/1828 (2008), op.
15;S/RES/1794 (2007),
op. 18; S/RES/1674
(2006), op. 19;
S/RES/1590 (2005),
op. 15; S/RES/1565
(2004), op. 5(g);
S/RES/1528 (2004), op. 6
(n); S/RES/1325 (2000),
op. 4, 5 and 7; and
S/PRST/2007/40;
S/RES/1265 (1999), op.
13.

S/RES/2190 (2014),
op. 8

S/RES/2187 (2014),
op. 22

S/RES/2185 (2014),
op. 20

S/RES/2180 (2014),
op. 20

S/PRST/2015/23

91/98

Calls upon all parties to armed conflict in [affected country], including former [armed groups]
elements, to issue clear orders against sexual and gender based violence, and further calls upon
[national authorities] to investigate swiftly alleged abuses in order to hold perpetrators accountable, in
line with its resolutions 1960 (2010) and 2106 (2013), to ensure that t hose responsible for such crimes
are excluded from the security sector and prosecuted, and to facilitate immediate access for victims of
sexual violence to available services
Authorizes [UN Mission], in pursuit of the objectives described in [previous paragraph], to take all
necessary measures to perform the following tasks, bearing in mind that these are mutually
reinforcing tasks; (c) Work with the Government of [affected country] to identify threats to civilians
and implement existing prevention and response plans and strengthen civil -military cooperation,
including joint-planning, to ensure the protection of civilians from abuses and violations of human
rights and violations of international humanitarian law, including all forms of sexual and gender-based
violence and violations and abuses committed against children and persons with disabilities, and
requests [UN Mission] to ensure that child protection and gender concerns are integrated into all
operations and strategic aspects of [UN Mission]’s work and accelerate the coordinated
implementation of monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements on conflict -related sexual
violence and the swift deployment of Women Protection Advisers as called for in resolution 1960
(2010) and 2106 (2013), in order to seek commitments on the prevention and response to conflict related sexual violence
… welcomes the ten-year vision for the Ministry of Interior and [national police], including the
commitment to develop an effective strategy for coordinating increased recruitment, retention,
training, and capacity development for women in [national police], as well as furthering the
implementation of their gender integration strategy, and welcomes [UN Mission]’s c ontinued support
for women police associations
Decides that the mandate of [UN Mission] shall be the following, in priority order: … (e) Human
Rights Promotion and Protection (i) To carry out promotion, protection and monitoring activities of
human rights in [affected country], with special attention to violations and abuses committed against
children and women, notably sexual- and gender-based violence; (ii) To support the strengthening of
efforts by the Government of [affected country] to combat sexual- and gender-based violence,
including its efforts to combat impunity for perpetrators of such crimes
… reiterates its call on the Government of [affected country] to continu e to combat sexual violence,
particularly against children, and gender-based violence and to aggressively combat impunity for
perpetrators of such crimes and to provide redress, support and protection to victims, including
through public information campaigns and by continuing to strengthen national police capacity in this
area and to raise awareness of existing national legislation on sexual violence and encourages the
Government of [affected country] to reinforce its commitment in this regard, including b y funding the
implementation of its national action plan on sexual and gender -based violence and improving women
and girls’ access to justice
calls upon all parties to take measures to ensure women’s full and effective representation and
leadership in all conflict resolution and peacebuilding efforts, including through support to women’s
civil society organizations and incorporating gender expertise in peace talks, and encourages troop
and police contributing countries to take measures to increase the deployment of women in the
military, police, and civilian components of the mission, and reaffirms the importance of appropriate
gender expertise and training in all missions mandated by the Security Council
Encourages police-contributing countries to increase the percentage of women police in deployments
to United Nations peacekeeping operations, in particular senior officers, including in leadership roles,
and requests the Secretary-General to continue to support innovative efforts to encourage such
deployment of women police and to enhance coordination between Police Components and child
protection advisers as well as gender and women protection advisers
… calls upon the Government of [affected country], with the support of [UN Mission] and the United
Nations country team, to continue to promote and protect the rights of women and children as set out
in Security Council resolutions 1325 (2000), 1612 (2005), 1820 (2008 ), 1882 (2009), 1888 (2009),

S/RES/2158 (2014),
OP. 1 (d), (i), (iii),
and (iv), and (e), (iii)

S/PRST/2014/21,
para. 5

S/PRST/2014/21,
para. 6

S/RES/2106 (2013),
op. 16

S/RES/1960 (2010),
op. 3

S/PRST/2015/23

92/98
15-20840

1889 (2009), 2106 (2013), and 2122 (2013) and encourages all actors in the … Government, the
international community and civil society to renew their efforts to eliminate sexual and gender -based
violence in [affected country]; as well as to improve response to rape complaints and access to justice
for the victims of rape and other sexual crimes; encourages national authorities to promote national
legislation in this regard
Decides to extend [UN Mission]’s mandate for a period of [duration] as follows: … (d) To help build
the capacity of the … Government of [affected country] to: (i) Promote and protect human rights and
women’s empowerment, including through the provision of Gender Advisers and Hu man Rights
Advisers; (iii) Prevent conflict-related sexual and gender-based violence, including through the
provision of Women’s Protection Advisers; (iv) Strengthen [affected country]’s justice institutions and
to help ensure accountability in particular with respect to crimes against women and children; (e) To
monitor, help investigate and report to the Council on, and help prevent: (iii) Any violations or abuses
committed against women, including all forms of sexual and gender -based violence in armed conflict
The Security Council welcomes the additional steps taken to implement Security Council resolutions
2106 (2013) and 2122 (2013), and notes the importance of sustained efforts by the United Nations to
improve the quality of information and analysis on the impact of armed conflict on women and girls,
the role of women in all areas of conflict prevention and resolution, peacemaking and peacebuilding
and the gender dimensions of these areas, and to systematically include information and related
recommendations on issues of relevance to women, peace and security in their reports and briefings to
the Council. The Council reiterates its intention to increase its attention to women, peace and security
as a cross cutting subject in all relevant thematic areas of work on its agenda, including on threats to
international peace and security caused by terrorist acts
… The Security Council reaffirms the primary responsibility of Member States in the protection of
their populations, including refugee and internally displaced women and girls. The Council stresses
the importance of the Secretary-General and relevant United Nations agencies, inter alia, through
consultation with women and women-led organizations as appropriate, supporting the development
and strengthening of effective mechanisms for preventing and providing protection from violence,
including in particular sexual and gender based violence, to refugee and internally displaced women
and girls
Requests the Secretary-General and relevant United Nations entities to assist national authorities, with
the effective participation of women, in addressing sexual violence concerns explicitly in: (a)
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration processes, including, inter alia, by establishing
protection mechanisms for women and children in cantonment sites, as well as for civilians in close
proximity of cantonment sites and in communities of return, and by offering trauma and reintegration
support to women and children formerly associated with armed groups, as well as ex -combatants; (b)
security sector reform processes and arrangements, including through the provision of adequate
training for security personnel, encouraging the inclusion of more women in the security sector and
effective vetting processes in order to exclude from the security sector those who have perpetrated or
are responsible for acts of sexual violence; (c) justic e sector reform initiatives, including through
legislative and policy reforms that address sexual violence; training in sexual and gender -based
violence of justice and security sector professionals and the inclusion of more women at professional
levels in these sectors; and judicial proceedings that take into account the distinct needs and
protection of witnesses as well as survivors of sexual violence in armed conflict and post -conflict
situations, and their family members;
Encourages the Secretary-General to include in his annual reports submitted pursuant to resolutions
1820 (2008) and 1888 (2009) detailed information on parties to armed conflict that are credibly
suspected of committing or being responsible for acts of rap e or other forms of sexual violence, and to
list in an annex to these annual reports the parties that are credibly suspected of committing or being
responsible for patterns of rape and other forms of sexual violence in situations of armed conflict on
the Security Council agenda; expresses its intention to use this list as a basis for more focused United
Nations engagement with those parties, including, as appropriate, measures in accordance with the
procedures of the relevant sanctions committees;

15-20840

Comprehensive
strategies and timebound commitments

S/RES/1960 (2010),
op. 8

S/RES/1820 (2008),
op. 9
S/RES/1820 (2008),
op. 10

S/RES/1820 (2008),
op. 13
S/RES/1820 (2008),
op. 14
S/RES/2223 (2015),
op. 23

S/RES/2198 (2015),
op. 15
S/RES/2173 (2014),
op. 24
S/RES/2162 (2014),
op. 19 (g)
S/RES/2113 (2013),
op. 25

S/RES/2106 (2013),
op. 10

See also, for example,
S/RES/2228 (2015), op.
24; S/RES/2211 (2015),
op. 32; S/RES/2187
(2014), op. 20;
S/RES/2158 (2014), op.
11; S/RES/2155 (2014),
op. 18; S/RES/2149
(2014), op. 15;
S/RES/2127 (2013), op.
23; S/RES/2112 (2013),
op. 6; S/RES/2109 (2013),
op. 14; S/RES/2088
(2013), op. 15;
S/RES/2065 (2012), pp. 9;
S/RES/2000 (2011), op. 7;
S/RES/1996 (2011), op. 9;
S/RES/1889 (2009), op. 4;
S/RES/1885 (2009),
pp. 14; S/RES/1881
(2009), op. 14; and
S/RES/1880 (2009), op.
16.

S/PRST/2015/23

93/98

Requests the Secretary General to establish monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements on
conflict-related sexual violence, including rape in situations of armed conflict and post -conflict and
other situations relevant to the implementation of resolution [on Women, Peace and Security], as
appropriate, and taking into account the specificity of each country, that ensure a coherent and
coordinated approach at the field-level, and encourages the Secretary-General to engage with United
Nations actors, national institutions, civil society organizations, health -care service providers, and
women’s groups to enhance data collection and analysis of incidents, trends, and patterns of rape and
other forms of sexual violence to assist the Council’s consideration of appropriate actions, including
targeted and graduated measures, while respecting fully the integrity and specificity of the monitoring
and reporting mechanism implemented under [resolutions on children and armed conflicts];
Requests the Secretary-General to develop effective guidelines and strategies to enhance the ability of relevant UN
peacekeeping operations, consistent with their mandates, to protect civilians, including women and girls, from all forms of
sexual violence and to systematically include in his written reports to the Council on conflict situations his observations
concerning the protection of women and girls and recommendations in this regard.
Requests the Secretary-General and relevant United Nations agencies, inter alia, through consultation with women and
women-led organizations as appropriate, to develop effective mechanisms for providing protection from violence,
including in particular sexual violence, to women and girls in and around UN managed refugee and internally displaced
persons camps, as well as in all disarmament, demobilization, and reintegration processes, and in justice and security sector
reform efforts assisted by the United Nations.
Urges all parties concerned, including Member States, United Nations entities and financial institutions, to support the
development and strengthening of the capacities of national institutions, in particular of judicial and health systems, and of
local civil society networks in order to provide sustainable assistance to victims of sexual violence in armed conflict and
post-conflict situations.
Urges appropriate regional and sub-regional bodies in particular to consider developing and implementing policies,
activities, and advocacy for the benefit of women and girls affected by sexual violence in armed conflict.
… calls upon [parties to the conflict] as a matter of urgency to finalize actions plans to implement the commitments made
under their respective communiqués, urges the Government of [affected country] to implement without delay the
commitments made in accordance with resolution 1960 (2010) and 2106 (2013), and further calls for specific and time
bound commitments by both parties to combat sexual violence in accordance with resolution 1960 (2010) and 2106
(2013);
Also calls on the Government of [affected country] to pursue its action plan commitments to end sexual violence and
violations committed by its armed forces and undertake further efforts in that regard, noting that failure to do so may result
in [national armed forces] being named in the Secretary-General’s report on sexual violence
Demands that the parties to the conflict immediately cease all acts of sexual and gender-based violence; further demands
that the parties to the conflict make and implement specific and time-bound commitments to combat sexual violence, in
accordance with resolution 2106 (2013); requests [UN Mission] to report on sexual and gender-based violence and actions
taken to combat it, including through the timely appointment of Women Protection Advisers …
Decides that the mandate of [UN Mission] shall be the following: … (g) Support for compliance with international
humanitarian and human rights law – To support the efforts of the Government in combating sexual- and gender-based
violence, including through contributing to the development of a nationally owned multi-sectoral strategy in cooperation
with UN Action Against Sexual Violence in Conflict entities
Demands that the parties to the conflict immediately cease all acts of sexual violence, and make and
implement specific and time-bound commitments to combat such violence, in accordance with
resolution 2106 (2013); … notes the inclusion of protection to women and children from sexual
violence and gender based violence, as part of th e mission-wide Protection of Civilians strategy
identified in [relevant paragraph] above …
Reiterates its demand for the complete cessation with immediate effect by all parties to armed conflict
of all acts of sexual violence and its call for these parties to make and implement specific time -bound
commitments to combat sexual violence, which should include, inter alia, issuance of clear orders
through chains of command prohibiting sexual violence and accountability for breaching these orders,
the prohibition of sexual violence in Codes of conduct, military and police field manuals or equivalent
and to make and implement specific commitments on timely investigation of alleged abuses; and

S/PRST/2015/23

94/98

Training for
peacekeeping
personnel and other
relevant actors

15-20840

further calls upon all relevant parties to armed conflict to cooperate in the framework of such
commitments, with appropriate United Nations mission personnel who monitor their implementation,
and calls upon the parties to designate, as appropriate, a high -level representative responsible for
ensuring implementation of such commitments;
… emphasizes the importance of [the Mission] supporting the Government of [the affected country] in
developing and implementing a national strategy for preventing and responding to sexual and gender based violence;
Calls upon parties to armed conflict to make and implement specific and time-bound commitments to
combat sexual violence, which should include, inter alia, issuance of clear orders through chains of
command prohibiting sexual violence and the prohibition of sexual violence in Codes of Conduct,
military field manuals, or equivalent; and further calls upon those parties to make and implement
specific commitments on timely investigation of alleged abuses in order to hold perpetrators
accountable;
Requests the Secretary-General to track and monitor implementation of these commitments by parties
to armed conflict on the Security Council’s agenda that engage in patterns of rape and other sexual
violence, and regularly update the Council in relevant reports and briefings;
Decides that the mandate of [UN Mission] shall be the following: … (e) Reconstitution and reform of
security institutions – … to facilitate the provision of training, within its current resources and as
requested by the Government and in close coordination with other international partners, in human
rights, child protection and protection from sexual and gender -based violence to the security and law
enforcement institutions, …
Welcomes the continued cooperation between, and the conduct of coordinated activities by, [UN
Mission] and the defence and security forces, including [national army] and calls for strict adherence
by the defence and security forces, including [national army] to international humanitarian, human
rights and refugee laws and in this context, recalls the importance of training in human rights, child
protection and sexual- and gender-based violence for security and law-enforcement agencies
Welcoming the efforts of [UN Mission] and international partners in delivering training in human
rights, international humanitarian law, gender mainstreaming, child protection and protection from
sexual and gender-based violence for [national] security institutions and underlining its importance …
… encourages troop- and police-contributing countries to provide all military and police personnel
with adequate training to carry out their responsibilities, and relevant United Nations entities to make
available appropriate guidance or training modules, including in particular the United Nations
predeployment scenario-based training on prevention of sexual and gender-based violence;
Reaffirms the importance of appropriate gender expertise and training in missions mandated by the
Security Council in accordance with resolutions 1325 (2000) 1820 (2008) and 2106 (2013) …
Recognizes the role of United Nations peacekeeping contingents in preventing sexual violence, and,
in this respect, calls for all predeployment and in-mission training of troop- and police-contributing
country contingents to include training on sexual and gender-based violence, which also takes into
account the distinct needs of children; further encourages troop - and police-contributing countries to
increase the number of women recruited and deployed in peace operations;
… further requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide and deploy guidance on addressing
sexual violence for predeployment and inductive training of military and police personnel, and to
assist missions in developing situation-specific procedures to address sexual violence at the field level
and to ensure that technical support is provided to troop and police contributing countries in order to
include guidance for military and police personnel on addressing sexual violence in predeployment
and induction training;
Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with the Security Council, the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations and its Working Group and relevant States, as appropriate, to develop and implement appropriate training
programs for all peacekeeping and humanitarian personnel deployed by the United Nations in the context of missions as
mandated by the Council to help them better prevent, recognize and respond to sexual violence and other forms of
violence against civilians.

S/RES/2102 (2013),
op. 8
S/RES/1960 (2010),
op. 5

S/RES/1960 (2010),
op. 6
S/RES/2226 (2015),
op. 19 (e)

S/RES/2226 (2015),
op. 17

S/RES/2211 (2015),
pp. 12
S/RES/2122 (2013),
op.9
S/RES/2109 (2013),
op. 40
S/RES/2106 (2013),
op. 14

S/RES/1960 (2010),
op. 16

S/RES/1820 (2008),
op. 6

See also, for example,
S/RES/2187 (2014), op.
13; S/RES/2066 (2012),
pp. 10; S/RES/1960
(2010), op.15;
S/RES/1906 (2009), op.
13; S/RES/1898 (2009),
op. 10; S/RES/1325
(2000), op. 6; S/RES/1296
(2000), op. 19; and
S/RES/1265 (1999),
op. 14.

15-20840

Targeted and
graduated measures
in response to
violations of
international
humanitarian law
and human rights
law related to
women

Accountability for
the perpetrators of
sexual violence

S/RES/1820 (2008),
op. 8
S/RES/2242 (2015),
op. 6

See also, for example,
S/RES/1820 (2008), op. 5,
and S/RES/1807 (2008),
op. 9, 11, and 13 (e)

S/RES/2198 (2015),
op. 5 (e)

S/RES/2136 (2014),
op. 4 (e), (h) and (j)

S/RES/2134 (2014),
op. 37 (b)

S/RES/2106 (2013),
op. 13

S/RES/2078 (2012),
op. 4

S/RES/2242 (2015),
op. 14

S/RES/2232 (2015),
pp. 11

S/RES/2217 (2015),
op. 19

See also, for example,
S/RES/2232 (2015), pp.
11; S/RES/2203 (2015),
op. 6; S/RES/2198 (2015),
pp. 19; S/RES/2197
(2015), op. 12; S/Res/2190
(2014), op. 8; S/RES/2182
(2014), op. 32;

S/PRST/2015/23

95/98

Encourages troop and police contributing countries, in consultation with the Secretary-General, to consider steps they
could take to heighten awareness and the responsiveness of their personnel participating in UN peacekeeping operations to
protect civilians, including women and children, and prevent sexual violence against women and girls in conflict and postconflict situations, including wherever possible the deployment of a higher percentage of women peacekeepers or police.
Expresses its intention, when adopting or renewing targeted sanctions in situations of armed conflict, to consider
designating, as appropriate, those actors, including those in terrorist groups, engaged in violations of international
humanitarian law and violations and abuses of human rights, including sexual and gender-based violence, forced
disappearances, and forced displacement, and commits to ensuring that the relevant expert groups for sanctions
committees have the necessary gender expertise;
Decides that [Security Council-imposed travel ban and financial sanctions] shall apply to individuals and entities as
designated by the [relevant Security Council sanctions Committee] for engaging in or providing support for acts that
undermine the peace, stability or security of [affected country], and decides that such acts include: ... (e) being involved in
planning, directing, or participating in the targeting of children or women in situations of armed conflict, including killing
and maiming, rape and other sexual violence, abduction, forced displacement, and attacks on schools and hospitals
Decides that the measures referred to in [paragraph of the resolution providing for individual targeted measures] shall
apply to the following individuals, and, as appropriate, entities, as designated by the Committee: (e) Individuals or entities
operating in [affected country] and involved in planning, directing, or participating in the targeting of children or women in
situations of armed conflict, including killing and maiming, rape and other sexual violence, abduction, forced
displacement, and attacks on schools and hospitals; … (h) Individuals or entities acting on behalf of or at the direction of a
designated individual or entity, or acting on behalf of or at the direction of an entity owned or controlled by a designated
individual or entity; … (j) Individuals or entities providing financial, material, or technological support for, or goods or
services to, or in support of a designated individual or entity
Further decides in this regard that the measures contained in [paragraphs of the resolution providing for individual restrictive
measures] shall also apply to the individuals and entities designated by the Committee as: … (b) involved in planning,
directing, or committing acts that violate international human rights law or international humanitarian law, as applicable, or
that constitute human rights abuses or violations, in the [affected country], including acts involving sexual violence, targeting of
civilians, ethnic- or religious-based attacks, attacks on schools and hospitals, and abduction and forced displacement
Urges existing sanctions committees, where within the scope of the relevant criteria for designation,
and consistent with resolution 1960 (2010) to apply targeted sanctions against those who perpetrate
and direct sexual violence in conflict; and reiterates its intention, when adopting or renewing targeted
sanctions in situations of armed conflict, to consider including, where appropriate, designation criteria
pertaining to acts of rape and other forms of serious sexual violence;
Decides that the measures referred to in [relevant] paragraph … above [travel ban and assets freeze]
shall apply to the following individuals, and, as appropriate, entities, as designated by the Committee:
… (e) Individuals or entities operating in [the affected country] and committing serious violations
involving the targeting of … women in situations of armed conflict, including killing and maiming,
sexual violence, abduction, and forced displacement;
Urges Member States to strengthen access to justice for women in conflict and post -conflict
situations, including through the prompt investigation, prosecution and punishment of perpetrators of
sexual and gender-based violence, as well as reparation for victims as appropriate, notes that the fight
against impunity for the most serious crimes of international concern committed against women and
girls has been strengthened through the work of the International Criminal Court, ad hoc and mixed
tribunals, as well as specialized chambers in national tribunals and reiterates its intention to continue
forcefully to fight impunity and uphold accountability with appropriate means;
Welcoming the AU’s investigation of allegations of sexual violence allegedly perpetrated by some [AU Mission] troops,
underlining the importance of the AU implementing the recommendations of the report, expressing its disappointment that
the AU did not receive full cooperation from all [AU Mission] troop contributing countries in carrying out its investigation,
and calling on the AU and troop contributing countries to ensure that allegations are properly investigated and appropriate
follow-up action is taken, including full investigation of those cases of abuse evidenced by the AU investigation team
Calls upon all parties to armed conflict in [affected country], including former [armed groups] elements, to issue clear
orders against sexual and gender based violence, and further calls upon [national authorities] to investigate swiftly alleged
abuses in order to hold perpetrators accountable, in line with its resolutions 1960 (2010) and 2106 (2013), to ensure that

S/RES/2211 (2015),
op. 32

S/RES/2187 (2014),
op. 21

S/RES/2182 (2014),
pp. 30
S/RES/2144 (2014),
op. 2
S/PRST/2014/21,
para. 7

S/RES/2121 (2013),
op.16

S/RES/2106 (2013),
pp. 9
S/RES/2106 (2013),
op. 2

S/RES/2066 (2012),
op. 9

S/RES/2062 (2012),
pp. 8

S/RES/2153 (2014), pp.
16; S/RES/2147 (2014),
op. 29; S/RES/2136
(2014), pp. 14;
S/RES/2122 (2013),
op.12; S/RES/2106
(2013), op. 18;
S/RES/2078 (2012),
pp. 10; S/RES/1960
(2010), pp. 5; S/RES/1902
(2009), op. 19;
S/RES/1591 (2005),
pp. 10; S/RES/1493
(2003), op. 8; and
S/RES/1468 (2003), op. 2.

S/PRST/2015/23

96/98
15-20840

those responsible for such crimes are excluded from the security sector and prosecuted, and to facilitate immediate access
for victims of sexual violence to available services
Calls upon the Government of [affected country] to pursue the full implementation, with the support of [UN Mission] as
appropriate, of the action plan to prevent and end the recruitment and use of children and sexual violence by [national
army], and to strengthen its efforts to combat impunity for conflict-related sexual violence, including sexual violence
committed by [national army], noting that failure to do so may result in [national army] being named in the SecretaryGeneral’s report on sexual violence, and to provide all necessary services and protection to survivors and victims
Calls upon the Government of [affected country] to move forward expeditiously and transparently to complete the
investigations of allegations of human rights violations and abuses consistent with international standards, to hold to
account all those responsible for violations and abuses of human rights and violations of international humanitarian law,
and to ensure that all victims of sexual violence have equal protection under the law and equal access to justice, and to
safeguard equal respect for the rights of women and girls in these processes
… welcoming the African Union’s deployment of a team to conduct a full investigation into … allegations [of acts of
sexual exploitation and abuses committed by AU Mission elements], and underlining the importance of holding to account
those responsible for such abuses
… calls for those responsible for serious violations of international humanitarian law and human rights law, including
sexual violence and violations and abuses against children, to be held accountable in accordance with international
standards, and urges all Member States to cooperate closely with the … government [of the affected country] in its efforts
to end impunity for such violations
The Council urges Member States to take measures … to strengthen access to justice for [refugee and internally displaced]
women [who are subject to violence], including through the prompt investigation, prosecution and punishment of
perpetrators of sexual and gender based violence, as well as reparations for victims as appropriate. The Council stresses
that the fight against impunity for the most serious crimes of international concern committed against women and girls has
been strengthened through the work of the International Criminal Court, ad hoc and mixed tribunals, as well as specialized
chambers in national tribunals
Calls upon all parties to armed conflict in the [affected country], including [specific armed group]
elements to issue clear orders against sexual violence, and further calls upon thos e parties to make and
implement specific commitments on timely investigation of alleged abuses in order to hold
perpetrators accountable, in line with its resolution 1960 (2010), and to facilitate immediate access for
victims of sexual violence to available services;
Recalling the inclusion of a range of sexual violence offences in the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) and the statutes of the ad hoc international criminal tribunals,
Notes that sexual violence can constitute a crime against humanity or a constitutive act with respect to
genocide; further recalls that rape and other forms of serious sexual violence in armed conflict are war
crimes; calls upon Member States to comply with their relevant obligations to continue to fight
impunity by investigating and prosecuting those subject to their jurisdiction who are responsible for
such crimes; encourages Member States to include the full range of crimes of sexual violence in
national penal legislation to enable prosecutions for such acts; recognizes that effective investigation
and documentation of sexual violence in armed conflict is instrumental both in bringing perpetrators
to justice and ensuring access to justice for survivors;
Reiterates its calls on the Government of [the affected country] to continue to combat sexual and
gender-based violence and, in coordination with [the mission], to continue to combat impunity for
perpetrators of such crimes and to provide redress, support, and protection to victims, including
through the strengthening of national police capacity in this area and by raising awareness of existing
national legislation on sexual violence;
Expressing its concern about the continued reports of human rights abuses and violations of
international humanitarian law, including against women and children, including reports of increased
incidents of sexual violence in particular those attributed to armed men, stressing the importance to
investigate such alleged violations and abuses committed by all parties, irrespective of their status or
political affiliation, including those that occurred throughout the [relevant] crisis, including …
reaffirming that those responsible for such violations must be held accountable and noting [relevant
entity] commitments in this regard,

15-20840

Sexual exploitation
and abuse

Recognizing the need for civilian and military leaders, consistent with the principle of command responsibility, to
demonstrate commitment and political will to prevent sexual violence and to combat impunity and enforce accountability,
and that inaction can send a message that the incidence of sexual violence in conflicts is tolerated.

S/RES/1888 (2009),
pp. 11

Notes that rape and other forms of sexual violence can constitute a war crime, a crime against humanity, or a constitutive
act with respect to genocide, stresses the need for the exclusion of sexual violence crimes from amnesty provisions in the
context of conflict resolution processes, and calls upon Member States to comply with their obligations for prosecuting
persons responsible for such acts, to ensure that all victims of sexual violence, particularly women and girls, have equal
protection under the law and equal access to justice, and stresses the importance of ending impunity for such acts as part of
a comprehensive approach to seeking sustainable peace, justice, truth, and national reconciliation.
Condemning in particular sexual violence perpetrated by [militias and armed groups as well as elements of the national
armed and police forces] and other security and intelligence services, stressing the urgent need for the [the affected State],
in cooperation with [peacekeeping mission] and other relevant actors, to end such violence and bring the perpetrators, as
well as the senior commanders under whom they serve, to justice, and calling on Member States to assist in this regard and
to continue to provide medical, humanitarian and other assistance to victims.
… urges those troop- and police-contributing countries that are currently listed [in the annexes of the Secretary-General’s
reports on Children and Armed Conflict and Sexual Violence in Conflict] to cease … [grave violations against children in
armed conflict and acts of sexual violence in armed conflict] and implement actions plans expeditiously, thereby avoiding
suspension from peace operations, further requests the Secretary-General to include a section on conduct and discipline
including, whenever relevant, adherence to his zero tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse, in all his reports on
country-specific situations to the Security Council
Expresses deep concern over continuing allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse by United Nations peacekeepers and
non-United Nations forces, including military, civilian and police personnel, urges police- and troop-contributing countries
to provide robust pre-deployment training on sexual exploitation and abuse and vetting of their peacekeeping personnel, to
conduct swift and thorough investigations of their uniformed personnel and, if appropriate, to prosecute, and to inform the
United Nations in a timely manner of the status and outcome of investigations, calls upon the United Nations to cooperate
as appropriate and in a timely manner with national authorities, including courts responsible for investigating such
allegations, when requested for that purpose, and requests United Nations troop- and police-contributing country meetings
to address sexual S/RES/2242 (2015) exploitation and abuse whenever relevant and the United Nations Military Staff
Committee to discuss these issues as part of its regular programme;
Welcomes the efforts being undertaken by [UN Mission] to implement the Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance policy on
sexual exploitation and abuse and to ensure full compliance of its personnel with the United Nations code of conduct,
requests the Secretary-General to continue to take all necessary action in this regard and to keep the Security Council
informed, and urges troop-contributing countries to take preventive and disciplinary action to ensure that such acts are
properly investigated and punished in cases involving their personnel
Requests the Secretary-General to continue and strengthen efforts to implement the policy of zero tolerance on sexual
exploitation and abuse by United Nations personnel, as well as the policy on prohibition of child labour in United Nations
peacekeeping operations, and urges police-contributing countries to take appropriate preventative action, including predeployment and in-mission awareness training and other action to ensure full accountability, including prosecutions, in
cases of such conduct involving their nationals
Expressing concern at the reports of sexual violence and exploitation allegedly perpetrated by some [AU Mission] troops,
reminding [AU Mission] of the United Nations Human Rights and Due Diligence policy, underscoring in this context the
importance of the United Nations Zero Tolerance Policy on Sexual Exploitation and Abuse in the context of peacekeeping,
welcoming the African Union’s deployment of a team to conduct a full investigation into these allegations, and underlining
the importance of holding to account those responsible for such abuses
Recalling its resolutions … on women, peace, and security, … recognizing the challenges that remain
in addressing the serious issues of gender-based violence and sexual exploitation and abuse, and
calling on Member States to increase support to the Government in its efforts,
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to fully investigate the allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse by civilian
and military personnel of [the mission], and to take the appropriate measures set out in the Secretary-General’s bulletin on
special measures for protection from sexual exploitation and sexual abuse.

S/RES/1820 (2008),
op. 4

S/RES/1794 (2007),
pp. 14

S/RES/2242 (2015),
op. 10

S/RES/2242 (2015),
op. 9

S/RES/2236 (2015),
op. 11

S/RES/2185 (2014),
op. 22

S/RES/2182 (2014),
pp. 30

S/RES/1906 (2009),
op. 12

97/98

S/PRST/2015/23

S/RES/1938 (2010),
pp. 16

See also, for example,
S/RES/2230 (2015), op.
26; S/RES/2225 (2015),
op. 16; S/RES/2223
(2015), op. 13;
S/RES/2218 (2015), op.
12; S/RES/2205 (2015),
op. 25; S/RES/2197
(2015), op. 12;
S/RES/2180 (2014), op.
23; S/RES/2172 (2014),
op. 11; S/RES/2168
(2014), op. 12;
S/RES/2084 (2012), op. 4;
S/RES/2131 (2013), op. 5;
S/RES/2126 (2013), op.
22; S/RES/2075 (2012),
op. 15; S/RES/2070
(2012), op. 19; S/RES/
2064 (2011), op. 9;
S/RES/1996 (2011), op.
28; S/RES/1840 (2008),
op. 22; S/RES/1820
(2008), op. 7;
S/RES/1674 (2006),
op. 20; S/RES/1565
(2004), op. 25;
S/RES/1460 (2003), op.
10; and S/RES/1436
(2002), op. 15.

S/RES/1769 (2007),
op. 16

S/PRST/2015/23

98/98

Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary measures to achieve actual compliance in [the peacekeeping mission]
with the United Nations zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse, including the development of strategies
and appropriate mechanisms to prevent, identify and respond to all forms of misconduct, including sexual exploitation
and abuse, and the enhancement of training for personnel to prevent misconduct and ensure full compliance with the
United Nations code of conduct, and to further take all necessary action in accordance with the Secretary-General’s
Bulletin on special measures for protection from sexual exploitation and sexual abuse (ST/SGB/2003/13) and to keep the
Council informed, and urges troop-contributing countries to take appropriate preventive action including the conduct
of pre-deployment awareness training and … post-deployment awareness training, and to take disciplinary action and
other action to ensure full accountability in cases of such conduct involving their personnel.

15-20840
