S/2014/181

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
13 March 2014
Original: English

Conflict-related sexual violence
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report, which covers the period from January to December 2013,
is submitted pursuant to paragraph 22 of Security Council resolution 2106 (2013), in
which the Council requested me to submit annual reports on the implementation of
resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009), 1960 (2010) and 2106 (2013) with regard to
conflict-related sexual violence. The report presents information on parties to
conflict credibly suspected of committing or being responsible for acts of rape and
other forms of sexual violence. The term “conflict-related sexual violence” refers to
rape, sexual slavery, forced prostitution, forced pregnancy, forced sterilization and
any other form of sexual violence of comparable gravity perpetrated against women,
men or children with a direct or indirect (temporal, geographical or causal) link to a
conflict. This link to conflict may be evident in the profile of the perpetrator, the
profile of the victim, the climate of impunity or State collapse, any cross -border
dimensions or violations of the terms of a ceasefire agreement. While conflict related sexual violence may be present in several contexts not mentioned in the
current report, the following outlines those countries in which credible information
is currently available, including situations of emerging concern.
2.
The report highlights actions taken and challenges faced by States in conflict
and post-conflict situations to protect women, men and children from such sexual
violence; the implementation of the monitoring, analysis and reporting
arrangements; the deployment of women’s protection advisers; the work of the Team
of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict; the efforts of the
United Nations system; and recommendations to strengthen efforts to combat this
egregious crime. In the report, appropriate actions are recommended and a list of
parties credibly suspected of committing or being responsible for patterns of r ape
and other forms of sexual violence in situations of armed conflict on the agenda of
the Security Council is contained in the annex. The report should be read in
conjunction with my previous reports on the same topic ( A/66/657-S/2012/33 and
A/67/792-S/2013/149). Preparation of the report involved consultations with the
13 United Nations entities that are members of United Nations Action against
Sexual Violence in Conflict, United Nations field missions and country teams,
concerned Member States and non-governmental organizations. United Nations
peacekeeping and political missions, as well as country teams, were the primary
14-26364 (E)

070414

*1426364*

S/2014/181

sources of information. In the present report, reference is made to the nature and
scope of sexual violence in 20 countries.

II. Current and emerging concerns regarding sexual violence
as it relates to international peace and security
3.
Sexual violence is almost universally underreported because of the risks faced
by survivors and witnesses who come forward and by the humanitarian workers,
human rights defenders, journalists and others to whom they speak. These risks
include severe stigmatization, familial and social shunning and reprisals. In many
contexts, the limited availability of services also hampers data gathering. Even
where primary health care is available to survivors, staff may lack the capacity and
the resources to provide holistic care, most notably psychosocial support and mental
health services. In several contexts, service provision is limited also by access
restrictions. In the absence of adequate and appropriate services, it is all the more
difficult to have a comprehensive understanding of the scale, scope and character of
conflict-related sexual violence.
4.
Clearly, sexual violence is closely related to broader issues of insecurity and
security-sector reform and to incomplete and/or flawed disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes. It is essential, therefore, to address
conflict-related sexual violence explicitly in such processes and in the context of
peace agreements and ceasefires, which often establish the parameters for security sector reform and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration efforts. The
prevalence of sexual violence during periods of conflict often leaves lasting
legacies, with acute consequences for the security of women and children in
peacetime. This is demonstrated by the high levels of rape and other forms of sexual
violence perpetrated against women and minors in some post-conflict settings.
Ultimately, this has a direct bearing on the durability of peace and prospects for
sustainable development. It is also evident that sexual violence perpetrated by
demobilized actors and non-State armed groups is sometimes related to criminal
activities such as the illicit extraction of resources and human trafficking and, in
some cases, forms part of a strategy to control territory and access to resources. In
such contexts, sexual violence is an effective tool of intimidation and social control.
5.
In several of my reports I have highlighted the issue of sexual violence
perpetrated in the context of conflict specifically as it relates to contested political
processes. In some cases, female protesters specifically have been targeted,
sometimes by organized groups or multiple perpetrators. In this regard, the Security
Council has expressed grave concern regarding sexual violence crimes committed in
the context of contested elections in Kenya in 2007 and Guinea in 2009. This issue
requires continued vigilance by the Security Council, and further monitoring,
analysis and preventive action, as appropriate.
6.
During 2013, sexual violence was reported by displaced persons to have been
a significant factor motivating their flight. During flight and while displaced,
civilian populations continued to be vulnerable to sexual violence. In the context of
prolonged and repeated displacement, effective mechanisms to prevent rape and
other forms of sexual violence are often absent or limited. In some cases, the use of
extreme violence, including honour killings, is related to sexual violence crimes.
These risks not only lead to underreporting of sexual violence but to other harmful

2/33

14-26364

S/2014/181

practices, such as early and/or forced marriage. The settlement of allegations of rape
of women and girls through informal or “traditional” justice arrangements often
results in agreements between the perpetrator and the survivor ’s family or
community that are detrimental to the survivor.
7.
I have also previously highlighted the specific concern of sexual violence
perpetrated against men and boys. Such incidents were again reported in 2013 but it
remains difficult to determine their scale and scope and to respond accordingly.
Challenges in this area include deep stigma, the failure of national legislation in
many instances to recognize sexual violence against men and boys as a crime, the
inadequacy of services specifically for male victims and the lack of access to legal
services. In 2013, the Office of my Special Representative on Sexual Violence in
Conflict, Zainab Hawa Bangura, convened, together with the Government of the
United States of America, a workshop of experts on sexual violence against men and
boys, the key recommendations of which will inform the response of the United
Nations system going forward.
8.
Similarly, the issues of pregnancy as a result of sexual violence and of the
plight of children born of rape require further research and information as a basis for
response. In situations where conflict-related sexual violence takes the form of
campaigns of forced pregnancy, and where abortion services are illegal, unsafe
abortion practices may put the lives of survivors at greater risk. There are also the
related risks of HIV transmission and limited access to HIV prophylaxis.
9.
Access to justice for survivors can be hindered by physical restrictions, by
inadequate legislation or by the financial and social costs associated with reporting
and pursuing justice for crimes of sexual violence. A number of countries also lack
the necessary national legislation or have failed to fully adopt and implement
legislation that would offer improvements in terms of accountability and reparations
for survivors. Many countries lack legal aid services or protocols for the protection
of victims and witnesses. United Nations actors, including the Team of Experts on
the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict, continue to support national
authorities in this regard.
10. At the global level, there is now unprecedented commitment and momentum.
In its resolution 2106 (2013), the Security Council outlined for the first time a
comprehensive approach and framework to prevent conflict -related sexual violence.
In April 2013, the countries of the Group of Eight adopted the historic Declaration
on Preventing Sexual Violence. On the sidelines of the sixty-eighth session of the
General Assembly, more than 140 Member States endorsed the Declaration of
Commitment to End Sexual Violence in Conflict at an event co -chaired by my
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict and the Foreign Secretary of
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, William Hague, who
continues to vigorously champion this cause (see A/68/633, annex). These are
notable and important advances, but it is crucial that we now focus our collective
efforts on converting these political commitments into concrete actions aimed at
prevention and the provision of services on the ground.

14-26364

3/33

S/2014/181

A.

Addressing sexual violence in conflict and information on parties
credibly suspected of committing or being responsible for acts of
rape or other forms of sexual violence
11. The following information is based on cases recorded and documented by the
United Nations system. As such, it is only indicative of the scope, scale and
character of sexual violence committed against women, men and children.
Afghanistan
12. Between March and September 2013, the Afghanistan Independent Human
Rights Commission indicated an increase of 25 per cent in violations against
women, including an increase in reported incidents of sexual violence and forced
marriage of women and girls. Furthermore, the Commission r eported an increase in
sexual violence against men and boys during 2013 and a pattern of sexual
exploitation of children by commanders. Perpetrator profiles include police and
military commanders, former warlords, tribal leaders and non-State armed groups.
Armed groups operating in Takhar, Kunduz and Badakhshan are among those
responsible for sexual violence against minors. The practice of bacha bazi (an
illegal form of child prostitution and sexual slavery) is common among militia
leaders and is understood to be prevalent in the northern and southern provinces.
Members of both the national and local police have also been reported to be
involved in this practice. Reporting of sexual violence against men and boys is
severely limited but the United Nations has received reports of threats of sexual
violence against men in detention. In addition, the Organization has noted that
sexual violence is perpetrated and women are killed in Taliban -controlled areas as a
method of curtailing the participation of women and girls in public life. Service
provision remains extremely limited: there are only 19 women ’s centres in
34 provinces. There is a limited number of staff trained to treat survivors, a lack of
female medical staff in rural areas and a lack of legal service provision in hospitals,
while psychological services are unavailable even in urban hospitals. Most cases
remain untreated owing to a combination of limited resources and insufficient
coordination between the Government and civil society. In some instances,
survivors reported being raped a second time by security forces while seeking
protection.
Recommendation
13. I call on the Government to reinforce efforts to implement relevant legislation
and, with the support of the United Nations and civil society, to establish the
infrastructure necessary to systematically collect data and report on sexual violence,
thereby creating a basis for a justice and service response.
Central African Republic
14. An already fragile security, human rights and humanitarian situation worsened
during 2013, most notably with the attack on Bangui of 5 December by anti -balaka
groups and elements of the former armed forces of the Central African Republic
against ex-Séléka elements and the Transitional Government led by Michel
Djotodia. At the end of the reporting period, human rights violations against
civilians, rooted in sectarian conflict, had reached acute levels. At the request of my
Special Representative and Head of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding

4/33

14-26364

S/2014/181

Office in the Central African Republic (BINUCA), Babacar Gaye, my Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict, Leila Zerrougui, my Special
Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide, Adama Dieng, and a representative from the
office of my Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict travelled to
Bangui and Bossangoa from 17 to 21 December 2013 after having carried out a joint
technical-level assessment mission.
15. The delegation reported that numerous human rights violations had been
committed and that there were clear indications that conflict-related sexual violence
had been a main feature of attacks between March and December 2013. These
crimes, which targeted civilian communities, were initially committed by ex -Séléka
elements in acts described as “score settling”. More recent events indicate that
sexual violence was being committed as part of the sectarian violence, as reports of
rape during house-to-house search operations conducted by anti-balaka elements
and by ex-Séléka and other armed groups emerged. During the reporting period,
allegations emerged of abductions and forced marriages by ex-Séléka officers in
Bangui, Bouar and other areas affected by the conflict, with credible reports of girls
being kept in military camps and becoming pregnant as a result of sexual slavery.
The United Nations also received information that female politicians and female
relatives of public officials have been raped, kidnapped and sometimes tortured. In
mining areas such as Obo, Zemio, Rafai and Nzako, and in the cit y of Bria, women
and children have also reportedly been kidnapped, raped and killed by the Lord ’s
Resistance Army.
16. At least 146 pregnancies resulting from conflict-related sexual violence were
recorded by United Nations partners during 2013. United Nat ions entities also noted
an elevated risk of HIV infection and that, in the context of severe insecurity,
civilians were less likely to risk travelling to seek assistance, contributing to high
levels of miscarriage among women and girls and to untreated in fections and
disorders. The gender-based violence subcluster has developed a referral pathway,
distributed post-exposure prophylaxis kits and trained service providers, mainly in
camps for internally displaced persons. Few awareness-raising efforts have been
carried out among vulnerable groups in the wake of the escalation of the violence,
however, owing to funding and capacity constraints and the absence of an
emergency preparedness plan. At present, medical and police authorities lack
adequate training on caring for and protecting survivors of sexual violence, leaving
women and girls vulnerable to stigmatization and reprisal. Survivors are also
deterred from reporting because of the continuing presence of alleged perpetrators
and the lack of a functional justice system. It is imperative that peacekeepers
continue to be trained with a view to enhancing their capacity to prevent and
respond to conflict-related sexual violence. In addition to building the capacity of
BINUCA to monitor and report on human rights violations, including sexual
violence, closer coordination between international actors is paramount. This should
include the establishment of an integrated incident alert and coordinated response
mechanism between the African-led International Support Mission in the Central
African Republic, Operation Sangaris and BINUCA.
Recommendation
17. I urge the transitional authorities in the Central African Republic to ensure that
efforts to restore security and the rule of law specifically take into account the
prevention of crimes of sexual violence and that any eventual ceasefire or peace

14-26364

5/33

S/2014/181

agreement explicitly reflect sexual violence considerations, in line with the joint
communiqué of the Government of the Central African Republic and the United
Nations on the prevention of and response to conflict-related sexual violence of
12 December 2012.
Colombia
18. For the period 2012-2013, the General Attorney’s Office reported on the
investigation of 86 cases of sexual violence, involving 154 victims, perpetrat ed in
the context of armed conflict. United Nations partners have reported that a range of
violations and abuses were committed, including rape, gang rape, the recruitment of
women, girls and boys by illegal armed groups for use as sexual slaves, forced
pregnancy, forced abortion and forced prostitution. Other crimes reported in
connection with sexual violence included kidnapping, threats of violence and
assassinations. United Nations data on sexual and gender-based violence for 2013
indicate that women and girls of Afro-Colombian descent were disproportionately
affected. In both 2012 and 2013, as many as 10 per cent of incidents reported by
government sources related to sexual violence against men and boys.
19. The sexual exploitation of women and girls in areas under the influence of
illegal armed groups or groups emerging after the demobilization of paramilitary
organizations (under Law 975 of 2005, the “Justice and Peace Law”) remains a
grave concern. In this context, incidents indicate that sexual violen ce is perpetrated
as a strategy to assert territorial control, to intimidate women leaders and human
rights defenders and to intimidate the civilian population as a method of social
control. Some survivors report having been displaced and raped repeatedly.
Survivors reporting incidents of sexual violence to the authorities and service
providers also reported receiving subsequent threats against them and their families,
some of which resulted in forced displacement. The continuing presence of
survivors and perpetrators in the same community represents an ongoing security
risk, creates acute psychological trauma owing to prolonged intimidation and
hinders reporting and access to justice and services. These trends are consistent with
the acknowledgement by the Colombian Constitutional Court (in its judgement 092
of 2008) that sexual violence is a habitual, extensive, systematic and invisible
practice in the context of the Colombian armed conflict, perpetrated by all of the
illegal armed groups and, in isolated cases, by individual agents of the national
armed forces.
20. With regard to the need for adequate and timely legal, medical and
psychological attention for survivors, a draft bill outlining measures to guarantee the
right of access to justice for survivors of sexual violence, particularly as it relates to
the armed conflict, is under consideration by Congress. The approval, in November
2013, of guidelines for a public policy aimed at risk prevention and at protecting
and guaranteeing the rights of women who are victims of armed conflict and that
make specific reference to the needs of survivors of conflict -related sexual violence
is also a welcome development. Other positive developments include the elaboration
by the Ministry of Defence of a protocol aimed at building the capacity of the public
forces to prevent and respond to sexual violence, in particular with regard to the
armed conflict. With regard to reparations, as at November 2013 the special
administrative unit charged with providing support and rep aration to victims had
registered 3,525 survivors of sexual violence (2,902 of whom were female). To date,
some 409 survivors have comprehensive reparation plans, including benefits for

6/33

14-26364

S/2014/181

their families. A collective reparations process is also under way in consultation
with five women’s organizations and a national programme for the protection of
those in situations of extreme risk is being implemented. (See also para. 66 below,
on the work of the Team of Experts in Colombia.)
Recommendation
21. I urge the Colombian authorities to ensure that legislative and policy
developments, including the Colombian legal framework for peace, contribute to the
fulfilment of survivors’ rights to truth, justice and reparation for the full range of
violations associated with conflict-related sexual violence. Furthermore, I call upon
the Government of Colombia to continue and extend its collaboration with the
United Nations, including the Team of Experts.
Côte d’Ivoire
22. Data on sexual and gender-based violence for 2013 indicate that high levels of
sexual violence, particularly rape, continue to be committed. The United Nations
has verified 381 cases between January and December, including 62 gang rapes. The
slow progress being made in disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
processes, persistent insecurity caused by the presence of armed elements
throughout the country and the climate of impunity contribute to a high -risk
environment, particularly for women and children. Over 60 per cent of recorded
rape survivors were children between the ages of 10 and 18 years; 25 per cent were
children aged between 14 months and 10 years. At least 10 women and girls were
killed after being raped or died from severe injuries sustained during the assault.
The United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI) notes that while instances
of sexual violence were being recorded in the western part of the country, they are
now being recorded in the north. In urban areas, the prevalence of small arms and
light weapons is linked to insecurity: 63 cases of rape were reported during armed
robberies.
23. A total of 24 incidents of sexual violence investigated by the United Nations in
2013 involved elements of the Forces républicaines de Côte d ’Ivoire (FRCI), the
police, the gendarmerie or ex-combatants. An incident of particular concern
involved the alleged rape of nine women by FRCI members during an eviction
operation in the protected forest of Niégré. Although the commanders suspected of
involvement are known, to date no one has been held accountable for those
incidents. UNOCI notes a high level of impunity for security actors accused of
committing crimes of sexual violence, often with the complicity of commanders.
Since January 2013, of 15 rape allegations against security and defence forc es
brought to the attention of the military prosecutor of Abidjan and regional civilian
courts, two cases have been tried under civilian jurisdiction, criminal charges were
dropped in four cases, while nine investigations are still pending. To date,
transitional justice arrangements have addressed none of the 54 incidents of sexual
violence reported in connection with the post-election crisis in 2010 and 2011.
24. In terms of prevention, the limited implementation of disciplinary procedures,
the absence of sanctions and a lack of awareness-raising activities on codes of
conduct and ethics within national security institutions have presented major
challenges. In September 2013, the Ministry of Defence supported an initiative of
the Office of my Special Representative in partnership with the Kofi Annan

14-26364

7/33

S/2014/181

International Peacekeeping Training Centre and the United Nations Population Fund
(UNFPA) to conduct two training workshops for the Ivorian security forces. As a
result, a pool of national trainers on conflict-related sexual violence was created to
enhance the sustainability of capacity-building efforts. Through a national training
programme on investigative techniques and gender-based violence for members of
the police and the gendarmerie operating as judicial police officers, delivered by the
Ministry of the Interior and supported by United Nations and international partners,
a further 300 officers will be trained by June 2014. There have been some
improvements in the capacity of actors to detect, prevent and pla n responses to
sexual violence, and several United Nations training sessions have been held for
health personnel throughout the country. While referral mechanisms are in place,
access to services continues to be a challenge nationwide.
25. The lack of a regularly functioning high court since 2001 poses a significant
barrier to justice. Despite the efforts of national authorities, the prosecution rate
remains low. Alleged perpetrators are often released owing to insufficient evidence
and rape often continues to be reclassified as indecent assault, a lesser offence. The
United Nations has verified 26 cases in which survivors opted to settle out of court
as a result of social pressure, lengthy judicial procedures, lenient sentences and the
cost of medical certificates. In June 2013, the Government adopted a national justice
policy that envisages improvements with respect to service delivery, access to
justice, legal documentation for vulnerable persons and a review of the legal
framework on women’s rights and protection. In August 2013, a national legal
review aimed at reforming criminal and civil codes was initiated by the Ministry of
Justice. Other initiatives are under way to review issues related to legal aid, victim
and witness protection, and representation.
Recommendation
26. I urge the Government to ensure the implementation of a comprehensive
national strategy to prevent sexual violence and to improve access to justice and
other services for survivors.
Democratic Republic of the Congo
27. During 2013 the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
recorded 15,352 incidents of sexual and gender-based violence in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo (North Kivu, South Kivu, Katanga and Ituri
district). Also with reference to 2013, the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) investigated and
verified 860 cases of sexual violence committed by parties to the conflict,
representing an increase of 13 per cent since my previous report o n sexual violence
in conflict. Non-State armed groups were involved in 71 per cent of cases verified
by MONUSCO, while national security forces (mostly the national armed forces
(Forces armées de la République démocratique du Congo — FARDC) and the
national police) were responsible for 29 per cent of cases. This marks a change from
my previous report, in which more than 50 per cent of cases were attributed to State
actors. Because of the deteriorating security situation and the activities of the
Mouvement du 23 mars (M23), North Kivu Province was most affected by conflict related sexual violence during the reporting period.

8/33

14-26364

S/2014/181

28. Armed groups operating in conflict-affected areas effectively condone sexual
violence through the encouragement of predatory behaviour. Furthermore, most
armed groups in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, such as the Mai -Mai
Cheka, the Raia Mutomboki, the Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda and
the Alliance des patriotes pour un Congo libre et souverain, as well as som e FARDC
elements, are involved to some degree in illicit activities, such as trafficking in
conflict minerals and poaching, during which opponents and civilians are targeted,
including through the use of sexual violence. The United Nations has also
documented ethnically targeted attacks, including sexual violence perpetrated by
Mai-Mai Cheka in the area of Pinga, mainly against Nande and Hutu groups.
Mai-Mai Simba/Lumumba combatants were responsible for a large number of
incidents of sexual violence, mostly involving the abduction of women and girls,
looting and forced labour. It has been reported that 46 girls recruited and used by
armed groups such as Mai-Mai Simba were used as sexual slaves. Of particular
concern is the arrest of former sex slaves by government forces on suspicion of
being collaborators of the armed groups that held them captive. For example, in Ituri
district, 27 women released from captivity were arrested by FARDC because they
were suspected of being Mai-Mai Morgan supporters. Problems of insecurity and
access have impeded efforts to document and determine the magnitude of the
phenomenon.
29. Almost half of the documented cases of sexual violence during 2013 were
rapes of girls. In addition, the Office of the United Nations High Commissi oner for
Refugees (UNHCR) recorded 525 incidents of forced marriage in areas affected by
armed conflict. Sexual violence against men and boys was most often reported in
Rutshuru territory (North Kivu), which was under M23 control for much of 2013.
Also in North Kivu, sexual violence was particularly documented during
displacement and around camps for internally displaced persons. With United
Nations support, the Government has trained police officers working in areas where
there are internally displaced persons to escort women and has created an alternative
energy working group in North Kivu. In terms of service provision, geographic
coverage is uneven and there are significant challenges to equipping remote health
facilities, ensuring the adequate quality of the assistance and preventing attacks on
facilities by parties to the conflict. In this environment, multisectoral assistance was
provided to the 12,247 survivors identified by the United Nations and partners.
Psychosocial assistance was provided to 78 per cent of the total (9,533 survivors,
including 3,205 minors) within the framework of a programme for providing
assistance to survivors of sexual violence. Capacity-building efforts have contributed
to improvements in care during 2013, including with respect to HIV/AIDS.
30. Concerning access to justice for survivors, significant gaps exist in the
implementation of the legal framework, owing in part to the State ’s absence in areas
affected by armed conflict. In cases where justice is pursued and perpetrat ors are
required to pay civil damages to survivors, insolvency and a lack of funding for
legal assistance and reparations were often a problem. Nonetheless, during 2013,
61 members of the national defence and security forces were sentenced for sexual
violence crimes, including 4 members of the national police force, 33 FARDC
members of and 24 other State agents. On 16 May, the Prosecutor General of the
armed forces issued international arrest warrants and extradition requests for war
crimes and crimes against humanity, including sexual violence, to former M23
president Jean-Marie Runinga and M23 colonels Eric Badege, Innocent Zimurinda

14-26364

9/33

S/2014/181

and Baudouin Ngaruye, all of whom surrendered to Rwandan authorities in 2013.
Regarding the Minova case, the operational military court of North Kivu Province
held the first hearing in Goma on 20 November 2013. In total, 40 FARDC members,
including five high-ranking officers, were accused of crimes against humanity and
war crimes, including rape, murder and looting, committed in and around Minova
between 20 November and 4 December 2012. (See also para. 89 below, on the
support provided by the Team of Experts.)
31. My Special Representative and the Team of Experts visited the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in March 2013. During that time, they met the President, the
Prime Minister and other officials. The visit resulted in the adoption, on 30 March
2013, of a joint communiqué of the Government and the United Nations on
combating conflict-related sexual violence. The Team of Experts has been assisting
the Government to develop an implementation plan in line with the communiqué
(see para. 89). In October 2013, my Special Representative and the Executive
Director of UNFPA conducted a joint follow-up visit to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and met senior government officials, including the Prime Minister. My
Special Representative held discussions with the Minister of Defence and addressed
a special session of the Senate on sexual violence. On 23 October, the President of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Joseph Kabila, announced his intention to
appoint a presidential representative on sexual violence and child recruitment to
lead the Government’s response and liaise with the international community. The
President also emphasized zero tolerance for sexual violence, reiterated his
continued commitment to fighting impunity for sexual violence and announced the
Government’s intention to create special chambers to prosecute alleged perpetrators
of grave international crimes, including sexual violence. On 28 November, the
Senate voted to create a special commission on conflict-related sexual violence.
Recommendation
32. I commend the Government for the recent commitments made and urge
national authorities to implement, as a matter of priority, the measures outlined in
the joint communiqué of 30 March 2013 and the subsequent implementation plan,
and I encourage donors to support the Government in that regard. I also encourage
the President to appoint a presidential representative to lead the Government’s
response, in accordance with his announcement.
Mali
33. During the reporting period, data collection on conflict -related sexual violence
was affected by fear of reprisal, limited access to services and the fact that judicial
institutions were still in the process of redeploying to the north of the country.
During 2013, incidents of sexual violence were perpetrated by armed State and
non-State actors, including during house searches, at checkpoints and in places of
detention. Women and children, particularly internally displaced persons, reported
sexual violence in Mopti, Timbuktu, Gao and Kidal regions. In June 2013,
28 displaced girls under 17 years of age were reported to have become victims of
sexual exploitation and sexual slavery in Mopti, while women and girls displaced by
the conflict also reported resorting to prostitution. Of the total number of reported
cases of rape during 2013, 25 per cent included the rape of minors and more than
one third were reportedly carried out by more than one perpetrator. The majority of

10/33

14-26364

S/2014/181

survivors were women and girls from economically and socially disadvantaged
backgrounds.
34. With respect to non-State armed actors, several incidents of gang rape by
unidentified armed elements were reported in Timbuktu. At least four incidents
involving the abduction and gang rape of girls by rebel groups, including Ansar
Dine, have been verified by United Nations partners. Some of those cases resulted
in pregnancies and associated risks of stigma and ab andonment. Other reported
incidents include the rape for the purpose of reprisal of a girl by elements of the
Movement for Unity and Jihad in West Africa (MUJAO) and the rape of a woman in
Kidal by members of the Mouvement national pour la libération de l ’Azawad,
reportedly for “not supporting the independence of Azawad”. A number of
allegations of sexual violence involving the Malian defence and security forces were
reported during 2013, including allegations of abductions and rape. A military
judicial process is under way for members of the defence and security forces alleged
to have committed rape during the recapture of Gao, many of whose inhabitants
were suspected of collaborating with MUJAO. There is concern, however, regarding
accountability for sexual violence crimes, as only seven survivors of such violence
pursued legal action during the reporting period and as alternative conflict
resolution mechanisms continued to be used.
35. Efforts have been made by the Government, the United Nations and partne rs to
build the capacity of the Malian defence and security forces and other Malian
civilian and security entities. As part of the European Union Training Mission in
Mali, 2,100 troops belonging to the Malian defence and security forces received
training on the protection of women in situations of armed conflict. In January 2013,
the Ministry of Justice of Mali, supported by the United Nations, trained 45 judges
and judicial officers on conflict-related sexual violence and on the procedures
required to bring perpetrators to justice, on HIV/AIDS and on international
humanitarian law. The United Nations, together with partners, has also implemented
projects for the prevention of sexual violence and the collection and management of
data. Messages on prevention and referral to counselling services were broadcast.
The Ministry for the Promotion of Women, Children and the Family equipped
centres for women and children in the regions of Gao, Kidal, Timbuktu, Mopti,
Segou, Kayes and Koulikouro to accommodate female survivors and provide
psychosocial services; a similar space was established in Bamako. Only a limited
number of humanitarian actors, however, have the resources and technical expertise
to provide comprehensive services to survivors.
Recommendation
36. I urge the Government, with the support of the United Nations and its partners,
to develop and implement a comprehensive national strategy to address sexual
violence that includes the provision of services for survivors, strengthening
monitoring and reporting and addressing impunity.
Myanmar
37. Incidents of sexual violence continued to be reported in Myanmar during 2013.
Reporting is limited because of access restrictions for humanitarian and human
rights actors in conflict-affected areas and because formal reporting protocols
discourage many survivors from seeking assistance for fear of police involvement,

14-26364

11/33

S/2014/181

negative repercussions, compromised confidentiality and stigma. Sexual violence
has nonetheless been associated with targeted violence in Rakhine St ate and in
non-State ethnic armed conflicts in Kachin State and northern Shan State. In these
states, overcrowding in camps and shelters for internally displaced persons raises
the risk of sexual violence and abuse, particularly for single females and fem aleheaded households. Conflict-affected women and girls in camps for internally
displaced persons are also at risk of being trafficked, often by so -called “brokers”,
to neighbouring countries for the purposes of forced marriage and sexual
exploitation. Regional and local government offices have limited capacity to lead,
manage and coordinate emergency programming. Local non-governmental
organizations are able to access communities of internally displaced persons but
generally lack the capacity to deliver health-care and psychosocial support services
consistent with international standards. A lack of access to formal justice
mechanisms for rape survivors often results in the mediation of sexual violence
cases by camp leaders.
38. In Kachin State, assessments carried out in February and March 2013 found
that women and girls were at risk in both government-controlled and non-governmentcontrolled areas. Also in Kachin State, since September 2013 there have been
increased reports of sexual violence, including the rape of girls as young as 7 years
of age, incidents involving multiple perpetrators and the involvement of armed
actors and uniformed services. In northern Rakhine State, ongoing tensions between
host communities and internally displaced persons and related threats against
humanitarian actors have compromised service provision outside camps for
internally displaced persons. Psychosocial counselling and medical services in
northern Rakhine State are extremely limited and local state -run structures are often
unwilling to provide services to internally displaced Muslims. To gain access to
urgent health services, the Rohingya population is limited to a hospital in Sittwe,
which has minimal capacity for sexual violence case management and to which
humanitarian actors do not have access. Access to justice is also limited for those
unable to prove their citizenship.
39. In his report of 23 September 2013 (A/68/397), the Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in Myanmar stated that, with respect to abuses perpetrated
in Rakhine State, including rape and other forms of sexual violence, the obligations
of the State to fully investigate and hold perpetrators to account had not been met.
The Special Rapporteur recommended the amendment of constitutional provisions
to provide better accountability and civilian oversight over military tribunals. In
respect of the findings in the report of the Special Rapporteur, the Government of
Myanmar cites the prosecution of suspects in six cases of sexual violence committed
by military personnel or deserters in Rakhine, Kachin and northern Shan States
through military and civilian courts. The Government notes that it has undertaken
capacity-building efforts for the armed forces, including on human rights and the
prevention of sexual violence. It also highlights the signature of ceasefire
agreements with most ethnic groups and the expected signature of a nationwide
ceasefire agreement.
Recommendation
40. I call on the Government of Myanmar to fully investigate and respond to
current and historical human rights violations and abuses, including crimes of sexual
violence. I urge the Government, with the support of the United Nations and its

12/33

14-26364

S/2014/181

partners, to work to develop a comprehensive protection and service response for
survivors.
Somalia
41. During the reporting period, sexual violence, including rape, remained one of
the most serious and recurrent human rights violations in Somalia. Data for 2013
concerning Banadir, Shabelle Dhexe and Juba Dhexe indicate that survivors
reported armed men in uniform as the primary perpetrators, including members of
the Somali National Army, Al-Shabaab, militias, private actors and organized crime
units. The most commonly reported form of sexual violence was rape. Internally
displaced persons were particularly vulnerable, often owing to the fact that they
have no clan mechanisms to protect and support them. Women from minority clans
too were vulnerable. In camps for internally displaced persons, conditions are often
unsafe for women and girls because of the proliferation of arms, scarce lighting and
limited policing. Continued displacement, including as a result of the forced
eviction that took place during 2013 in the Mogadishu area, has increase d their
vulnerability. In areas of Somalia that are outside the control of the federal
Government there have been reports of forced marriage and sexual slavery.
Therefore, dialogue with de facto authorities to gain specific commitments and
prevention measures is also required.
42. The handling by the federal authorities of several emblematic rape cases
reported during 2013 raised serious concerns with respect to due process, freedom
of expression, adherence to safe and ethical standards for interviewing sur vivors of
sexual violence crimes and the protection of survivors and journalists who report
such crimes. It is therefore welcome that, on 4 December 2013, at an open -day event
on women, peace and security, the President of the Federal Republic of Somalia,
Hassan Sheikh Mohamud, made a commitment to address the issues of
investigations and access to services, promising that no more alleged rape victims
would be imprisoned and that a specialized crime unit and dedicated clinic would be
created to deal with cases of sexual violence. The United Nations and its partners
have trained approximately 12,000 police officers on human rights. In addition,
concerted efforts have been made to recruit more female police officers; those
officers now require support to take substantive and active roles within the police
force.
43. Following a visit by my Special Representative in April 2013, a joint
communiqué of the Government of the Federal Republic of Somalia and the United
Nations on preventing sexual violence in conflict was signed by the President of
Somalia and the Deputy Secretary-General at the international conference on
Somalia held in London on 7 May 2013. In December 2013, the Team of Experts
undertook a technical mission to develop an implementation plan focused on
accountability and service provision (see para. 91 below).
Recommendation
44. I encourage the continued collaboration between the Federal Government of
Somalia and the United Nations to implement the commitments made, including in
the joint communiqué of 7 May 2013 and the subsequent implementation plan, as
well as the commitment made, as part of the Somali Compact, to zero tolerance on

14-26364

13/33

S/2014/181

gender-based violence. I urge donors to provide the required technical and financial
support to the Federal Government in this regard.
South Sudan
45. Since 15 December 2013, heavy fighting has affected the civilian population in
South Sudan, most notably in Central Equatoria, Jonglei, Unity and Upper Nile
States. In its interim report on the human rights crisis in South Sudan of 21 February
2014, the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) indicated that
information available at the time of writing the report suggested that sexual violence
was a consistent characteristic of the crisis in all affected stat es and that there were
sectarian dimensions to the conflict, including the deliberate and ethnically based
targeting of and reprisal against Dinka and Nuer populations. In addition to having
targeted foreign women, perpetrators of opportunistic acts of sex ual violence could
also have victimized other ethnic groups. In the report, UNMISS noted that alleged
perpetrators of sexual violence such as rape, gang rape, forced abortion and sexual
harassment include members of the Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA ), the
South Sudan national police service and opposition forces. Although reported
incidents are still being investigated, I am concerned that the information to date
suggests that violations are being committed by all the parties to the conflict.
46. Prior to 15 December, UNMISS had registered 73 credible allegations of
conflict-related sexual violence. Of the 73 cases, 42 were abductions, of which at
least 3 resulted in forced marriage. Rape was reported in 22 of the incidents and
other violations reported included 3 gang rapes, forced abortion and sexual
humiliation. Five verified incidents of the rape of minors by members of SPLA were
reported by child protection actors. SPLA members were allegedly responsible for
21 of the 73 incidents; 1 incident was reportedly perpetrated by a state official
together with police and military police officers. A total of 47 incidents were
reportedly perpetrated by unnamed armed individuals or groups. The Lord’s
Resistance Army was alleged to be responsible for 4 of the recorded incidents.
47. The majority of the incidents reported prior to 15 December occurred in the
context of cross-border incursions and military operations in Jonglei State between
SPLA and the armed group led by David Yau Yau. Several incidents of rap e by
SPLA members in Jonglei were reported, including the alleged rape of a Murle
minor by an SPLA officer during food distribution. One incident of concern
involved the abduction of 32 women who were reportedly forced to walk naked
from their village to a military barracks and were “assigned” to soldiers and militia
members. Their return was facilitated by governmental, civil society and United
Nations actors, but to date no medical, legal or psychosocial service has been
provided to the victims. Of the limited services available to survivors of sexual
violence, the majority are concentrated in Juba. Efforts are being made to establish
special police units, safe spaces and medical services for survivors in state capitals
such as Bor (Jonglei State) and humanitarian actors have provided services to
survivors in some conflict-affected areas of Jonglei. The conflict that erupted on
15 December, however, has severely hampered the already limited access to medical
care.
48. There are significant barriers to justice and redress that deter survivors of
sexual violence from seeking assistance, while gaps in legislation hamper the
overall response. Survivors risk arrest and detention when reporting sexual violence

14/33

14-26364

S/2014/181

crimes. During 2013, legislation was passed to ratify the Convention on the Rights
of the Child and the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment, reaffirming the State’s obligations to protect
human rights, including by preventing conflict-related sexual violence. Before the
December 2013 crisis, SPLA had made efforts with respect to accountability,
exemplified by eight verdicts against SPLA soldiers and officers for rape. Also prior
to 15 December, UNMISS conducted 42 training sessions to raise awareness about
conflict-related sexual violence, including for SPLA and the national police.
UNMISS women protection advisers led a legislative review task force that
recommended, among other things, that the definition of rape in the Penal Code Act
(2008) be revised, and that revisions be made to the Local Government Act, to
remove provisions that grant the customary justice system jurisdiction over women
and children’s rights.
Recommendation
49. In relation to the post-15 December outbreak of conflict, I urge the parties to
live up to the commitments they made in the cessation of hostilities agreement of
23 January to refrain from attacking civilians, including by committing acts of rape
or sexual abuse, and to ensure accountability for sexual violence crimes. I wel come
the steps taken to establish the commission of inquiry mandated by the African
Union and underscore the important role of such a commission in investigating
human rights violations and other abuses, including conflict -related sexual violence,
during the recent conflict. I also urge the Government, with the support of the
United Nations and the international community, to pursue the legislative reforms
and the capacity-building efforts of the security and justice sectors necessary to
comprehensively address sexual violence.
Sudan (Darfur)
50. During 2013, in the context of persistent and widespread insecurity, reports of
conflict-related sexual violence in Darfur increased. Access by UNAMID to areas of
ongoing military operations remained severely limited in part because of security
constraints and restrictions imposed by government officials. Therefore, it is
believed that the 149 cases verified during the reporting period reflect significant
underreporting of conflict-related sexual violence. Internally displaced women and
girls were particularly vulnerable and the majority of reported survivors were
residents of camps for internally displaced persons who were attacked either outside
camp perimeters while engaging in routine livelihood activities or inside camps. The
proliferation of small arms in such camps and settlements, as well as in towns and
villages, and an apparent increase in banditry, were exacerbating factors. Women
and girls are particularly vulnerable during cultivation and harvest seas ons (between
June and November) and in the context of clashes between nomads and farming
communities over land.
51. Sexual violence was also reported in the context of armed clashes, particularly
following armed operations, while victims were isolated fro m their communities and
in the process of resettling. Examples include abuses committed in the context of
tribal clashes connected with gold mining in Jebel Amir, northern Darfur; abuses
perpetrated by the Sudanese armed forces and its allied militias in s outhern and
eastern Darfur; and abuses committed following clashes between the Sudanese
armed forces and the Sudan Liberation Army/Minni Minawi faction in eastern

14-26364

15/33

S/2014/181

Darfur. The profiles of alleged perpetrators of sexual violence include unidentified
armed Arab nomads, armed men in military uniforms and members of the
government security apparatus, as well as internally displaced persons. In 20 per
cent of cases, victims identified members of the forces of the Government of the
Sudan as their attackers; specifically, they said the attackers were members of the
Sudanese armed forces, the National Intelligence and Security Services, the
government police forces and their affiliates (the Central Reserve Police, the Border
Intelligence Guards and the Popular Defence Force). One member of the Liberation
and Justice Movement was identified as a perpetrator. Government -affiliated militia
members were also alleged to be perpetrators, but it should be noted that these
forces frequently operate in the absence of direct go vernment control.
52. It is difficult for survivors to identify perpetrators given the wide range of
armed and uniformed actors in Darfur. Where identification is possible, prosecutions
through the formal justice system proceed slowly. That said, the Gover nment is
pursuing, through the judicial process, allegations against several members of its
armed forces. Access restrictions faced by all United Nations actors have also
resulted in the placement of severe limitations on the provision of assistance to
survivors. Owing to stigma and for fear of repercussions, survivors of rape do not
always list sexual violence as an aspect of a crime committed against them when
accessing medical treatment, which is an evidentiary requirement for judicial
proceedings. Therefore, there is concern that the reporting protocols, particularly the
use of a document known as “form 8”, present obstacles to the treatment of sexual
violence survivors rather than facilitating investigations. Furthermore, rape victims
often run the risk of being charged with the offense of adultery (zinna), and a
reference to adultery is made in the definition of rape provided by article 149 of the
Criminal Act 1991. The Act does not contain provisions on command responsibility.
During 2013, UNAMID received a number of reports of pregnancy as a result of
rape. Survivors have reported revictimization, some by being accused of unlawful
pregnancy and one by being accused of having murdered the child. The protection
of women with children born as a result of rape, as well as the well-being of such
children, is a significant concern.
53. The United Nations continued to engage in advocacy, training and capacity building measures directed at armed actors, law enforcement officials, members of
the judiciary and government officials. In addition to efforts to support formal
protection measures, community-level protection mechanisms continued to be
implemented, such as women moving in large groups for farming, firewood, water
or grass collection, daily security patrols and security meetings in camps for
internally displaced persons with the support of the United Nations police. During
2013, the UNAMID police force also continued to train community policing
volunteers on handling sexual violence survivors, particularly rape victims,
interviewing skills and referral pathways. The women’s police networks established
for Sudanese women also continued to provide a platform for internally displaced
women to highlight their security concerns and request action from authoritie s.
Similarly, the women’s protection networks established in the camps for internally
displaced persons in northern Darfur continued to identify protection issues specific
to women in order to inform prevention and response strategies by different actors,
including the government of Northern Darfur State, the United Nations and
non-governmental organizations working on protection issues.

16/33

14-26364

S/2014/181

Recommendation
54. I urge the Government of the Sudan to facilitate access by the United Nations
and partners to conflict-affected areas so that they may provide services and carry
out monitoring activities. I also encourage the Government to reform national
legislation in relation to sexual violence crimes and revise reporting protocols. I
encourage the Government to engage with my Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Conflict to develop a framework of cooperation to address conflict related sexual violence.
Syrian Arab Republic
55. Fear of reprisal, social stigmatization and a lack of safe and confidentia l
response services for survivors have severely limited reporting on sexual violence in
the context of the Syrian conflict. Information gathered from displaced civilians
outside the Syrian Arab Republic and reported by the independent international
commission of inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic indicates that sexual violence
has been a persistent feature of the conflict and that the fear of rape has served as a
driving motivation for families fleeing the violence (see A/HRC/23/58, para. 91). It
has been difficult, however, for the United Nations to verify allegations within the
Syrian Arab Republic, largely owing to a lack of access and considerations related
to the safety of survivors. Similarly, assessments of the scale and the scope of sexual
violence are limited. The United Nations in the Syrian Arab Republic reports that it
has provided information and held awareness-raising sessions on protection issues,
including sexual and gender-based violence, psychosocial support and first aid to
over 38,000 women in connection with the crisis during 2013.
56. The commission of inquiry has reported that government forces and
pro-government militias have used sexual violence, including rape, in detention
centres and prisons throughout the country, often as part of interrogations by
intelligence services (see A/HRC/23/58, para. 92). Former detainees have provided
United Nations partners with accounts of sexual harassment a nd the abuse of
women, men and children in overnight detention facilities. The accounts included
descriptions of detainees being stripped of their clothes and receiving threats that
they or their relatives would be raped, as a tool to intimidate those perc eived of
being associated with the opposition. The United Nations has also received
allegations of rape, including gang rape and other forms of sexual violence, against
women and girls, including in the presence of relatives, by government forces at
checkpoints, during incursions and during searches of houses of families perceived
to be pro-opposition. (See also my report on children and armed conflict in the
Syrian Arab Republic (S/2014/31.))
57. With respect to allegations against armed opposition groups, credible
information has been provided to the United Nations in Homs, Damascus and Rif
Damascus of sexual violence perpetrated against young women and girls in shelters
and in some opposition areas. Furthermore, the commission of inquiry has reported
accounts of women being segregated during house searches in the city of Aleppo
during joint operations by armed groups, with an implication of possible sexual
violence (A/HRC/23/58, para. 94). Also in relation to armed opposition groups, the
Commission found that, during the assault in Yarmouk, the war crime of sexual
violence was committed (A/HRC/23/58, para. 95). Reports of the curtailment of
women’s participation in public life in some areas where armed opposition groups

14-26364

17/33

S/2014/181

operate are of concern. I am also deeply concerned by the prevailing climate of
impunity for sexual violence crimes by all parties.
58. The Government refutes the assertions of the commission of inquiry and has
expressed particular concern regarding media reports during 2013 on “sexual jihad”
or “marriage jihad”. The Government regrets that United Nations actors operating in
the Syrian Arab Republic, Lebanon and Jordan have not yet been able to verify such
reports. The Government has also reported that women have been abducted and
raped, sometimes on a sectarian basis, and that, while some of those victims are
released in exchange for ransom, others are reportedly passed on to other armed
elements and revictimized. The Government notes that intimidation, killings and
incidents of sexual violence against women, including rape, gang rape and sexual
slavery, have occurred in Homs, Damascus, Idlib, Dara’a and Raq qa, among other
places. The United Nations has been unable to verify this information.
59. To date, some 6.5 million individuals are displaced within the Syrian Arab
Republic, while over 2 million have been displaced to Jordan, Turkey and Lebanon,
as well as to Iraq, Egypt and other parts of North Africa. The vulnerability to sexual
violence and sexual exploitation of those displaced is among the most acute
concerns of those responding to the humanitarian crisis. In Jordan, as at
31 December 2013, 576,354 Syrian refugees were registered with UNHCR, with
approximately one quarter of that total residing in camps and the remainder in urban
and rural settings. Women and girls represent the majority of the registered refugee
population. Refugee women inside and outside camps report restricted movement
owing to perceived security risks, as well as for cultural reasons. Most Syrians in
Jordan have limited or no income, placing them at risk of exploitation and abuse,
and leading some to resort to prostitution. While early marriage was already a
practice in rural parts of the Syrian Arab Republic, there are concerns that the
number of early marriages may have increased as a result of displacement, out of
economic necessity and because of the perceived need to protect young women.
Forced marriage, particularly of single women and widows, has also been reported
as a form of reparation for women, especially when they have been victims of rape.
The risk of exposure to prostitution, including as a means to pay rent or gain access
to services, is also severe. Similar patterns of risk and vulnerability are reported in
Lebanon, where over 800,000 Syrian refugees are registered with UNHCR, and in
other receiving countries. The situation for those displaced within the Syrian Arab
Republic is also dire.
Recommendation
60. I call upon all parties to the conflict to immediately issue command orders
prohibiting sexual violence and to hold perpetrators in their ranks accountable, in
accordance with the prevention measures specified in paragraph 10 of Security
Council resolution 2106 (2013). I urge the parties to ensure that any ceasefire and
eventual peace agreement contains explicit provisions with respect to conflict related sexual violence, and I reiterate the call on all parties to allow unfettered
access by United Nations actors and humanitarian partners for monitoring and the
delivery of aid and services to vulnerable populations.

18/33

14-26364

S/2014/181

Yemen
61. Consistent with my previous report on sexual violence in conflict, there
continue to be concerns in Yemen regarding the link between the presence of armed
groups and an increase in rates of early and forced marriage and consequent sexual
slavery and abuse among the poorest and most vulnerable girls in society. In my
previous report, I noted that armed groups linked to Al -Qaida in the Arabian
Peninsula paid a bride price reportedly as high as $5,000. Such reports were noted in
Abyan governorate as a result of the conflict in 2011 and 20 12. Improved access to
Abyan during 2013 allowed child protection partners to verify historical reports of
the forcible recruitment and sexual abuse of boys by members of Ansar al -Sharia.
Similar reports in connection with the Popular Committee in Abyan ar e of concern,
particularly as the popular committees in many locations throughout the country
have begun to fill a security vacuum caused by the absence of police and judicial
authorities. United Nations partners report that the rape of returnee women and
girls, in some cases resulting in pregnancy, was the most reported violation. A rise
in child abduction and in the sexual abuse of young girls during 2013 was also
reported, affecting girls’ access to education. Few medical professionals in Yemen
are trained to provide support to survivors of sexual violence or to collect and store
evidence, and there are no national guidelines on the clinical management of rape.
Protection and response to conflict-related sexual violence is further complicated by
the lack of a clear legal definition of sexual violence in line with international
standards, as well as an absence of a legal age for marriage under national
legislation, or legal provisions related to war crimes or crimes against humanity.
Furthermore, the codification of rape as adultery in Yemeni legislation offers
protection to perpetrators at the expense of survivors.
Recommendation
62. I acknowledge the efforts that continue to be made to revise the legal age of
marriage under national law and urge Yemeni authorities, with the support of the
United Nations, to undertake comprehensive legislative reform as a basis for
addressing impunity for sexual violence crimes and ensuring services for survivors.

B.

Addressing conflict-related sexual violence crimes in
post-conflict situations
Angola
63. Following the deployment of a United Nations protection adviser on
expulsions, in 2013 positive developments occurred with regard to the
implementation of the joint communiqué addressing sexual violence signed between
the United Nations and the Government of Angola in March 2011. A series of
agreements between the Angolan province of Lunda Norte and border provinces in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo triggered the voluntary return of at least
70,000 migrants to the Democratic Republic of the Congo between May and June
2013 and made it possible to have a system of transborder trade and the opening of
some border posts. The Government also granted United Nations partners access so
that they could observe population movements and visit detention facilities in the
border areas. Various capacity-building activities, including training for relevant

14-26364

19/33

S/2014/181

State actors, may have contributed to a reported reduction in incidents of sexual
violence.
Recommendation
64. I encourage the further strengthening of cooperation between the Government
and United Nations actors in the implementation of the joint communiqué, and
continued monitoring and reporting by the Government in that regard.
Bosnia and Herzegovina
65. My Special Representative conducted a visit to Bosnia and Herzegovina in
June 2013, to review ongoing efforts by national authorities and civil society at all
levels to address conflict-related sexual violence. It was found that serious
challenges remain in terms of service provision and access to justice for an
estimated 20,000 survivors of sexual violence crimes committed during the conflict
that took place from 1992 to 1995. Despite recognition of the widespread and
systematic use of sexual violence during the war, the stigma remains and many
survivors are reluctant to come forward. This is partly due to the fact that many of
the alleged perpetrators are in positions of influence within State institutions such as
the police, as well as in the political sphere. Constitutional barriers also remain,
resulting in the fragmentation of the Government’s prevention and response efforts.
This is compounded by an apparent lack of political will on the part of the
authorities at different levels. In terms of national pro secutions of war crimes, of an
estimated 200 cases processed by the State since the end of the conflict, to date only
29 cases involving charges of sexual violence have led to sentencing.
66. There is a lack of comprehensive services for survivors, with no n-governmental
organizations in this area offering mainly psychosocial support, with limited
geographical coverage. At the end of 2013, initiatives to establish a system of
referral for comprehensive services were at an early stage. Bosnia and Herzegovina
is in the process of developing a second action plan for the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), for 2014-2017, with important provisions
for survivors of conflict-related sexual violence. Implementing the draft programme
of assistance to women victims of wartime rape, sexual violence and torture (20132016) would also be beneficial. In some areas, there have been some training
initiatives for key victim support institutions and orga nizations that have led to
improved assistance to survivors and witnesses before, during and after criminal
prosecutions. Similar training for judges and prosecutors is needed. Despite the fact
that hundreds of Bosnian men are believed to have been victims of wartime rapes
and sexual abuse, only three non-governmental organizations with limited resources
provide dedicated psychological services to male survivors and the status of male
survivors has not been properly regulated under the law. Moreover, the pa ucity of
data on the number of children born as a result of rape requires urgent attention by
service providers and researchers in order for the needs of these young people to be
addressed.
Recommendation
67. I urge the Government to prioritize the development and passage of
harmonized legislation and policies in all relevant national institutions to facilitate
cooperation, the effective exchange of information and the establishment of referral

20/33

14-26364

S/2014/181

mechanisms to ensure comprehensive and multisectoral servi ces for survivors of
sexual violence. I encourage the Government to draw on the expertise of the United
Nations and civil society in that regard.
Cambodia
68. Since my previous report on sexual violence in conflict, no governmental
system has been put in place to respond to my recommendation that the effective
prosecution of perpetrators be pursued. The introduction of vetting processes to
exclude those who have perpetrated or are otherwise responsible for acts of sexual
violence from the security sector are also a priority area for action at the national
level.
Recommendation
69. I reiterate my call to the Government to respond to the needs of survivors of
sexual violence and to address impunity for such crimes, and assure national
authorities of the support of the United Nations in that regard.
Liberia
70. The availability of reliable data on sexual violence remains a critical
challenge, but reports indicate that 2013 has seen an overall increase in the number
of reported sexual violence crimes. The increase could be attributed to positive
efforts by national stakeholders and the United Nations system to raise awareness
and enable reporting. Data from the Ministry of Gender and Development for 2013
indicate an increase in the number of cases of sexual violence against children aged
6-14 years (as at November 2013, 90 per cent of the 1,175 cases of sexual and
gender-based violence seen by four “one-stop facilities” in Montserrado county
involved children). At least 10 children died as a direct re sult of rape. Given the
high number of underage victims, a child-centred approach to prevention is crucial.
Also crucial is the adoption of a comprehensive national approach to prevention in
order to ensure service coverage throughout Liberia, not only in Monrovia, where
most of the services are concentrated. The first medical forensic laboratory for
Liberia, which was launched on 16 August 2013 in Monrovia, will contribute to
enhancing evidence-gathering capabilities so as to facilitate the prosecution of
suspects in rape cases. With the support of civil society, the United Nations and
other international partners, the Government has continued to conduct awareness raising campaigns and activities, particularly to address rape. An evaluation of the
joint programme of the United Nations and the Government of Liberia on
prevention and response to sexual and gender-based violence undertaken in April
2013 highlighted the need to further strengthen legal responses and improve
coordination among service providers, to strengthen community ownership through
the decentralized implementation of the joint programme and to increase the
engagement of men in activities to combat conflict-related sexual violence, with a
focus on prevention and an emphasis on attitudinal and behavioural change.
Recommendation
71. I urge the Government, with the support of the United Nations, to put in place
a comprehensive prevention strategy that includes more systematic monitoring,
analysis and reporting as a basis for response at all levels, while maintaining the

14-26364

21/33

S/2014/181

emphasis on multisectoral service provision for survivors. Addressing impunity
continues to be critical for deterrence and, ultimately, for the prevention of sexual
violence crimes.
Libya
72. I welcome the recent adoption by the interim Government of Libya of a decree
addressing the situation of individuals who became victims of sexual violence
during the events of 2011. This is a positive step towards providing reparations and
physical and psychological health care for survivors, establishing shelters, a legal
instrument to grant children born of rape legal status, and legal aid for survivors to
seek accountability. To date, civil society organizations have developed advocacy
and programmatic responses for survivors of sexual violence perpetrated during
2011, for example by providing psychological support. The Ministry of Social
Affairs and the Ministry of Justice, however, require support to provide
comprehensive multisectoral services. Support is also necessary for the r ecruitment
and training of police, including judicial police, and for legal advocacy groups and
other civil society organizations. Continuing risks of sexual violence relate to the
ongoing reform of the Libyan security sector, which is taking place in the context of
weak security institutions and the proliferation of arms. In October 2013, the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya reported that sexual violence was used in 2012
and 2013 as an element of torture in detention and was perpetrated largely agai nst
men in detention facilities operated by armed brigades. Noting that the General
National Congress has adopted legislation criminalizing torture, enforced
disappearance and discrimination, the prevention of sexual violence in the security
sector is an area for continued attention.
Recommendation
73. I urge the Government to ensure adequate financial, administrative and human
resources for a comprehensive protection and service response, to strengthen
national institutions, and for the implementation of comprehensive legislation on
reparations for victims of conflict-related sexual violence.
Nepal
74. Since my previous report on sexual violence in conflict, there has been little
progress in pursuing justice for survivors of sexual violence perpetr ated during the
internal conflict. Institutional reforms that would prevent the promotion of
individuals accused of involvement in human rights violations, including sexual
violence, to the senior ranks of the security forces have not been undertaken.
Furthermore, no prosecutions of gross violations of human rights, including sexual
violence, committed up until the end of the war in 2006 have progressed through the
courts, despite many victims having filed cases with the police. Moreover, survivors
cannot access comprehensive services or receive redress. Victims of sexual violence
perpetrated during the conflict are not recognized as conflict -affected persons and
therefore cannot benefit from the interim relief programme. The Ministry of Peace
and Reconstruction has committed itself, however, to providing interim relief and
has initiated consultations with relevant stakeholders. During 2013, concerns were
raised regarding the passage of a presidential ordinance that would establish a truth
and reconciliation commission not in compliance with international standards. On
2 January 2014 the Supreme Court ruled that the provisions of the ordinance

22/33

14-26364

S/2014/181

concerning amnesty, prosecution and the filing of cases against perpetrators
contravened fundamental rights guaranteed by the constitution of Nepal, the
national justice system and international standards. The decision also provided
guidance on the establishment of the truth and reconciliation commission, including
the need for guarantees of autonomy and impartiality and of protection for victims
and witnesses. The Government notes its response to reports of sexual violence
citing existing legislation, policy and programmes, including the comprehensive
peace agreement, the policy on internally displaced persons and the re sponse to
gender-based violence through district-level service centres.
Recommendation
75. I urge the Government to fully implement the decision of the Supreme Court
of Nepal of 2 January 2014 as a priority and to ensure that victims of sexual
violence are recognized under the law as conflict-affected persons, in order that they
may access services and benefits.
Sierra Leone
76. In Sierra Leone, significant levels of rape and other sexual violence crimes are
a legacy of the decade-long civil war. Sexual and gender-based violence were also a
feature of the conflict. To address this reality, 43 family support units, to which
sexual violence can be reported, have been established within the Sierra Leone
police service. Although conviction rates in 2013 improved in comparison with
2012, access to the family support units is limited for a large proportion of the
population, and local chiefs often adjudicate cases of sexual violence through out of-court settlements and marriages between the perpetrator and the victim, including
in cases where the survivor is under the legal age of consent. Data received from the
Reparations Directorate of the National Commission for Social Action indicate that
3,602 of the 32,110 registered war victims are survivors of sexu al violence, although
unregistered numbers are believed to be higher. Through a programme of the United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN -Women)
and the National Commission for Social Action, funding is provided to train f emale
survivors of sexual violence and support them to establish businesses. As many as
2,952 beneficiaries, however, have not participated in the programme owing to a
shortfall in funding.
Recommendation
77. I urge the Government and international partners to ensure that there is
adequate funding for ongoing programmes to benefit survivors of conflict -related
sexual violence, including training and livelihood schemes. I also acknowledge the
pilot programme that was recently facilitated by the Office of my Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict to share experience gained in Sierra
Leone with neighbouring Côte d’Ivoire and to encourage further such South -South
cooperation initiatives.
Sri Lanka
78. In my previous report on sexual violence in conflict, I noted that the action
plan launched in August 2012 to respond to the recommendations made by the
Commission of Inquiry on Lessons Learnt and Reconciliation included no action

14-26364

23/33

S/2014/181

directly providing redress for those affected by sexual violenc e during the conflict.
During 2013, the Government of Sri Lanka committed itself to incorporating more
of the Commission’s recommendations into the National Plan of Action for
the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights. In total, 145 of some
285 recommendations, some of which focused on the security of women and
children, were incorporated. In my previous report I also noted the continued
vulnerability of women and children in areas formerly affected by conflict, partly
due to the continued militarization of those areas. These issues remained pertinent
during 2013, as women and girls, especially in female -headed households,
continued to be vulnerable to sexual harassment and abuse, including at the hands of
military personnel (A/HRC/25/23). The Government reports that the military has
taken strict action in such cases. The United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, however, continued to voice concerns in 2013 with regard to accountability
in Sri Lanka, stating that the Government has taken limited and piecemeal steps
towards investigating serious allegations of violations of international human rights
and humanitarian law, and none of these have had the independence or credibility
required (see A/HRC/25/23, para. 36). Efforts to investigate such allegations fully
and to bring justice to victims of the civil conflict, including those reporting sexual
violence crimes, thus remain a priority.
Recommendation
79. In the context of dialogue on the establishment of a comprehensive truth and
reconciliation commission, I urge the Government of Sri Lanka to ensure that such a
transitional justice mechanism explicitly seek accountability for sexual violence
crimes and that national authorities put in place the necessary services, remedies and
reparations for survivors.

III. Work of United Nations Action against Sexual Violence,
including information on progress made in the
implementation of the monitoring, analysis and reporting
arrangements established pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1960 (2010)
80. In 2013, United Nations Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict, an
inter-agency network chaired by my Special Representative on Sexual Violence in
Conflict, supported the delivery of scenario-based training for peacekeepers in
several training centres, to improve their operational readiness to react swiftly to
sexual violence. To help enhance prevention capabilities in mission settings, United
Nations Action also rolled out a framework of early-warning indicators of conflictrelated sexual violence through the United Nations missions in Côte d’Ivoire
(UNOCI), the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and South Sudan
(UNMISS). In Côte d’Ivoire, progress was made in the development of a joint
Government-United Nations comprehensive strategy to combat sexual violence. An
inter-agency team visited the Democratic Republic of the Congo to discuss the
transfer of coordination tasks under the comprehensive national strategy, following
the adoption of Security Council resolution 2098 (2013). In addition, United
Nations Action has produced a number of tools to improve practice in the field,

24/33

14-26364

S/2014/181

including a guidance note on reparations for conflict-related sexual violence and
policy briefs on psychosocial and mental health interventions.
81. Technical support at the country level was provided for the continued roll -out
of the Guidance for Mediators on Addressing Conflict-Related Sexual Violence in
Ceasefire and Peace Agreements, including through the training of envoys,
mediators and mediation experts. After the roll-out, the number of ceasefire
agreements that included provisions on conflict-related sexual violence more than
doubled. Among the agreements with such provisions were: the declaration of
principles signed on 11 January 2013 in the Central African Republic; the ceasefire
agreement between the Government of the Sudan and the Justice and Equality
Movement signed on 6 April 2013 on the basis of the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur; the Preliminary Agreement to the Presidential Election and the Inclusive
Peace Talks in Mali, signed on 18 June 2013; and the declaration of commitments
by M23 signed at the conclusion of the Kampala Dialogue, on 12 December 2013.
The increase in ceasefire agreements with conflict-related sexual violence
provisions underlines the importance of continued cooperation between actors in
international peacemaking and of continued exchange of knowledge and expertise
on how to address the inclusion of such provisions in ceasefire and peace
agreements and ensure their effective implementation.
82. In 2013, an independent five-year review of United Nations Action was
published. The review found the network to be an effective mechanism in providing
a global platform for advocacy, accountability and coordination, while noting the
need for continued dissemination of guidance and training tools an d for enhanced
country-level action. All of these activities are supported by voluntary contributions
to the United Nations Action Multi-Partner Trust Fund, which fosters joint action
across the spectrum of United Nations entities and encourages transparen cy,
cooperation and “Delivering as one”. The key review recommendations will inform
United Nations Action policy and practice moving forward.
83. As the basis for evidence-based action on sexual violence, the United Nations
system continues to implement the monitoring and reporting arrangements on
conflict-related sexual violence, as mandated by Security Council resolution 1960
(2010). That work takes account of ongoing operational and field -level
coordination, including the protection cluster and gender-based violence subcluster
arrangements, the working groups on the protection of civilians and the monitoring
and reporting mechanisms on grave violations against children. The United Nations
Action network is also developing a guidance note on the intersections between the
monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements and the Gender-based Violence
Information Management System, with a view to improving the way in which data
are gathered and reported to the Security Council, while preserving the rights and
protection needs of survivors. It should be noted that my “Rights up front”
initiative, which aims to ensure that the mandated human rights responsibilities of
the Organization are always part and parcel of United Nations peace and security
work, will also help to enhance monitoring, the sharing of information and joint
analysis throughout the system.
84. Within peacekeeping and special political missions, dedicated capacity in the
form of women protection advisers continues to be required to facilitate and
coordinate the implementation of the Security Council resolutions on sexual
violence in conflict. As at December 2013, senior women protection advisers had

14-26364

25/33

S/2014/181

been deployed to the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali; it is envisaged
that additional women protection advisers will be deployed to UNMISS, UNOCI,
BINUCA and UNAMID. Women protection advisers have also deployed within
human rights and women’s empowerment and gender units in those missions. To
bolster capacity on the ground, United Nations Action has committed catalytic
funding for women protection advisers in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Côte d’Ivoire and has contributed to building their capacity. Senior women
protection advisers in particular are deployed to provide guidance to mission
leadership on conflict-related sexual violence, to engage in dialogue with parties to
the conflict, to strengthen prevention and response in collaboration with the United
Nations country team and partners, and to lead efforts to implement the monitoring,
analysis and reporting arrangements. Working groups on the arrangements are
operational in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Sudan (Darfur) and
will be established in the Central African Republic, Côte d’Ivoire, Mali, Somalia
and South Sudan during 2014. The continued deployment of dedicated expertise in
fact-finding missions and independent international commissions of inquiry
mandated by the Human Rights Council is also a significant aspect of monitoring
and reporting on conflict-related sexual violence.

IV. Work of the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict
85. The Team of Experts, which was established pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1888 (2009), continued to assist Governments in building national
capacity and expertise in addressing impunity for crimes of sexual violence in
conflict. Lack of capacity remains one of the main impediments to ensuring
accountability. This leads to widespread impunity, which in turn has a detrimental
impact on access to justice, security and the safety of survivors. The Team has
focused its efforts on strengthening the capacity of national rule of law and justice
actors, including within the specialized areas of criminal investigation and
prosecution, collection and preservation of evidence, military justice system
investigation and prosecution, criminal and procedural law reform, and protection of
victims, witnesses and justice officials. The Team complements and adds value to
the work of the United Nations on the ground and enables national authorities to
take the lead. It operates under a joint programme developed in coordination with
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the United Nations Development Programme.
86. In the Central African Republic, following the commitments made by the
Government in the joint communiqué on addressing sexual violence of 12 December
2012, the Team of Experts carried out a technical assessment in partnership with
UN-Women and the entities responsible for the area of gender-based violence within
the Global Protection Cluster. Concrete actions to be taken by the Government and
other partners on the ground towards implementation of the commitments were
proposed. While the current security situation in the Central African Republic d oes
not allow for the provision of assistance, the Team has received a request from the
Government regarding the provision of support to the gendarmerie for the
establishment of a specialized unit on sexual violence.

26/33

14-26364

S/2014/181

87. In Colombia, notable efforts have been made since my former Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict visited the country in May 2012. The
Team of Experts conducted a mission to build on consultations held during that visit
and to discuss concrete modalities of technical assistance, with a particular focus on
possible support to the Attorney General’s Office, including with regard to the
investigation of cases. In addition, at the request of the national authorities, the
Team provided inputs for the development of guidelines by the Ministry of Defence
on addressing conflict-related sexual violence for the police and the military.
88. In Côte d’Ivoire, the Team of Experts supported an experience -sharing
exercise to provide the Ivorian delegation — composed of representatives of
relevant ministries, the police, the judiciary, the military and civil society — an
opportunity to learn from the experience of Sierra Leone in addressing conflict related sexual violence across several sectors. Lessons from the exercise have
informed the national strategy currently under consideration by the Government of
Côte d’Ivoire and a number of other governmental initiatives in the country.
89. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Team of Experts, in coordination
with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the United Nations Development
Programme and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, has continued to support national authorities by strengthening their capacity
to investigate and prosecute in cases of sexual violence crimes committed by
FARDC and other security forces in the northern and southern parts of the country.
In February 2013, the Team deployed an investigations expert to provide support to
the FARDC military justice authorities through prosecutions support cells. The
expert assisted with investigations in a number of major incidents, including
allegations of sexual violence committed by FARDC soldiers in Minova (South
Kivu) and Bweremana (North Kivu) during their withdrawal in the aftermath of
Goma’s fall to elements of M23 in November 2012. As a result of the investigations,
12 commanders of operational military units were suspended from their duties and
18 soldiers from various units were arrested and detained in Goma central prison. In
the future, the Team will focus its efforts on fair trial standards and the safety of
survivors in cases involving sexual violence. The investigations expert also
supported the military prosecutor in the investigation of other incidents of sexual
violence, including incidents in Katindo (Goma) and Kitchanga (Masisi territory).
Moreover, the Team helped the Government to assess its needs and capacity to
implement the commitments made in the joint communiqué on combating conflict related sexual violence of 30 March 2013. In July 2013, through a technical
workshop, the Team helped the Government to develop a plan for implementing the
joint communiqué.
90. In accordance with the joint communiqué signed between the Government of
Guinea and the United Nations in November 2011, the Team of Experts continues to
assist national authorities in investigating sexual violence crimes and prosecuting
alleged perpetrators of such crimes committed in Conakry in September 2009. Since
December 2012, a member of the Team based in Conakry has provided advice to the
panel of judges that was established by the Government; that has led to an increase
in the number of hearings of sexual violence cases: over 200 victims have been
heard by the panel since December 2012. The expert’s assistance ha s also led to the
indictment of several high-level officials, the indictment and detention of a
gendarme specifically on charges of rape in relation to those events, and the
commitment from the Government to establish mechanisms for the protection of

14-26364

27/33

S/2014/181

survivors. A notable result is the indictment and appearance in court of Colonel
Claude Pivi, head of presidential security, and the hearing of General Ibrahima
Baldé, Chief of Staff of the gendarmerie. Going forward, the Team will also look
into the establishment of systems to protect victims and witnesses and the
strengthening of security measures for the panel of judges.
91. In Somalia, the Team of Experts carried out a technical assessment in
partnership with UN-Women and the Preventing Sexual Violence Initiative of the
United Kingdom to help the Government of Somalia develop a plan for the
implementation of the commitments it made in the joint communiqué of 7 May 2013
and in line with the Somali Compact.
92. In South Sudan, the Government is considering the findings of the Team’s
2012 assessment and the recommendations related to legislative reform priorities
and strategies to strengthen national and State-level capacity in the justice sector to
address sexual violence. The Team will continue to support the Government in
establishing an implementation plan to address the problem.
93. The Team continues to build a roster of experts in coordination with initiatives
such as the Justice Rapid Response mechanism and the Preventing Sexual Violence
Initiative.

V. Recommendations
94. The following recommendations outline critical aspects of a framework for the
prevention of sexual violence in conflict, in accordance with Security Council
resolution 2106 (2013). The recommendations outline specific actions required at
the political and operational levels. The breadth of the recommendations illustrates
the comprehensive, multisectoral and multidimensional approach for the prevention
of conflict-related sexual violence that has emerged over the past years. In the
implementation of such a prevention framework, I continue to emphasize the need
for national ownership, leadership and responsibility. The United Nations stands
ready to support national authorities in their efforts.
95. I call upon all parties to conflict responsible for or credibly suspected of acts
of sexual violence to cease such violations and, in accordance with Security Council
resolutions 1960 (2010) and 2106 (2013), to make specific and time-bound
protection commitments that include: (a) the issuance of clear orders through chains
of command and in codes of conduct (or their equivalent) prohibitin g sexual
violence; (b) the timely investigation of alleged violations in order to hold
perpetrators accountable; (c) the immediate identification and release from their
ranks of those most vulnerable to sexual violence, especially women and children;
(d) the designation of a high-level interlocutor responsible for ensuring the
implementation of commitments; and (e) cooperation with and facilitation of access
by the United Nations to monitor compliance. Parties to conflict should prepare
timely implementation plans on the basis of the above-mentioned commitments.
96. I emphasize our responsibility to the survivors of sexual violence and the need
to continue to support the delivery of timely assistance, including
non-discriminatory and comprehensive health services (including the full range of
sexual and reproductive health services and HIV awareness and response services),

28/33

14-26364

S/2014/181

psychosocial, legal, livelihood assistance and other multisectoral services, and to
ensure differentiated and appropriate services for children and male survivors.
97. I urge the Security Council to reinforce the key elements of the prevention
framework outlined under its resolution 2106 (2013) by:
(a) Supporting United Nations efforts to engage in dialogue with State and
non-State parties to elicit commitments to prevent and respond to conflict -related
sexual violence and to consistently review compliance with these commitments,
including by regularly reviewing joint communiqués concluded with the United
Nations and the implementation plans related to those communiqués;
(b) Continuing to emphasize the centrality of civil society, including
women’s organizations, and community leaders in all prevention and response
efforts and by continuing to support their efforts, including through engagement
with parties to conflict, to influence them with respect to addressing sexual
violence;
(c) Supporting United Nations efforts to build the capacity of civil society
groups, including women’s organizations and networks, to enhance informal
community-level protection mechanisms against conflict-related sexual violence in
conflict and post-conflict situations, and of journalists and human rights defenders,
to report and respond to sexual violence crimes;
(d) Ensuring the deployment of women protection advisers, in line with the
agreed operational concept and terms of reference and the provisions of Security
Council resolution 2106 (2013), in order to facilitate the full and timely
implementation of Council resolutions on sexual violence in conflict and by
ensuring that those posts are included in the regular budgets of United Nations
missions;
(e) Ensuring that attention is paid to the issue of sexual violence in the work
of relevant Security Council sanctions monitoring entities, including through the
deployment of qualified experts and of dedicated sexual violence expertise as part of
commissions of inquiry and other fact-finding modalities and consistently
monitoring progress in that regard;
(f) Ensuring that signed ceasefire and peace agreements contain provisions
that, at a minimum, stipulate conflict-related sexual violence as a prohibited act in
the definition of ceasefire, particularly in provisions relating to disengagement, and
that they detail or annex arrangements for ceasefire monitoring mechanisms that
should take into account, among other things: (i) verification of the cessation of
conflict-related sexual violence; (ii) monitoring and reporting on incidents, trends
and patterns of sexual violence, including the identification of parties credibly
suspected of committing or of being responsible for sexual violence; and (iii) the
inclusion of male and female observers, as well as of dedicated gender experts, in
the monitoring structure. Adequate and timely funding is required for the effective
implementation of ceasefire and peace agreements, including provisions related to
conflict-related sexual violence;
(g) Ensuring that action to prevent conflict-related sexual violence is
explicitly reflected in security sector reform processes, in disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes and in justice reform initiatives,

14-26364

29/33

S/2014/181

including as they relate to corrections and police capacity, in lin e with paragraph 16
of Security Council resolution 2106 (2013);
(h) Systematically reflecting the prevention of conflict-related sexual
violence in all relevant country-specific resolutions and in authorizations and
renewals of the mandates of peacekeeping and special political missions through the
inclusion of the key operational provisions of resolutions 1960 (2010) and 2106
(2013), in particular the requirement to establish monitoring, analysis and reporting
arrangements on conflict-related sexual violence, by engaging parties to conflict in a
dialogue with a view to gaining commitments, as specified in the above resolutions,
and by regularly monitoring progress in that regard. Where possible, monitoring
efforts should be combined with service delivery and emphasis should be placed on
coordination and information-sharing across peacekeeping, humanitarian, human
rights, political and security sectors;
(i) Continuing to encourage and support the training of all United Nations
peacekeeping personnel using the innovative tools developed by United Nations
Action partners, including Addressing Conflict-related Sexual Violence: an
Analytical Inventory of Peacekeeping Practice and the matrix of early-warning
indicators, by encouraging troop- and police-contributing countries to increase the
number of women recruited and deployed to peacekeeping operations and by
encouraging troop- and police-contributing countries to rigorously address
allegations of sexual violence and sexual exploitation and abuse by peacekeepers;
(j) Recognizing and addressing the connections between conflict -related
sexual violence and the illicit trade in natural resources, as well as illegal activities
such as the trafficking in illicit drugs and humans. In that regard, the Security
Council may wish to consider the applicability of the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime and its protocols and its relevant legal tools;
(k) Encouraging corporate sector actors to make specific commitments
related to the prevention of conflict-related sexual violence, including with regard to
sourcing materials for their production processes from areas not affected by conflict;
(l) Recognizing that sexual violence is not only a risk faced by displaced
persons but also a tactic that has been used to induce displacement and, therefore,
by giving due consideration to accepting sexual violence in conflict as a form of
persecution that should lead to the recognition of refugee status for the individuals
affected;
(m) Continuing to put pressure on perpetrators of conflict -related sexual
violence, including the individuals, parties and States named in my reports, through
the adoption of targeted measures by relevant sanctions committees and by
considering, when adopting or renewing targeted sanctions in situations of armed
conflict and where appropriate, the inclusion of acts of rape and other serious forms
of sexual violence as criteria for designating individuals. Such actions by the
Security Council should apply to those who commit, command or condone (by
failing to prevent or punish) sexual violence, consistent with the stipulations un der
international criminal law regarding those bearing direct, command or superior
responsibility.
98. I acknowledge the adoption of political commitments to prevent sexual
violence in conflict and provide care for survivors by Member States outside the
framework of the Security Council, namely the historic declarations adopted by the

30/33

14-26364

S/2014/181

Group of Eight countries and by 140 nations on the sidelines of the General
Assembly. I urge those Member States to implement the commitments as a matter of
priority.
99. Furthermore, in line with my emphasis on fostering national ownership,
leadership and responsibility, I urge Member States to draw upon the expertise of
the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict and to
support it in strengthening the rule of law and the capacity of civilian and military
justice systems, as part of broader efforts to strengthen institutional safeguards
against impunity for conflict-related sexual violence. I urge donors to ensure
sustainable funding for this valuable resource for the countries concerned.
100. Finally, I urge all Member States to support the efforts of United Nations
Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict and its Multi-Partner Trust Fund,
particularly for the development and implementation of comp rehensive national
strategies aimed at preventing and addressing conflict-related sexual violence.

VI. Annexed list
101. The annex to the present report, based on currently available information,
contains a list of parties credibly suspected of commi tting or being responsible for
patterns of rape and other forms of sexual violence in situations of armed conflict on
the Security Council agenda. The annex does not purport to be a comprehensive list
of violators, but includes those on whom credible infor mation is currently available.
It should be noted that the annex does not list countries as such. The purpose of the
list is to identify particular parties to conflict that are credibly suspected of
committing or being responsible for patterns of rape and other forms of sexual
violence. In that regard, the names of countries are mentioned only in order to
indicate the locations or situations where offending parties are committing the
violations in question.

14-26364

31/33

S/2014/181

Annex
List of parties credibly suspected of committing or being
responsible for patterns of rape and other forms of sexual
violence in situations of armed conflict on the agenda of the
Security Council
Parties in the Central African Republic
1.

Lord’s Resistance Army.

2.

Ex-Séléka forces.

3.
Anti-balaka forces, including associated elements of the armed forces of the
Central African Republic.
Parties in Côte d’Ivoire
1.

Forces républicaines de Côte d’Ivoire.

2.
Ex-militia groups, including the Alliance patriotique de l’ethnie Wé, the Front
pour la libération du Grand Ouest, the Mouvement ivoirien de libération de l’ouest
de la Côte d’Ivoire and the Union patriotique de résistance du Grand Ouest.
Parties in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
1.

The following armed groups:
(a)

Alliance des patriotes pour un Congo libre et souverain;

(b)

Allied Democratic Forces — National Army for the Liberation of Uganda;

(c)

Forces de défense congolaises;

(d)

Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda;

(e)

Front de résistance patriotique de l’Ituri;

(f)

Lord’s Resistance Army;

(g)

Mouvement du 23 mars;

(h)

Mai-Mai Cheka/Nduma Defence for Congo;

(i)

Mai-Mai Kifuafua;

(j)

Mai-Mai Morgan;

(k)

Mai-Mai Simba/Lumumba;

(l)

Nyatura armed group;

(m) Patriotes résistants congolais;
(n)

32/33

Raia Mutomboki.

2.

Forces armées de la République démocratique du Congo.

3.

National police of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

14-26364

S/2014/181

Parties in Mali
1.

Mouvement national pour la libération de l’Azawad.

2.

Ansar Dine.

3.

Movement for Unity and Jihad in West Africa.

4.

Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb.

Parties in South Sudan
1.

Sudan People’s Liberation Army.

2.

South Sudan national police service.

3.

Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/Army in Opposition.

4.

Lord’s Resistance Army.

Parties in the Syrian Arab Republic
1.
Government forces, including the Syrian armed forces, the intelligence forces
and the shabbiha, a government-affiliated militia.
2.
Armed opposition elements operating in contested and opposition-held areas,
including Damascus, Rif Damascus, Aleppo and Homs.

14-26364

33/33
