United Nations

A/RES/71/319

General Assembly

Distr.: General
30 August 2017

Seventy-first session
Agenda item 106

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 28 August 2017
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/71/L.81)]

71/319. Draft outcome document of the high-level meeting of the
General Assembly on the appraisal of the United Nations
Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 70/179 of 17 December 2015, in which it decided to
convene a high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the appraisal of the
United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons 1 at its
seventy-second session, in October 2017, immediately after the general debate,
Recalling also its resolution 71/287 of 4 May 2017 regarding the modalities
for the high-level meeting, in which it decided that the high -level meeting would be
held on Wednesday, 27 September, and Thursday, 28 September 2017,
Decides to transmit the draft outcome document entitled “Political declaration
on the implementation of the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons”, which is contained in the annex to the present resolution,
for action by the General Assembly at its seventy-second session during the highlevel meeting on the appraisal of the United Nations Global Plan of Action to
Combat Trafficking in Persons, 1 to be held on Wednesday, 27 September, and
Thursday, 28 September 2017.
95th plenary meeting
28 August 2017

Annex
Political declaration on the implementation of the United Nations
Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons
1.
We, the States Members of the United Nations, reaffirm the United Nations
Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons 2 and our commitments
made therein, and evince our strong political will to take decisive concerted action
to end this heinous crime, wherever it may occur.
_______________
1
2

Resolution 64/293.
Resolution 64/293.

17-14898 (E)

*1714898*

Please recycle

Draft outcome document of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the appraisal
of the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons

A/RES/71/319

2.
We recall and reaffirm our commitments to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, 3 recognizing its integrated and indivisible nature and acknowledging
that the 2030 Agenda includes commitments that relate to combating all forms of
trafficking in persons, recognize the importance of partnerships in this regard, and
emphasize that the 2030 Agenda and the Global Plan of Action are mutually
reinforcing.
3.
We reaffirm our commitment to address the social, economic, cultural,
political and other factors that make people vulnerable to trafficking in persons,
such as poverty, unemployment, inequality, humanitarian emergencies, including
armed conflicts and natural disasters, sexual violence, gender discrimination, social
exclusion and marginalization, as well as a culture of tolerance towards violence
against women, youth and children. We reiterate our commitment to promote
education and awareness-raising campaigns to prevent trafficking in persons. We
welcome the designation of 30 July as the World Day against Trafficking in
Persons. 4
4.
We reiterate our strong condemnation of trafficking in persons, especially
women and children, which continues to pose a serious challenge to humanity,
violates and impairs the enjoyment of human rights and fu ndamental freedoms and
constitutes a crime and a serious threat to human dignity and physical integrity, and
a challenge to sustainable development, and which requires the implementation of a
comprehensive approach that includes partnerships and measures to prevent such
trafficking, to prosecute and punish the traffickers and to identify and protect the
victims, as well as a criminal justice response commensurate to the serious nature of
the crime. In this regard, we encourage the development of policies, p rogrammes
and national strategies to prevent and combat trafficking in persons.
5.
We reaffirm the crucial importance of universal ratification of the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime 5 and the Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime, 6 taking into consideration the central role of those instruments in
the fight against trafficking in persons, and urge Member States that have not yet
done so to consider ratifying or acceding to the Convention and the Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children, as a matter of priority. We urge States parties to those instruments to
implement them fully and effectively, and welcome the decision of the Conference
of the Parties to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime to continue the process of establishing a mechanism for the review of the
implementation of the Convention and the Protocols thereto.
6.
We also reaffirm the importance of universal ratification and implementation
of other relevant international instruments that address trafficking in persons.
7.
We reaffirm our recognition that “trafficking in persons” shall mean the
recruitment, transportation, transfer, harbouring or receipt of persons, by means of
the threat or use of force or other forms of coercion, of abduction, of fraud, of
deception, of the abuse of power or of a position of vulnerability or of the giving or
_______________
3

Resolution 70/1.
See resolution 68/192.
5
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2225, No. 39574.
6
Ibid., vol. 2237, No. 39574.
4

2/6

Draft outcome document of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the appraisal
of the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons

A/RES/71/319

receiving of payments or benefits to achieve the consent of a person having control
over another person, for the purpose of exploitation, which includes, at a minimum,
the exploitation of the prostitution of others or other forms of sexual exploitation,
forced labour or services, slavery or practices similar to slavery, servitude or the
removal of organs, as set forth in the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children.
8.
We express solidarity with and compassion for victims and survivors, call for
full respect of their human rights, and, recognizing their role as agents of change in
the global fight against trafficking in persons, encourage further consideration of
incorporating their perspective and experience in all efforts to prevent and combat
trafficking in persons. We will provide appropriate care, assistance and services for
their recovery and rehabilitation, working with civil society and other relevant
partners. We will also undertake appropriate measures for access to justice and
protections for victims in criminal justice processes, including measures to ensure
that identified victims are not penalized for having been trafficked and that they do
not suffer from victimization as a result of actions taken by Government authorities,
communities and families.
9.
We commit to intensify our efforts to prevent and address, with a view to
eliminating, the demand that fosters trafficking, especially of women and girls, for
all forms of exploitation, and in this regard to put in place or to enhance preventive
measures, including legislative and punitive measures, to deter exploiters of
trafficked persons, as well as ensure their accountability.
10. We reaffirm our commitment to continue our efforts to criminalize trafficking
in persons in all its forms, and to strengthen cooperation and coordination among
Member States in countries of origin, transit and destination in order to disrupt and
dismantle criminal networks involved in such crimes, including through, inter alia,
the enhancement of information-sharing with full respect for domestic law and
mutual legal assistance in combating crimes that might be connected with
trafficking in persons, such as money-laundering, corruption, illicit financial flows,
the smuggling of migrants and all forms of organized crime. We commit to
enhancing the capacity of law enforcement and criminal justice systems to identify,
investigate and prosecute cases of trafficking in persons, to analyse financial flows
and to detect those criminal networks.
11. We are seriously concerned that the scale of global resourcing to fight
trafficking in persons does not match the scale of the challenge and in this regard:
(a) We reaffirm our strong support for the United Nations voluntary trust
fund for victims of trafficking in persons, especially women and children,
established in accordance with the Global Plan of Action, aimed at providing
victims of trafficking in persons with humanitarian, legal and financial aid through
established channels of assistance, such as governmental, intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations, and we invite all stakeholders to contribute to the
trust fund, including through the announcement of pledges at the quadrennial highlevel appraisals of the Global Plan of Action;
(b) We stress the need to intensify international cooperation, including
capacity-building and technical assistance, especially for developing countries,
aimed at strengthening their ability to prevent all forms of trafficking, including
supporting their development programmes.
12. We also stress the need to ensure overall organization and coherence in the
efforts of the United Nations system to respond to trafficking in persons, especially
in ensuring support to Member States. In this regard, while recalling that the
3/6

A/RES/71/319

Draft outcome document of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the appraisal
of the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons

Inter-Agency Coordination Group against Trafficking in Persons was established to
foster coordination and cooperation among relevant United Nations system entities
and other international organizations involved in combating trafficking in persons,
with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime as its coordinator, we urge the
Secretary-General to continue efforts to strengthen coordination within the United
Nations system and to inform Member States thereof through existing reporting
channels.
13. We recognize the important role played by the Inter-Agency Coordination
Group against Trafficking in Persons in the United Nations system, and invite it to
continue to increase its activities related to the implementation of the Global Plan of
Action and, to that end, to incorporate aspects of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development relevant to preventing and combating trafficking in persons and to
consider how future activities will be coordinated and how the duplication of efforts
will be avoided. We encourage the Coordination Group to expand its working group
to include entities of the United Nations system that are not currently active in the
working group but that have a role in addressing trafficking in persons.
14. We reaffirm the central role of the work of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime in the global fight against trafficking in persons, particularly in providing
technical assistance to Member States, upon their request, to implement the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children, by making use of existing capacity-building tools, lessons learned from
Member States and expertise available in other international organizations.
15. We reaffirm the important contribution to the global fight against trafficking in
persons of the other members of the Inter-Agency Coordination Group against
Trafficking in Persons, in particular the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations Children’s Fund, the United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women),
the International Labour Organization, the International Organization for Migration,
the International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL), the United Nations
Development Programme, the United Nations Population Fund, the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and other intergovernmental
organizations, within their respective mandates.
16. We reiterate the need for improved data collection and analysis of trafficking
in persons, disaggregated by sex, age and other relevant factors, including the form
of exploitation, to effectively counter trafficking in persons. We thus recognize the
importance of improved data collection by national authorities and will enhance
international cooperation to this end, including through capacity-building, financial
support and technical assistance. We will do so consistent with our national
legislations on data protection, if applicable, and our international obligations
related to privacy, as applicable.
17. We acknowledge the importance of the biennial Global Report on Trafficking in
Persons, prepared by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime pursuant to the
Global Plan of Action, and request the Office to continue to collect information on
patterns, forms and flows of trafficking in persons, at the national, regional and
international levels, in a balanced, reliable and comprehensive manner, to be
published in the Global Report, and in ongoing research to estimate the prevalence of
trafficking in persons, in close cooperation and collaboration with Member States.

4/6

Draft outcome document of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the appraisal
of the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons

A/RES/71/319

18. We recall the New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants, 7 in which,
inter alia, it was recognized that refugees and migrants in large movements are at
greater risk of being trafficked and of being subjected to forced labour. We will
provide support for the victims of trafficking in persons and work to prevent
trafficking in persons among those affected by displacement, including through
targeted measures to identify victims of trafficking in persons or those at risk of
trafficking. We reiterate our commitment to take steps to address the particular
vulnerabilities of women and children during the journey from country of origin to
country of arrival, including their potential exposure to traffick ing in persons,
including through the development of age- and gender-sensitive policies and
programmes.
19. We express our serious concern over the increase in the number of women and
children who are being trafficked, recognize that trafficking in persons
disproportionately affects them, and call upon Member States to establish
comprehensive policies, programmes and other measures to protect trafficked
women and children from revictimization and to provide appropriate assistance and
protection in the best interest of the child.
20. We recognize that the issue of trafficking in persons in situations of armed
conflict and humanitarian emergencies, including natural disasters, requires further
attention. We encourage the training of humanitarian and peacekeepi ng personnel to
be deployed in humanitarian emergencies and peacekeeping operations on
responding to trafficking in persons and on gender expertise, child protection and
sexual exploitation. We encourage all entities and bodies of the United Nations
system to train their personnel and to build their technical capacity to assess
situations for instances of trafficking in persons in armed conflict and humanitarian
emergencies, and to work together to identify, prevent and respond effectively to
victims of trafficking.
21. We express our deep concern about the increasing links in some regions
between armed groups, including terrorist groups, and trafficking in persons,
involving the coercion of women and girls into marriages or sexual slavery, and
pressing men and boys to act as forced labour or combatants.
22. We note with concern the criminal misuse of information and communications
technologies, in particular the Internet, to facilitate trafficking in persons, and
emphasize the importance of countering such use while respecting human rights and
fundamental freedoms, including the right to privacy, in compliance with other
obligations under international law.
23. We reaffirm that the crime of trafficking in persons for the purpose of organ
removal constitutes a form of exploitation and an offence against the human dignity
of the victims, and condemn the involvement of criminal groups and unethical
medical personnel in trafficking in persons for the purpose of organ removal.
24. We reiterate, in the strongest terms possible, the importance of strengthening
collective action by Member States to end trafficking in persons, including through
regional, subregional and cross-regional mechanisms, and through partnerships and
initiatives with the United Nations system and other stakeholders, including,
inter alia, regional and international organizations, the private sector, the media,
parliamentarians and civil society, including non-governmental organizations,
_______________
7

Resolution 71/1.

5/6

Draft outcome document of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the appraisal
of the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons

A/RES/71/319

academic institutions and faith-based organizations, as well as national human rights
institutions, where they exist, with regard to the Paris Principles. 8 In particular, we
underline the work of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on
trafficking in persons, especially women and children, and the Sp ecial Rapporteur of
the Human Rights Council on contemporary forms of slavery, in combating
trafficking in persons, and welcome their continued efforts to implement the Global
Plan of Action and the present political declaration.
25. We will promote partnerships and engage the business community and civil
society, including non-governmental organizations, in developing and implementing
sustainable initiatives to prevent and combat trafficking in persons in supply chains,
taking into account the views and experiences of trafficked persons in designing,
implementing, monitoring and evaluating such initiatives, and encourage businesses
to support efforts to combat trafficking in persons. We urge the Secretary -General to
ensure that all United Nations procurement is free from trafficking in persons.
26. We recognize that arrangements are needed to ensure the systematic follow -up
to and review of all of the commitments we are making at the present high -level
meeting, including in the quadrennial high-level meetings of the General Assembly
to appraise progress achieved in the implementation of the Global Plan of Action.

_______________
8

6/6

Resolution 48/134, annex.
