S/PV.7006

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

7006th meeting

Monday, 22 July 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. DeLaurentis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(United States of America)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Bliss
Mr. Musayev
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Bertoux
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Kim Sook
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. Kadangha-Bariki
Mr. Shearman

Agenda
The situation in Burundi

13-40059 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1340059*

S/PV.7006

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Burundi
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representative
of Burundi to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Office in Burundi, to
participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Paul Seger, Permanent
Representative of Switzerland and Chair of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Onanga-Anyanga.
Mr. Onanga-Anyanga (spoke in French): It is
a great privilege for me to take the floor today on
behalf of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon to inform
the Security Council of the implementation of the
mid-term mandate of the United Nations Office in
Burundi (BNUB), in accordance with the relevant
provisions of resolution 2090 (2013), of 13 February
2013, in particular paragraph 13.
Allow me to convey to the Council my warmest
congratulations for its sustained interest and forthright
support for the efforts of the Organization, alongside
the Government and people of Burundi, aimed at peace,
development and national reconciliation.
I left Bujumbura following the holding, on 15 and
16 July, of the first sectoral conference organized by
the Government in order to ensure effective followup to the Conference of Development Partners, held
in Geneva on 29 and 30 October 2012. It is now more
essential than ever to implement the promises made
at that important meeting with respect to the second
generation strategic framework for growth and poverty
reduction, which guides the efforts of the Government.

2

That is so because Burundi is at a crossroads. It
is both urgent and essential that the many advances
made to bring the country out of its monstrous cycle
of violence be converted from the basic management of
violent upheavals into a profound national ownership
of principles that are capable of promoting institutional
transformation based on the rule of law and democratic
values.
However, there are still enormous challenges on the
path towards achieving the lofty goals that the people
of Burundi and their authorities have set. At the outset,
I would like to echo the appeal made by the SecretaryGeneral for continued, multilateral support for economic
recovery in Burundi. Helping Burundi to overcome the
current economic problems that threaten to undermine
the gains of a still-fragile stability requires taking part
in the dynamic set in motion by the Security Council
and following through on the peacebuilding process in
the country in a holistic manner, as reflected by the
criteria and indicators known as the benchmarks — in
this case the benchmark pertaining to economic and
social development — so as to make the dividends
of peace, without which stability could be called into
question, even more tangible.
The Secretary-General of course wishes to
underscore that the primary responsibility lies with
Burundians themselves, particularly through bold
reforms and uncompromising governance. However, in
the light of the many burdens that might impede growth
and the emergence of a more effective economy that is
more strongly linked to the East African Community,
Burundi should receive essential support from its
development partners in order to better strengthen its
foundations and more effectively deploy its potential.
The priority areas of energy, infrastructure, youth
employment and agriculture should be developed,
including through foreign direct investment, as the
levels in the latter area remain far too low.
It is therefore in a spirit of mutually sustained
commitment that I would like to present the following
oral report on the situation in Burundi, which I have the
honour to deliver following the publication of the most
recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/36).
(spoke in English)
I am pleased to report that we have seen significant
advances in terms of political dialogue since my most
recent briefing to the Security Council (see S/PV.6909).
As indicated then, from 11 to 13 March, BNUB

13-40059

S/PV.7006

organized a workshop on electoral lessons learned with
all Burundian political parties and actors, with the aim
of helping to prepare the way ahead to the elections
in 2015 by drawing lessons from the 2010 electoral
process. The country’s First Vice-President addressed
the opening session of the workshop, which was
attended by the Home Affairs Minister and other senior
Government officials, representatives of all political
parties, political actors who played a key role during
the 2010 elections, and a range of senior Government
officials and eminent persons, such as former Presidents.
In one particular development, several opposition
politicians who had remained in exile abroad following
their boycott of the 2010 elections returned to Burundi
to participate in the workshop.
It is worth stressing that, for the first time since
2010, all Burundian political actors came together to
discuss their country’s political future. Discussions
during the three days were open, frank and constructive.
Despite diverging views on several issues, participants
agreed on a number of key principles going forward, as
documented in the elements of a road map that emerged
as the workshop’s immediate outcome. Such principles
included, inter alia, the need for inclusive political
dialogue, the creation of a security environment
conducive to the holding of free and peaceful elections,
and the freedom of all political parties and actors to
carry out their activities. The Home Affairs Ministry
assumed responsibility for moving the process forward
in an inclusive manner, and is to be congratulated for
the constructive approach it has taken towards that
aspect of dialogue.
As the first in a series of follow-up activities
envisaged to move the preparations forward, the
Government, with the support of the United Nations,
organized a workshop from 22 to 25 May in the northern
town of Kayanza, to discuss possible revisions to the
electoral code, which was one of the elements that the
March seminar had agreed to discuss. That workshop
was again a success, and ended with broad agreement
on the provisions of the electoral code that should be
proposed to lawmakers for revision. Recommendations
included the combination of presidential, legislative
and communal elections; the distribution of tally sheets
to political party agents at polling stations; and, most
important, an agreement on the use of a single-ballot
system, which had been a long-standing and divisive
matter in Burundi. While some of the participants
lamented a lack of preparation, they mostly appreciated

the Government’s initiative and the degree of openness
that was shown by the inclusive list of invitees and the
way the discussions were managed.
In our views, the implementation of the conclusions
reached in Kayanza would represent a major step
forward on the path to organizing free, fair and
transparent elections. It is encouraging that, on various
occasions, the President of the Republic reaffirmed
his Government’s commitment to ensuring that those
recommendations be endorsed through the established
legislative process when revising Burundi’s electoral
law in the coming months. Another crucial element, as
key political party leaders emphasized during a meeting
I held with them on 7 June, is a dedicated discussion
on the establishment of a political environment that is
conducive to the elections. The Government and BNUB
have begun preparations for an inclusive meeting, to be
held by September, that would specifically focus on this
key issue.
I wish to emphasize that the return of key political
figures to Burundi marks significant progress and is
an encouraging sign of the increasing willingness
of all political actors to collaborate in the interest of
preparing for peaceful, free and fair elections in 2015.
The returning politicians have since resumed their
activities, with some political parties having already
been able to make progress in terms of reaching out to
their members in different parts of the country.
Such major advances on political dialogue
have played a key role in reducing restrictions of
political space, which have had the negative impact
of curtailing the ability of political parties and actors
to freely conduct their day-to-day activities. Yet,
there is more to be done, since the activities of some
members of the Imbonerakure — the youth league
of the ruling party, the Conseil national pour la
défense de la démocratie-Forces pour la défense de
la démocratie (CNDD-FDD) — and overzealous local
authorities continue to raise concerns. On numerous
occasions during the reporting period, members of the
Imbonerakure have harassed citizens and committed
crimes — often, it is alleged, for political reasons.
We welcome the recent statements by the
President of the ruling party and the President of the
Imbonerakure, echoed by Cabinet members, in which
they all emphasized that the CNDD-FDD and the
Government did not endorse violent acts and called on
the courts to prosecute violations in accordance with

13-400593

S/PV.7006

the law. Leaders of other political parties have similarly
encouraged their youth to refrain from violence. Given
the country’s violent history, we strongly urge all
stakeholders to ensure that youth wings of political
parties perform their activities peacefully and do not
become a source of intimidation and, at times, actual
danger to the population, including those who may be
politically active, thus affecting negatively the political
environment ahead of the 2015 elections. BNUB has
intensified contacts with youth-group leaders to that
end, and is planning to facilitate a meeting among
them later this year, to assist in reinforcing peaceful
approaches ahead of the 2015 elections.

regional instability, Burundi has actively participated
in regional and international efforts to strengthen peace
consolidation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
including through the International Conference of the
Great Lakes Region and, most recently, through its active
support to the Kampala process and the implementation
of the mandate of the United Nations Special Envoy for
the Great Lakes Region, Ms. Mary Robinson. Burundi
has also maintained its laudable commitment to peace
in Somalia through its significant contribution to the
African Union Mission in Somalia, an engagement that
the international community continues to appreciate
strongly.

The questions of land and the handling of disputes
by the Commission Nationale des terres et autres biens
(CNTB) relating to land and other assets unlawfully
seized during the 1972 crisis have also been the
subject of controversial discussion in Burundi during
the first six months of this year. In some cases, the
implementation of the Commission’s decisions has
elicited public, and at times violent, responses.

BNUB has continued to support the Government’s
efforts to professionalize and enhance the capacity of
the national defence and security services, together
with bilateral partners, including through the training
of trainers on human rights and the prevention of
gender-based violence, and through the marking and
registration of weapons. On 28 May, Burundi took a step
forward in the fight against the proliferation of small
arms and light weapons when the First Vice-President
launched a second civilian-disarmament campaign,
which will now be carried out with support from the
United Nations and other partners.

The issue of land and other assets is one of the most
sensitive in the Burundian context and does not lend
itself to easy solutions. Burundi is a landlocked country
with one of the highest population densities in the
world. In view of the divisive nature of this matter, and
the risk of its opportunistic exploitation for political
gain, including along ethnic lines, BNUB has called
on all stakeholders to handle it with great care, in the
spirit of the Arusha Accords, with a view to furthering
justice, reconciliation, social cohesion and peace. We
have therefore been encouraged to see the beginnings
of a broader and more open discussion concerning the
handling of land disputes in general, notably with a
workshop chaired by President Nkurunziza on 24 June,
which underlined the need for the CNTB to be guided by
the principles of the Arusha Accords, while promoting
justice and reconciliation.
With regard to benchmark II, concerning security
and stability, overall, Burundi continued to enjoy a
commendable level of security and stability. However,
occasional clashes among Government forces and
armed groups continued during the previous reporting
period, including cross-border incursions from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, with armed groups
claiming responsibility for some of the attacks. As such
incidents show, the ongoing instability in the eastern
part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo continues
to adversely impact Burundi. In a bid to help stem

4

With regard to benchmark III, concerning
transitional justice, the transitional justice mechanisms
foreseen by the Arusha Accords have yet to materialize.
In his address to the nation on the occasion of Burundi’s
Independence Day, the President reaffirmed his
Government’s commitment to establishing a truth and
reconciliation commission, noting that a draft law to that
effect was before the Parliament and preparatory work
was well advanced. In anticipation of the discussion
of the draft law in Parliament, BNUB continued its
activities with regard to raising awareness among
national stakeholders as to international standards
and best practices, notably by organizing a workshop
for parliamentarians on the topic. Those efforts will
continue to assist in the adoption of a law that is in
conformity with international norms and national
expectations.
No other process is as challenging as revisiting and
owning the Burundian past. Yet, as hard and painful a
path as that is, it remains vital to rebuilding the nation
so that it can at last live free of fear, identity-conflict
and impunity.

13-40059

S/PV.7006

On benchmark 4, concerning governance, Burundi
must be commended for its efforts to strengthen
governance and the accountability of institutions.
BNUB has been encouraging the Government of
Burundi to press ahead with the implementation of the
National Strategy of Good Governance and the Fight
against Corruption, especially given the current efforts
to work with donor partners on the follow-up to the
commitments made at last year’s partners conference
in Geneva. Building on the positive developments
reported last year, we have been able to note sustained
improvement in the business environment and an
ongoing reform process in the economic sector.
However, Burundi currently finds itself in an
extremely difficult fiscal position. After three strong
years of revenue growth, driven by the important work
of Burundi’s Office Burundais des Revenues, collected
revenues in Burundi showed a marked decline in the
period from February to May 2013. The country now
appears likely to miss its 2013 revenue targets by a very
substantial margin, threatening development outcomes
and currency exchange. If not properly handled, that,
in turn, could pose a serious threat to the hard-won yet
still fragile stability.
A recent mission to Burundi by the International
Monetary Fund identified a number of urgent alterations
in fiscal policy that the country must pursue in order
to balance its books. It will be critical for Burundi’s
leaders to take the painful steps necessary to ensure that
the situation is rectified and revenue growth resumes.
On benchmark 5, concerning the rule of law,
following the adoption of the sectorial strategy of the
Ministry of Justice in 2011, BNUB continued to work
closely with the Ministry of Justice and other relevant
partners on the planning of an inclusive and open
conference, the Etats-Généraux de la Justice, which is
now planned for August 2013, after lengthy and difficult
consultations. The judicial system as a whole still faces
considerable challenges, as evidenced, for example, by
the continuing gaps in the promotion of magistrates. It
is hoped that the Etats-Généraux will help define the
way forward in addressing the challenges in the justice
sector with inputs from all relevant stakeholders. In a
positive development, on 3 April a new criminal code
was signed into law by the President, marking significant
improvements in procedures in a number of important
areas and enhancing oversight and accountability.

On benchmark 6, concerning human rights, the
picture regarding the overall human rights situation
during the first six months of this year is mixed.
There has been a great deal of improvement, with
persistent challenges. We have noted far fewer cases
of killings that may have been politically motivated
than in the past. In the first six months of 2013, BNUB
documented 20 cases of extrajudicial executions. It
needs to be emphasized, however, that a large number
of those grave violations were associated with a single
event, on 12 March, in the commune of Businde, in
Kayanza province. Seven followers of a self-proclaimed
prophetess, Eusebie Ngendakumana, were killed after a
violent confrontation with the police. Eleven cases of
torture and 80 cases of cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment also occurred. Those figures,
regrettably, mark an increase over the comparative
period of the previous year. It must be noted that the
excessive and inappropriate use of force by State
security agents, mostly the police, appears to have
been the cause of the majority of the cases of human
rights violations that have been documented since the
beginning of this year.
The Government has attributed the Businde incident
to a lack of adequate training of the police with regard
to crowd control and managing public demonstrations.
It is worth noting that the police indeed seem to have
started adopting a more cautious approach when dealing
with similar incidents. It is imperative to now build on
those advances so as to prevent further tragedies such
as the incident on 12 March and to ensure that the
freedom of religion and the freedom of assembly are
respected while public order is upheld in accordance
with the relevant legal provisions.
Efforts continued aimed at improving judicial
follow-up to grave human rights violations, in a
somewhat encouraging trend that began in 2012.
Continued efforts will therefore need to be exerted to
ensure that all perpetrators of crimes are duly prosecuted
and sentenced, with a view to ending impunity.
The promulgation of the new press law on 4 June,
after much controversial debate, has proved to be a
highly divisive issue. Preoccupied by the risks of a
decline in the freedom of the press and democratic
space, the Secretary-General and a variety of bilateral
and international partners, as well as local and
international civil society organizations, called on
the Government to uphold the freedom of expression.
Among the concerns are provisions that broaden the

13-400595

S/PV.7006

conditions under which journalists can be forced to
reveal their sources and give disproportionate fines and
other penalties for certain press offences. It is therefore
reassuring that the Government of Burundi has since
indicated its intention to apply the law leniently and to
ensure that the freedom of the press continues to be
a feature of the vibrant democracy Burundi aspires to
be. We remain confident that the same attitude will be
observed during the review and adoption of two further
laws, on public meetings and demonstrations, and on
non-profit organizations, with a view to protecting
freedom of association and expression.
On benchmark 8, concerning socioeconomic
development, overall Burundi continues to struggle
with high rates of extreme poverty. Food security
and nutrition remain major challenges, and most
Burundians continue to face a daily struggle to make
ends meet. Projections for 2013 indicate a slightly
increased growth rate of 5.3 per cent, which is, however,
insufficient to significantly reduce the poverty level,
given the continuing high rates of population growth.
On 27 January, the central market of Bujumbura burned
down completely, profoundly affecting the economic
and social life of the city and the country as a whole.
The incident has negatively affected local merchants,
farmers, transport workers and other citizens,
exacerbating an already difficult economic situation
for many.
Income generation also continued to be a major
challenge for those Burundians who returned from
the Mtabila refugee camp in Tanzania at the end of
2012, mostly due to the lack of land for agriculture and
related land conflicts, despite the reintegration support
provided by the United Nations and other partners.
Burundi remains host to more than 50,000 refugees,
mostly from the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the majority of whom are women and children. Almost
80,000 people continue to be internally displaced in
Burundi.
Despite many advances made at the national
level and the commendable efforts undertaken by
the Government, the private sector and citizens
themselves, Burundi remains in need of strong support
from its partners in order to overcome the numerous
challenges it faces on the socioeconomic development
front. In that regard, a key area of focus during the first
half of this year was to ensure effective follow-up to
the commitments made by international partners at
the October 2012 Geneva Conference. As I mentioned

6

earlier, the Government successfully organized a first
sectoral follow-up conference, which took place in
Bujumbura from 15 to 16 July. A second conference,
focused on governance and energy, is being planned
for October. We are grateful to Burundi’s partners
for their steadfast support, and urge the international
community to stay engaged and help ensure that the
country remains firmly set on its path to sustainable
development and lasting peace consolidation.
In that regard, work has also continued to advance
in the more area of peacebuilding in Burundi. The
implementation of the reintegration programmes for
war-affected populations, funded by the Peacebuilding
Fund (PBF), is expected to be completed before the end
of the year. Efforts to plan for a possible third tranche of
PBF funding for Burundi have begun. In his capacity as
Chair of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, Ambassador Paul Seger visited Burundi
from 21 to 28 June. Allow me once again to commend
Ambassador Seger for his leadership and tireless work
to promote lasting peace and development in Burundi.
I have found in Paul a strong ally in our joint efforts
to enable Burundi to achieve its own national strategic
objectives for peace, development and reconciliation.
I would also like to express my appreciation to
Special Envoy Mary Robinson for her exceptional work
to advance peace and stability in the region. Burundi
recently hosted a regional conference on women,
security, peace and development, co-organized by
Ms. Robinson’s office, which led to the adoption of
a regional action plan on resolution 1325 (2000), as
well as to a renewed commitment to collaborate in the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region. We look forward to seeing this
encouraging process continue, and to supporting the
Government of Burundi and other national stakeholders
in their work on this important initiative.
(spoke in French)
In accordance with paragraph 13 of resolution 2090
(2013), of 13 February, the Secretary-General will soon
inform members of the Council in greater detail about
the implementation of BNUB’s mandate based on the
report to be provided to him by the strategic assessment
mission, which he will deploy shortly. For its part,
BNUB will tirelessly pursue its mission to support the
peacebuilding process and to strengthen democratic
institutions in Burundi.

13-40059

S/PV.7006

In that respect, the preparation for the forthcoming
2015 elections, which are already giving rise to much
debate and are the subject of intense preparations,
deserve special attention. The holding of its next
elections will sorely test the young Burundian
democracy. The positive trends in the current political
scene bode well for the success of that important event
for the Burundian people and their history.
At the request of President Nkurunziza, the
Secretary-General is preparing to deploy a mission
during the third week of August to assess Burundi’s
electoral assistance needs. Carried out in the broader
context of the multilateral reforms under way while
effectively addressing the various issues that I have
referred to, and with effective support for the country’s
efforts to improve growth and combat poverty,
Burundi’s democratic experience could be a foundation
for building a nation that is more united, prosperous
and confident in its future.
In recent months, I had the privilege to hold lengthy
meetings with all senior Burundian officials, including
with the Permanent Representative, who is here in the
Chamber, on all the issues that I just mentioned. I was
thus able to take good stock of the importance that
the authorities attach to the task of modernizing their
country.
I am grateful for the quality of the reception and the
cooperation that I enjoyed in exercising my functions.
That demonstrates the great respect that Burundi has for
the United Nations, and for international cooperation
in general. I also took the time to listen to other
stakeholders in Burundian society — political parties,
representatives of civil society, religious groups,
women’s organizations and youth groups. Everywhere
I noticed a great deal of confidence in the future they
want to build together patiently, jointly and with mutual
respect.
Allow me to pay tribute to the members of the
international community present in Burundi for their
support to the country. I am also grateful to all my
colleagues from BNUB and to the United Nations
family in Burundi for their dedication.
I would like to conclude by referring to what an
astute Burundian observer once solemnly told me,
which was that his country continued to make progress
despite the weight of history and the daily challenges. I
found his words rich in meaning and hope — hope for a
better tomorrow, forged from the hard work of Burundi’s

men and women. They will need the outstretched and
reassuring hand of all their partners, and, undoubtedly,
the continued engagement of the Security Council.
The President: I thank Mr. Onanga-Anyanga for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Seger.
Mr. Seger (spoke in French): A Burundian proverb
says, “Even if there is no rooster to crow at dawn, the
day will dawn.” Undoubtedly, the day will dawn, but
will people also wake up on time?
Peacebuilding in Burundi has made significant and
impressive progress, but a critical point has also been
reached that requires a higher level of commitment
from both sides, the Government and the international
community, to take the final steps. The rooster would
therefore do well to continue crowing for some time
more.
My briefing will focus on the following three
points. First, I will summarize the results of my most
recent visit to Burundi, from 24 to 28 June, which
aimed to take stock of the situation in the country;
discuss the follow-up to the Geneva Conference of
Development Partners; and, address the issue of the
next steps to be taken by the Burundi configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). As I sent
member States of the Council my full report by letter
last week, I will simply give a brief summary of the
peacebuilding situation. Following the excellent
briefing by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, I will be able to make my statement even more
concise. Secondly, I will share the main messages and
conclusions from my visit. And, lastly, I will make a
pitch for extending the presence of the United Nations
Office in Burundi (BNUB) beyond its current mandate,
ideally until the 2015 elections.
Before I begin, let me first take this opportunity to
offer my sincere thanks to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga,
and his team at the United Nations Office in Burundi
for their exemplary work and excellent cooperation with
the Burundi configuration of the PBC. I would also like
to thank the Government of Burundi for welcoming
me warmly once again and for the spirit of trust and
cooperation it has always displayed.
Last month I visited Bujumbura, where as usual,
in close cooperation with BNUB, I met with senior
representatives of the Government, including the

13-400597

S/PV.7006

President of the Republic, the principal political
parties, and interlocutors from civil society and the
international community, including the international
financial institutions. The main topics discussed were
the political situation, particularly in the context of the
2015 elections, the socioeconomic situation, human
rights, the issue of how to deal with the past, and the
land issue. My impression confirms that of the Special
Representative, which is that although the country has
made significant progress, several challenges remain.
I saw a real risk of a gap between the expectations
of the Government on the one hand and those of the
international community on the other. Moreover, the
fragility of the Burundian economy requires urgent
action.
As the Special Representative said, we are seeing
positive developments but also problems at the political
level. On the positive side, it should be noted that the
two most recent workshops on elections promoted a
democratic, transparent and open dialogue between
the Government and the opposition, and prompted the
return of several politicians from exile. By contrast, the
recent enactment of a new press law, along with other
bills currently being drafted — particularly those on
non-profit associations and public demonstrations — has
drawn a lot of criticism. Some rather vague provisions
in these pieces of legislation are thought to be
potentially harmful to peacebuilding. The same applies
to the Imbonerakure, the youth wing of the governing
party, the Conseil national pour la défense de la
démocratie-Forces pour la défense de la démocratie.
The Special Representative also mentioned this point,
which was indicated to me across the board as an issue
in need of greater attention. It seems that these young
party members sometimes take over the role of State
security institutions and resort to intimidation methods
and threats against the population and members of
other political parties. And various people I spoke to
mentioned the risk that the other political parties might
also mobilize their own youth members. That is why
programmes targeting young people, particularly jobcreation programmes, should be given more weight.
The political situation is thus a difficult one, and the
same goes for the financial situation, which continues
to deteriorate. As the Special Representative said,
the results of the Geneva Conference of Development
Partners must be implemented, particularly since the
time is ripe to take bold, major measures. In order to do
that, new energy is needed on the part of the Government,

8

particularly in the area of good governance. It is also
important that the Geneva spirit of mutual commitment
be maintained by both the Government and the
international community. I am, incidentally, looking
forward to participating at the end of October in the
second sectoral conference, which will deal with the
challenges of peacebuilding in Burundi, among other
issues.
The Special Representative mentioned the process
of dealing with the past, and I will simply refer the
Council to his discussion of the issue. He also discussed
the handling of the land question by the Commission
nationale des terres et autres biens (CNTB), which
has recently shaken up public life in Burundi. As
the Council is aware, most of those cases date from
the tragic events of 1972, when a large part of the
population, mostly Hutus, were forcibly evicted from
their land. I have learned that the various stakeholders
have differing opinions on how the President of the
CNTB has dealt with this complex and politically
sensitive question. The controversy has chiefly to
do with the notion of purchasing in good faith. The
President of the Commission, minimizing the number
of cases of landowners who acquired their land unaware
of its illegal origins, favours reconciliation through
restitution. Given the importance of landownership
in Burundi and its potential ethnic repercussions, this
issue is very relevant to peacebuilding and deserves our
attention. I have specifically informed the authorities
that the Burundi configuration of the PBC is ready to
facilitate the establishment of a compensation fund,
should the Government so desire.
I left Bujumbura with mixed feelings. The country
has made impressive progress, but what is needed is
to maintain the momentum that has prevailed since the
Geneva Conference. I realize that the peacebuilding
process is arduous and requires perseverance. Every
marathon runner knows that the last 10 kilometres are
always the hardest. Like the Special Representative, I
therefore encourage the Government to stay the course,
given that the country has made so much progress
towards stabilization in recent years.
My message to the Burundian Government is that
it should display political leadership and redouble
its efforts to tackle major reforms in the areas of
good political and economic governance and the rule
of law. In particular, I encourage the authorities to
translate the consensus of the two political workshops
into improving the electoral code, to employ a liberal

13-40059

S/PV.7006

interpretation of the new press law while respecting
freedom of expression, to ensure that other legislation
complies with international standards, to implement
the poverty reduction strategy paper in accordance with
the commitments made in Geneva and to implement the
recommendations of the International Monetary Fund
for improving the country’s fiscal situation.
At the same time, my message to the international
community is to step up its commitment to Burundi
and to maintain constructive, open and forthright
communication with the Government. We should closely
monitor the implementation of the press law and the
drafting of other bills; continue to support Burundi in
the spirit of our mutual commitments and in compliance
with the pledges made in Geneva; follow developments
relating to the land issue and support the Government’s
efforts to establish a framework for dealing with the
past, based on the will of the Burundian people. In any
event, the PBC will remain engaged in all these areas.
My role as an advocate for Burundi depends largely
on the presence of BNUB and especially on the work
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga. Their untiring work,
day after day, for the good of Burundi is essential. I
am aware that BNUB’s mandate will not be under
discussion for another six months, when we will also
have the results of the strategic assessment mission,
but I know already that I would strongly recommend
BNUB’s continued presence at least until the 2015
elections. I have also said as much to the authorities
in Bujumbura. That personal conviction, which I
expressed the last time I spoke here (see S/PV.6909),
was further strengthened by the impressions produced
on my last visit to Burundi. We have not yet reached a
point when we can disengage.
In three days, the Security Council will discuss
the situation in the Great Lakes. It goes without saying
that the security situation in the region influences
the situation in Burundi and vice versa. The regional
dimension is one more reason why the international
community and the United Nations in particular should
continue its engagement in Burundi. With a peaceful,
secure and prosperous Burundi, the Council will not
have to worry about yet another situation in that volatile
region.
I will conclude my remarks by calling on the
representatives of the members of the Security Council
to keep Burundi in mind during their discussions next

Thursday. Burundians very much deserve a prosperous
future.
The President: I thank Mr. Seger for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Burundi.
Mr. Niyonzima (Burundi) (spoke in French): I
should like, on behalf of the Government of Burundi
and on my own behalf, to convey the warm thanks of
His Excellency Mr. Pierre Nkurunziza, President of
the Republic, and the entire Burundian people to the
Security Council and the international community for
the broad range of support that we have enjoyed in our
struggle to put our country back on the track of peace
and stability.
Not long ago, Belgium had been without a
Government for over a year. Despite the absence of
governmental authority, peace and security prevailed
and the Belgians continued to go about their business as
if nothing had happened. In Burundi, like in many poor
countries, a 24-hour power vacuum may be enough
to spawn criminal acts ranging from simple acts of
vengence to inter-community confrontation.
If peace and security prevailed in Belgium in the
absence of a Government, it is not because Belgians are
naturally more inclined to come together in fellowship.
Burundians are equally so inclined. That is an inherent
part of human nature. The explanation is simply that
the Belgians are free from worries of subsistence; they
have enough to eat, to keep themselves warm and to
dress themselves. They have access to health care. They
have access to drinking water. Burundi does not have
the minimum necessary to sustain life; it lives below
the poverty line.
The example of Belgium is sufficient to show that
the quality of governance is not a factor in ensuring
peace and security. Without the bare minimum for
subsistence, everything we do and everything we say is
irrelevant. The French say that a hungry stomach has no
ears. Let us discuss the good governance that is so dear
to Burundi’s many partners, because it is not an empty
word in Burundi and is central to all Government
action.
Since the beginning of the implementation of
the peacebuilding programme in Burundi in 2007,
significant progress has been registered in almost all
socioeconomic and political areas, including peace and
security, the disarmament of the civilian population, the
demobilization and reintegration of former combatants,

13-400599

S/PV.7006

the repatriation and resettlement of refugees, good
political and economic governance, the strengthening
of the rule of law and justice, the promotion of human
rights, national reconciliation and the fight against
impunity. Significant progress has been made in
particular within the new defence and security forces,
whose efficiency and professionalism have been placed
at the service of other countries in difficulty, such as
Somalia, Côte d’Ivoire, Haiti, Darfur, and soon Mali.
In the political field, significant progress has been
seen in the consolidation of democracy and the resolution
of political disputes through dialogue. It is in this context
that, with the assistance of the United Nations Office in
Burundi, workshops were recently held for Burundian
political actors, including those who were previously
in exile, aimed at strengthening institutional capacity.
These meetings gave participants the opportunity to
engage in consensual and constructive debate on the
arrangements for establishing the electoral code and a
road map that will lead to the very smooth holding of
elections in 2015.
The press law and the work of the Commission des
terres et autres bien endured negative media coverage,
but the Government is determined to continue its
efforts to promote justice, equality and peace. The
achievements of the Government are many and well
known to the international community, which has
heaped continual praise on the Government and cited
Burundi as an example of successful peacebuilding.
In recognition of our efforts, the international
community has pledged financial support to Burundi
totaling $2.6 billion in funding for the strategic
framework for the fight against poverty. Unfortunately,
this support has been slow in coming, and extreme
poverty has begun to create tensions in Burundi. With
only 46 per cent of pledged support yet to be delivered,
our partners have responded not with checks but by
signing disbursement agreements with the Government.
In Burundi, poverty has become so dire that life
has lost the meaning embodied in certain values, such
as work and participation in the building of society.
Living has become synonymous with not dying, and

10

each passing day becomes a victory over hunger and
death. The spring is too tightly wound.
The Government has made great efforts, but it
is exhausted and drained of the creativity and the
inspiration for making pronouncements that unite and
stabilize. Yesterday it was the doctors and medical
personnel who were on strike; today it is the teachers;
and tomorrow, it may be the police and the army. And
if the people do not follow the movement, despite the
numerous appeals made by union leaders, it is neither
because they are angels nor because of the creative
genius of the political class. It is merely because of the
contrast between the suffering caused by hunger and
that imposed by 40 years of military dictatorships.
Yes, we trust in the patience of the population, but for
how long? How long will it take hunger and poverty to
become the norms in Burundi?
Poverty in Burundi has become a security issue.
The Government asks that the Security Council treat
it as such, and quickly. Specifically, the Government
asks the Council to intercede on behalf of Burundi
so that the promises made to the people of Burundi
at Geneva are realized. For its part, the Government
of Burundi reiterates its commitment to pursuing the
reforms under way to rebuild and develop the country
in order to achieve the well-being that the Burundian
people deserve.
I should like to conclude my statement by sincerely
thanking Special Representative of the Secretary
General Parfait Onanga-Anyanga and Ambassador
Paul Seger, Chair of the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, for their advocacy work on
behalf of Burundi. I ask that they continue their tireless
efforts. The road ahead may be long and arduous, but it
will one day come to an end.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.10 a.m.

13-40059
