56

General Assembly-Thirty-second ~sion

of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics stated the
following:
"Today we are proposing a radical step: that
agreement be reached on a simultaneous halt in the
production of nuclear weapons by all States. This
would apply to all such weapons-whether atomic,
hydrogen or neutron bombs or missiles. At the same
time, the nuclear Powers could undertake to start
the gradual reduction of existing stockpiles of such
weapons and move towards their complete, total
destruction.";
3. Stresses the necessity and urgency that the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of
America strive to implement as soon as possible the
foregoing declarations of their respective heads of
State and invites the Governments of both countries
to adopt without delay all relevant measures to achieve
that objective;
4. Reiterates with special emphasis its invitation to
both Governments to keep the General Assembly informed in good time of the results of their negotiations
and trusts to be able to receive from them appropriate
information in this regard during the special session of
the Assembly devoted to disarmament, to be held in
May and June 1978.
100th plenary meeting
12 December 1977

1. Endorses the recommendation by the Preparatory
Committee for the Special Session of the General Assembly Devoted to Disarmament that the General Assembly should initiate a study on the relationship between disarmament and development, the terms of
reference of the study to be determined by the Assembly itself at its special scssion; 40
2. Requests the Secretary-General to appoint, at
the earliest possible date, an ad hoe group of governmental experts with the task of elaborating a possible
framework and terms of reference for the abovementioned study; 41
3. Requests the Secretary-General to make available to the Ad Hoe Group on the Relationship between
Disarmament and Development all the relevant materials, including proposals made by Member States, as
well as previous and current United Nations studies
on the subject;
4. Requests the Ad Hoe Group to report on its
work not later than 1 April 1978;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
report of the Ad Hoe Group to Member States not
later than a month before the opening, on 23 May
1978, of the special session.
100th plenary meeting
12 December 1977

B
32/88.

Special session of the General Assembly
devoted to disarman1ent=17
A

The General Assembly,
Gravely concerned that vast human and material
resources are spent on armaments,
Reaffirming the need to allocate greater resources
to economic and social progress, particularly having
in mind the needs of the developing countries,
Firmly believing that a curtailment of expenditures
on armaments in keeping with the objectives of the
Disarmament Decade would facilitate the availability of
greater resources for economic and social development,
particularly to the developing countries,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the aforementioned matters and the specific studies carried out at
its request,
Noting the declaration made by the Fifth Conference
of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Colombo from 16 to 19 August 1976,
on this matter, 38
Noting also the proposal for a United Nations study
presented to the Preparatory Committee for the Special
Session of the General Assembly Devoted to Disarmament, 39
Sharing the view that decisions on concrete action
would be facilitated through an in-depth analysis on
the relationship between disarmament efforts and measures to achieve economic and social progress,
37 See also sect. X.B.1, decision 321403, and sect. X.B.2,
decisions 321423 A and B.
ss See A/31/197.
39 Official Records of the General Assembly, Tenth Special
Session, Supplement No. 1 (A/S-10/1), vol. V, document
A/ AC.187 /80.

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31/189 B of 21 December
197 6, in which it decided to convene a special session
of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament,
Having considered the report of the Preparatory
Committee for the Special Session of the General Assembly Devoted to Disarmament,42
l. Endorses the report of the Preparatory Committee for the Special Session of the General Assembly
Devoted to Disarmament and the recommendation contained therein for the special session to be held between
23 May and 28 June 1978 in the General Assembly
Ha!l;4a

2. Requests the Preparatory Committee to continue
its work in order to prepare a draft final document or
documents for consideration and adoption by the General Assembly at its special session and to submit to
the Assembly its final report;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the members of
the Preparatory Committee for their constructive contribution to its work;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
Member States the records of the thirty-second session
of the General Assembly relating to the special session;
5. Further requests the Secretary-General to render
the Preparatory Committee all necessary assistance as
may be required for the completion of its work.
100th plenary meeting
12 December 1977
40 Ibid., Thirty-second Session, Supplement No. 41 (A/32/41
and Corr.l), para. 32.
4 1 For the composition of the Ad Hoe Group on the Relationship between Disa.rmament and Development, see
A/S-10/9, annex.
42 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Supplement No. 41 (A/32/41 and Corr.I).
43 Ibid., para. 19.
