General Aaeembly-Twenty-fifth Seesion

H

as possible and, at the latest, within a maximum period
of six months following the expiration of the administrative year in the Non-Self-Governing Territories concerned;

1. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
diacharge the functions entrusted to it under General
Auombly resolution 1970 (XVIII), in accordance
with established procedures.
1928th plenary meeting,
14 December 1970.

2702 (XXV), Question of Oman

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Oman,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
all other relevant resolutions,

Bearing in mind the relevant provisions of its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970 containing the
programme of action for the full implementation of
the Declaration,

ConcerMd about the situation in the Territory of
Oman,
Deploring the refusal of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland to implement the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly concerning the Territory,

1. Reaffirms its resolutions 2238 (XXI) of 20
December 1966, 2302 (XXII) of 12 December 1967,
2424 (XXIII) of 18 December 1968 and 2559
(XXIV) of 12 December 1969;

2. Reafjirms the inalienable right of the people of
Oman to self-determination and to the natural resources of their Territory, as well as their right to dispose of those resources in their best interests;
3. Urges the Government of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to implement

fully General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and
other relevant resolutions;

4. Recommends that the specialized agencies and
m.temational institutions concerned should stud¥, within
the scope of their activities and in co-operation. with
the reponal organization concerned and through it,
the possibilities of extending assistance to meet the
educational, technical and health requirements of the
people of the Territory;

S. Requests the Secretary-General to intensify, in
consultation with the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples, the wide dissemination of information about conditions in the Territory;
6. Requests the Special Committee to follow closely
developments regardmg the colonial situation in the
Territory and to ~ thereon to the General Assembly at its twenty-sixth session.
1928th plenary meeting,
14 December 1970.

2703 (XXV), Activities of foreign economic and
other interests which are impeding the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples in Southern Rhodeeia,
Namibia and Territories under PortUfJUeae
domination and in all other Terrltoriea
under colonial domination and efforts to
eliminate colonialism, apartheid and racial
discrimination in southern Africa

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Activities of
foreign economic and other interests which are impeding the implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of. Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples in Southern Rhodesia, Namibia and Territories
under Portuguese domination and in all other Territories under colonial domination and efforts to
eliminate colonialism, apartheid and racial discrimination in southern Africa",
Having examined the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to this
question,19
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
in particular the eighth preambular paragraph thereof,
and its resolution 2425 (XXIII) of 18 December 1968,
Recalling further the relevant provisions of its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970 containing the
programme of action for the full implementation of
the Declaration,
Convinced that any economic or other activity which
impedes the implementation of resolution 1514 (XV)
and obstructs efforts aimed at the elimination of
colonialism, apartheid and racial discrimination in
southern Africa and other colonial Territories violates
the political, economic and social rights and interests
of the ~pie in those Territories and is therefore incompatible with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling that the administering Powers have the
obligation to ensure the political, economic, social and
educational advancement of the inhabitants of the
Territories under their administration and to protect
the J.><>Pulation and the natural resources of those Territones against abuses, in accordance with Chapters
XI and xn of the Charter,
1. Approves the report of the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to this question;
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of
dependent Territories to self-determination and independence and to the natural resources of their Territories, as well as their right to dispose of those resources in their best interests;
3. Affirms that foreign economic, financial and other
interests operating in colonial Territories constitute a
major obstacle to political independence as well as to
18 /bid.,
Twenty-fifth
(A/8023/Rcv.l/ Add.I).

Session,

Supplement

No.

2.JA.
