UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1997/480
20 June 1997
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 20 JUNE 1997 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I write to inform you of my current intentions concerning my mission of
good offices in Cyprus.
In a communication dated 17 April 1997 addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/1997/320), I stated my determination to pursue intensified
efforts to bring about a comprehensive settlement of the Cyprus issue and that I
hoped that it would be possible for me to convene direct talks between the two
leaders. To that end, I appointed Mr. Diego Cordovez to prepare and assist me
in chairing the next round of the inter-communal talks.
I should now like to inform you, and through you the members of the
Council, that on 9 June I wrote to the two leaders inviting them to a first
session of face-to-face negotiations to take place in the New York area from
9 to 13 July. These face-to-face talks will constitute the beginning of a
process which should continue as long as may be needed to achieve agreement on a
comprehensive solution. I envisage that this first session will be followed by
another one in August and a third session, if necessary.
In order to avoid a prolongation and even a perpetuation of preceding
inconclusive dialogues, I firmly believe that there is a need for new approaches
and procedures. Inasmuch as the elements needed to work out a settlement are at
hand, I believe that it would be most appropriate to embark upon a sustained
process of direct negotiations leading to the conclusion of instruments that
will constitute a comprehensive settlement.
On 27 January 1997, I wrote to the leaders of the Greek Cypriot and the
Turkish Cypriot communities to underline the importance I attached to finding an
early settlement of the Cyprus problem. In February and April I had the
opportunity to discuss the Cyprus problem with the leaders of the two
communities, who expressed their readiness to make further efforts to reach a
comprehensive solution. The consultations held between the two leaders and my
representatives in recent months have been valuable in clarifying aspects of the
task of achieving our common objective of a viable and comprehensive solution to
the Cyprus problem.

97-16789 (E)

200697

/...

S/1997/480
English
Page 2

In its resolution 1092 (1996) of 23 December 1996, the Security Council
stressed its support for the Secretary-General's mission of good offices and the
importance of the concerted efforts to work with the Secretary-General towards
an overall comprehensive settlement. In late April 1997 the permanent members
of the Security Council also fully supported the early convening, under the
aegis of the United Nations, of direct negotiations between the leaders of the
two Cypriot communities in order to secure an overall settlement. A number of
Governments, as well as the Presidency of the European Union, have appointed
special envoys and representatives in support of the efforts carried out within
the framework of the good offices mission of the Secretary-General. The active,
firm and full support of all concerned, and particularly of the Security
Council, is indispensable if the current efforts are to bring results. I
therefore ask you, and through you the members of the Council, and all
concerned, to urge the parties to embark upon a sustained process of
negotiations that will lead to the conclusion of the instruments that will
constitute a comprehensive settlement of the Cyprus issue.
I should be grateful if you could bring this matter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.

(Signed)

-----

Kofi A. ANNAN
