VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

6. Takes note of the report of the Committee on the
Elimination ofDiscrimination against Women on its sixth
session;
7. Urges States parties to make ali possible efforts to
submit their initial reports on the implementation of the
Convention in accordance with article 18 thereof and with
the guidelines of the Committee;
8. Takes note of the views on the report of the Committee expressed by delegations at the first regular session
of the Economic and Social Council of 1987;44
9. Decides that no action shall be be taken on decision
4 adopted by the Committee45 and requests the Committee to review that decision, taking into account the views
expressed by delegations at the first regular session of the
Economic and Social Council of 1987 and in the Third
Committee46 of the General Assembly at its forty-second
session;
10. Takes note of the general recommendations
adopted by the Committee pursuant to the discussions at
its sixth session on ways and means of implementing article 21 of the Convention; 42
11. Notes with concern the account by the Committee
ofthe present constraints within which it operates with regard to the backlog of reports awaiting consideration and
encourages the Committee to intensify its discussion on
ways and means of dealing with this problem, including
possible adjustment of the reporting system, and to formutate in an appropriate way suggestions to that effect for
consideration by the Economic and Social Council and by
the General Assembly at its forty-third session;
12. Welcomes the efforts made by the Committee torationalize its procedures and expedite the consideration of
periodic reports, and encourages the Committee to continue its endeavours to those ends;
13. Decides, on an exceptional basis, that the Committee may hold no more than eight additional meetings during its session in 1988 in order to advance consideration of
reports already submitted to it;
14. Invites the Committee and the States parties to
consider the question of holding future sessions of the
Committee at Vienna, taking into account the recommendation of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions47 and all relevant factors;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to make every effott to ensure adequate servicing within existing resources
for the effective functioning of the Committee;
16. Also requests the Secretary-General, within existing resources and drawing in particular on funds available
to the Department of Public lnforrnation of the Secretariat, to provide, facilitate and encourage public information activities relating to the Committee and the Convention, giving priority to the dissemination of the
Convention in the official languages of the United Nations;
17. Further requests the Secretary-General to transmit
the report of the Committee on the Elimination of Dis-

44 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1987,
Plenary Meetings, vol. I, 9th to 12th and 14th meetings (E/1987/SR.9-12
and 14).
45 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-second Session,
Sufflement No. 38 (A/42/38), sect. V.
/bid., Forty-second Session, Third Committee, 22nd, 24th to 30th,
44th and 49th meetings and corrigendum.
47 /bid.. Forty-second Session. Supp/ement No. 7D (A/42/7/Add.4),
para. 11.

189

crimination against Women to the Commission on the
Status of W ornen for information.
85th plenary meeting
30 November 1987

42/61.

Participation of women in promoting international peace and co-operation

The General Assembly,
Confirming the noble goal enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations to maintain peace and security in the
world and the determination of the States Members of the
United Nations expressed therein to save present and succeeding generations from the scourge of war,
Recalling that the World Conference to Review and Appraise the Achievements ofthe United Nations Decade for
Women: Equality, Development and Peace, in adopting
the Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies for the Advancement of Women 40 for the period up to the year 2000,
recognized that women should participate fully in ali efforts to strengthen and maintain international peace and
security and to promote international co-operation,
Reaffirming the interrelationship of the objectives of the
United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace,
Expressing the need for equal opportunity for participation by women in the decision-making process, including
that related to peace, disarmament and security at national, regional and international levels, including the
United Nations system,
Reaffirming its resolution 37/63 of 3 December 1982, by
which it proclaimed the Declaration on the Participation
of Women in Promoting International Peace and Cooperation,
Bearing in mind its resolution 40/102 of 13 December
1985, in which it, in ter alia, requested the Commission on
the Status of Women to consider measures which may be
necessary to implement the Declaration in the context of
the Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies for the Advancement of Women for the period up to the year 2000,
Reaffirming its resolution 41/109 of 4 December 1986,
in which it recommended that future medium-term plans
ofthe United Nations and the specialized agencies should,
in accordance with the Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies, contain intersectoral presentations ofthe various programmes dealing with issues of concern to women, including those relating to the participation of women in
promoting international peace and co-operation,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution
1987/24 of 26 May 1987, in which the Council decided
that the work ofthe Commission on the Status ofWomen
relating to the priority themes of the long-term programme of work of the Commission should be closely related to the relevant provisions of the Nairobi Forwardlooking Strategies and of other policy documents,
Wishing to encourage the active participation of women
in promoting international peace, security and cooperation,
Convinced that increased efforts are required to eliminate still existing forms of discrimination against women
in every field of human endeavour,
Conscious of the need to implement the provisions of the
Declaration,
1. Pledges its determination to encourage the ful) participation ofwomen in the economic, social, cultural, civil

190

General Assembly-Forty-second Session

and political affairs of society and in the endeavour to promote international peace and co-operation;
2. Appeals to all Governments to take the necessary
measures to put into practice the principies and provisions
ofthe Declaration on the Participation of Women in Promoting International Peace and Co-operation;
3. Invites all Governments to give wide publicity to the
Declaration and its implementation;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take
adequate steps to ensure that publicity is given to the Declaration;
5. Invites all appropriate bodies of the United Nations
system that have not yet done so, including the regional
commissions and the specialized agencies, to develop and
implement comprehensive policies on the three objectives
ofthe United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace and to incorporate them in their
medium-term plans, statements of objectives, programmes
and other major policy statements;
6. Invites the Commission on the Status of Women to
give adequate attention to all the priority themes under
the headings of equality, development and peace on account ofthe complexity of all the matters addressed in the
Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies for the Advancement
of Women and in other policy documents, including the
participation of women in promoting international peace
and co-operation;
7. Decides to consider the further implementation of
the Declaration at its forty-third session, as a sub-item of
the item entitled "Forward-looking strategies for the advancement of women to the year 2000".

85th plenary meeting
30 November 1987
42/62.

Implementation of the Nairobi Forward-looking
Strategies for the Advancement of Women

The General Assembly,
Recalling ali its relevant resolutions, in particular resolutions 40/108 of 13 December 1985 and 41/111 of
4 December 1986, in which, inter afia, it endorsed the
Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies for the Advancement
ofWomen40 for the period up to the year 2000 and set out
measures for their immediate implementation and for the
overall achievement of the goals and objectives of the
United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace,
Taking into consideration Economic and Social Council
resolutions 1987/18, 1987/19, 1987/20, 1987/21,
1987/22, 1987/23, 1987/24, 1987/25 and 1987/26 of
26 May 1987,
Taking note of the Guiding Principies for Developmental Social Welfare Policies and Programmes in the Near
Future, 21 adopted by the Interregional Consultation on
Developmental Social W elfare Policies and Programmes,
held at Vienna from 7 to 15 September 1987,
Noting with concern the serious impact of the world economic situation on the programmes and plans for the advancement of women, especially in the global context,
Conscious of the important and constructive contribution to the advancement of the status of women made by
the Commission on the Sta tus of W ornen, the specialized
agencies, the regional commissions and other organizations ofthe United Nations system, Member States and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations,

Emphasizing once again the priority of the implementation, monitoring, review and appraisal ofthe Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies,
Welcoming the significant progress made by the Commission on the Status of Wornen at its special session in
1987 in restructuring its agenda along functional lines, developing a systematic long-term programme of work,
strengthening and rationalizing its role and functions and
mobilizing the resources of the United Nations system as a
whole towards the advancement of women by integrating
this objective into the programme planning and budgeting
processes of the Organization,
Welcoming also the designation by the SecretaryGeneral of the advancement of women as one of two priorities of the Organization for the next biennium,
Recognizing the need for the Commission on the Status
of Women to consider at its regular sessions the priority
themes for the next five sessions of the Commission, contained in the annex to Economic and Social Council resolution 1987 /24,
l. Takes note ofthe reports ofthe Secretary-General48
concerning the implementation of the Nairobi Forwardlooking Strategies for the Advancement of Women;
2. Takes note also of resolutions 1, 2 and 4 adopted by
the Commission on the Status of Women at its special session in 1987,49 in particular its recommendation that the
implementation of the Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies and the status of women in general should be incorporated as a global priority for the period 1990-1995 in the
introduction of the Organization's next medium-term
plan;
3. Reaffirms the need for the Forward-looking Strategies to be translated immediately into concrete action by
Governments, as determined by overall national priorities,
as well as by the organizations of the United Nations system, the specialized agencies and intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations;
4. Reaffirms also the central role of the Commission
on the Status of Women in matters related to the advancement of women and calls upon the Commission to promote the implementation of the Forward-looking Strategies to the year 2000 based on the goals of the United
Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and
Peace and the subtheme "Employment, Health and Education", and urges all organizations ofthe United Nations
system to co-operate with the Commission in this task;
5. Reaffirmsfurther, in the implementation ofthe Forward-looking Strategies, the role of the Centre for Social
Development and Humanitarian Affairs ofthe Secretariat,
in particular the Branch for the Advancement of Women,
as the substantive secretariat of the Commission on the
Status of Women and as a focal point for matters on
women, the catalysing role of the United Nations Development Fund for Women and the role ofthe International
Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of
Women in the promotion ofthe role ofwomen in the context of the participation of women in development;
6. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution
1987 /21, in which the Council, in ter afia, decided that the
Commission on the Status of Women, commencing with
its thirty-second session, should meet annually until the
year 2000, with a long-term programme of work that
would allow sufficient preparation for each session;

48 A/42/516 and A/42/528.
49 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1987.
Supplement No. 2 (E/1987/15). chap. I, sect. C.
