II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

25

may constitute collections representative of their cultural
heritage,
Noting with satis(action that sorne countries have taken
positive steps towards the return or restitution of museum
pieces, archives and ohjets d'art to their countries of origin,
Reaffirming the importance of inventaries as an essential tool for the understanding and protection of cultural
property and for the identification of dispersed heritage
and as a contribution to the advancement of scientific and
artistic knowledge and intercultural communication,
Deeply concerned at the clandestine excavations and the
illicit traffic in cultural property that continue to impoverish the cultural heritage of ali peoplcs,
Supporting the solemn appeal made on 7 June 1978 by
the Director-General of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization for the return of irreplaceable cultural heritage to those who created it.
l. Commends the United Nations Educational. Scientific and Cultural Organization and the Intergovernmental
Committee for Promoting the Return oí Cultural Property
to its Countries of Origin or its Restitution in Case of
Illicit Appropriation on the work they have accomplished.
in particular through thc promotion of bilateral negotiations, for the return or restitution of cultural property, the
preparation of inventaries of movable cultural property,
the development of infrastructures for the protection of
movable cultural property, the reduction of illicit traffic in
cultural property and the dissemination of information to
the public;
2. Reaffirms that the restitution to a country of its
ohjets d'art, monuments, museum pieces, archives, manuscripts, documents and any other cultural or artistic
treasures contributes to the strengthening of international
co-operation and to the preservation and flowering of universal cultural values through fruitful co-operation
between devéloped and developing countries;
3. lnl'ites Member States to draw up, in co-operation
with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, systematic inventaries of cultural
property existing in their territory and of their cultural
property abroad;
4. A/so invites Member States engaged in seeking the
recovery of cultural and artistic treasures from the sea-bed,
in accordance with intcrnational law, to facilitate by mutually acceptablc conditions the participation of States having a historical and cultural link with those treasures;
5. Appeals to Member States to co-operate closely with
the Intergovernmental Committee for Promoting the
Retum of Cultural Property to its Countries of Origin or
its Restitution in Case of Illicit Appropriation and to conelude bilateral agreements for this purpose;
6. A/so appeals to Member States to encourage the
mass information media and educational and cultural
institutions to strive to arouse a greater and more general
awareness with regard to the return or restitution of cultural property to its country of origin;
7. Takes note with satisfaction of the importance
accorded by the World Conference on Cultural Policies,
held at Mexico City from 26 July to 6 August 1982, to the
question of the return or restitution of cultural property
during the debate on cultural policies;
8. Endorses the opinion expressed at the World Conference on Cultural Policies that the return of cultural
property to its country of origin should be accompanied by

the training of key personnel and technicians and the provision ofthe necessary facilities for the satisfactory conservation and presentation of the property restored; 39
9. Invites once again those Member States that have
not yet done so to sign and ratify the Convention on the
Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import.
Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property;
1O. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the Director-General of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, to submit to
the General Assembly at its fortieth session a report on the
implementation of the present resolution;
11. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "Return or restitution of
cultural property to the countries of origin".

39See A/38/456, p. 12. para. 17.
40 Official Records <l the (ienera/ Assemhlr. Thiny- e1¡:hth Session, Supp/emenl No. 24 (A/38/24).
41 [bid .. Supp/ement No . .'3 (A/38/23). chaps. !-VI and VIII.

4 2 Legal Consequencesfor States ofthe Continued Presence ()(South A.frica
in Namibia (South IVest AfricaJ notwithstanding Security Council Resolution
7
2 6 (1970). Advisor_¡' Opinion, l.CJ. Reports 1971, p. 16.
4 .1 A/38:132-S'l5675 and Corr.l and 2, annex. scct. L

7 1st plcnar.r meeting

:?5 Nol'e111her 1983

38/36. Question of Namibia
A
SITUATION IN NAMIBIA RESLJLTING FROM THE ILLECiAI
OCCLJPATION OF THI TFRRITORY BY SOLJTH AFRICA

The General Asse111h!r,
Haring examined the report of the United Nations
Council for Namibia 40 and the relevan! chapters of the
report of the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the lmplementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. 41
Recalling its resolution I 5 14 (XV) of 14 December 1960
containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling, in particular, its resolutions 2145 (XXI) of 27
October 1966 and 2248 (S- V) of 19 May I 96 7 and subscqucnt rcsolutions of thc General Assembly and the Security Council relating to Namibia, as well as the advisory
opinion of thc International Court of Justice of 21 J une
1971, 42 dclivercd in response to thc request addresscd to it
by the Sccurity Council in its resolution 284 ( 1970) of 29
.luly 1970,
Recalling a/so its resolutions 3111 (XXVIII) of 12
Dccembcr 1973 and 31/146 and 31/152 of20 Dcccmber
1976, by which it, ínter aha. rccognized thc South Wcst
Africa Pcople's Organization as the sole and authcntic representativc of the Namibian people and granted obscrver
status to it,
Recalling further its resolutions ES-8/2 of I 4 Septembcr
1981 and 36/121 B of 10 December 1981, by which it
called upon States to ccase forthwith. individually and collectively, ali dealings with South Africa in order totally to
isolate it politically, economically. militarily and culturally,
Recalling the Political Dcclaration adoptcd by thc Scvcnth Confercncc ofHeads ofState or Govcmmcnt ofNonAligned Countries, held at New Delhi from 7 to 12 March
1983. 43
Reca/ling the Paris Declaration on Namibia and the
rcport ofthe Committee ofthe Wholc and the Programme
of Action on Namibia adoptcd at the Intemational Confcr-

26

General Assembly -· Thirty-eighth Session

ence in Support ofthe Strugglc ofthc Namibian Pcople for
Indcpcndencc, 44
R<'callinR thc debate on thc qucstion ofNamibia hcld in
thc Sccurity Council from 23 May to I Junc 1983, 45
RccallinR thc resolution on Namibia adoptcd by thc
Assemblv of Hcads of Statc and Governmcnt of thc
Organiza'tion of African lJnity at its ninctcenth ordinary
scssion, hcld at Addis Ababa from 6 to 12 J une 1983, 46
Stmngf_¡, 1T1tcrating that thc continuing ille_gal a~d colo-_
nial occupation of Namibia b:, South Afnca. m dehancc ol
repeated General Assembly and Security Council resolutions, constitutes an act of aggression against thc
Namibian people and a challenge to the authority of thc
lJnitcd Nations. which has direct rcsponsibility for
Namibia until indcpendence,
Strcssing the grave rcsponsibility of the intcrnational
community to take ali possible measures in support of the
Namibian pcople in their liberation strugglc under the
leadcrship of their sole and authcntic representativc, thc
South West Afrirn Peoplc's Organization.
Rcat/irming its full support for the armcd struggle of thc
Namibian people under thc lcadership of the South West
A frica
Peoplc's
Organi ✓ at ion
to
achieve
sl'lfdctermination. frcedom and national independence in a
united Namibia,
!11di1-;na111 at South Africa's refusal to comply with
repeated rcsolutions of thc Sccurity Council, in particular
resolutions 385 ( 1976) o!" 30 January 1976. 435 ( 1978) of
29 Septcmbcr 1978, 439 ( 1978) of 13 November 1978 and
532 ( 1983) of .11 May 198.1, and at its manoeuvre~ aimed
at pcrpetuating its brutal domination and exploitation of
thc Namibian pcoplc. as rcpeatedly manifcsted in thc
course of the consultations for the implcmentation of thc
United Nations plan for the independence of Namibia,
Comnwm/111g thc front-line States and the South We~t
Africa Pcople's Organi1ation for the statesmanlike and
constructivc attitude which they have displayed throughout the consultations to implcment Security Council resolution 4 35 ( l lJ78).
.'úronglr co11dc11111i11g South Africa's continucd illegal
ocrnpation of Namibia. its brutal rcprcssion of the
Namibian people and its ruthlcss exploitation of the people and resources of Namibia, as well as its attempts to
destroy the national unity and territorial integrity of
Namibia,
S1ro11J.:lr co11dc11111111g thc racist réginw of South A frica
for its efforts to dn'elop a nuclear capability for military
and aggrcssivc purposcs,
Dccpl.r m11c1'med at tlw incrcasing militari;ation of
Namibia, the forcclul con~cription of Namibians. the crcation oftribal armies and the use ofmercenaries for interna]
rcpression and externa] aggrcssion.
Noting w11h g-1urc conccrn that, as a rcsult of thc Security
Council's failure on 31 August 1981, 47 on account of the
veto of the lJnited Statcs of America, to cxercise its
responsibilitics, unprovokcd massive armed aggression
against Angola continues and recently has escalated to
extremrly dangcrous proportions,
L,prcssing its stmng ,mu/c111nation of South Africa·s
continuing acts of aggrcssion against indcpendcnt African
Statcs, particularly Angola, which havc caused extensiw
loss of human life ami dcstrnction of cconomic infrastructurcs,
44 Repon o(the lnternatwnal ( ·onft'r1·11n· in .\/l/lport o(thí' .'úruggh· o(rlw

,\'an11hwn /'('op/t' /nr /11dc¡,fnde11u·. l'arn. :5.;:r; l¡,n/ !9H3 (AiCONF.1 ~()

13), part thrcl'.
45 Scc O/licia/ Rc'l"ord, ,,/¡/"' S,·c1m11 Co,m, 1/ r/1in1-e1gh1h )áu-. 243'1th2444th and 2446th-245 l si mcctings
46A,38;)\2. anne,. n·,olution All<i Re,.105 (XIX)

Rcaffirming that thc resources ofNamibia are the inviolable heritage of thc Namibian people and that the
exploitation of those resources by forcign cconomic intercsts under the protection of the illegal colonial administration, in violation ofthe Charter ofthe United Nations, of
the rclevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council and of Decrec No. 1 for the Protection of
the Natural Resources of Namibia, 48 enacted by the
United Nations Council for Namibia on 27 Septembcr
1974, and in disregard of thc advisory opinion of thc
Jnternational Court of Justice of 21 June 1971, is illegal
and contributes to thc maintenance of the ilkgal occupation régimc.
Dccplr dcp/onng the continued collaboration with South
Africa of certain Western Sta tes, in particular the United
States of America. as well as that of Israel, in disregard of
the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council.
Decply cunccmcd at the continued assistance rendered
to the racist Pretoria régime by certain international organ11ations and institutions, in particular the lntcrnational
Monetary Fund. in disregard of the relcvant resolutions of
the General Assembly,
Indignan/ at the continuing arbitrary imprisonment and
detention of political leaders and followers of the South
West Africa People's Organization, the killing of
Namibian patnots and other acts of brutality, including
the wanton beating, torture and murder of innocent
Namibians, and the arbitrary inhuman measures of collective punishment and measures designed to intimidate the
Namibian peoplc and to destroy their will to fulfil their
legitimate aspirations for self-determination, freedom and
national indcpendence in a united Namibia,
Noting 11·ith g-ravc conccrn that the Security ( 'ouncil has
been prevented on severa! occasions from taking effecti ve
action against South A frica in the discharge of its responsibilities under Chapter VII of the Charter on account of the
vetoes cast by one or more of the Western permanent
members of the Security Couneil,
Co111111ending the efforts of the United Nations Council
for Namibia in the discharge of the responsibilities
entrusted to it under the relevan! resolutions of the General Assembly as the legal Administering Authority for
Namibia until indepcndencc.
1. Approves the rcport of the l lnited Nations Council
for Namibia; 40
2. Takcs notl' of the Paris Declaration on Namibia and
the report of the Committee of the Whole and the Programme of Actton on Namibia adopted at the lnternational Conference in Support of the Strugglc of the
Namibian Peoplc for lndependcnce; 44
3. Takcs note of the debate on the question of Namibia
held in the Security Council from 23 May to I June 1983,
in which the international community ovcrwhclmingly
pronounced i:sclf against the establishment of any linkage
or parallelism between Namibian independence and extraneous and irrclennt issues, in particular the withdrawal of
Cuban forces from Angola;
4. Reaffinm the inalienable right of thc pcoplc of
Namibia to self-determination, freedom and national
indcpendence in a united Namibia, in accordance with thc
Charter of the l lnited Nations and as recognized in General Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV) and 2145 (XXI) and
in subsequent resolutions of the Assembly relating to
47 See 0/fii·ia/ !ú-.wd, ¡;/1/li' S1·1"111"111· Co11nl"ii. Thir11·-11Hh l"ear. 2300th
llll'Cling.
4 8 Ofhnal Recoru, 11r !ht' (~t'IU'1al .·L\·\"c111hl_1·.
n!('nf .\·o. _..,.J (A 3) ~4L \ol. L ,mnex 11.

/'111r11·-titili

.\·esswn, Su¡>¡,/,•

11.

Resolutions adopted wilhoul reference lo a Main Committee

Namibia, as well as the legitimacy of thcir strugglc by ali
the means at their disposal, including armcd strugglc.
against the illegal occupation of thcir territory by South
Africa:
5. Reiterates that, in accordance with its rcsolution
2145 (XXI), Namibia is the direct responsibility of the
United Nations until genuinc self-determination and
national independence are achieved in the Territory and.
for this purposc, reaffirms the mandate given to the Unitcd
Nations Council for Namibia as the legal Administering
Authority for Namibia until independence under resolution 2248 (S-V) and subsequent resolutions or the General
Assembly:
6. Reatfirms that the South West Africa Peoplc's
Organization, the national liberation movcment of
Namibia, is the sole and authentic representative of thc
Namibian people:
7. Solemnly reatfirms that the genuine independence of
Namibia can be achieved onlv with the direct and full participation of the South West A.frica People's Organization
in ali efforts to implement resolutions of the United
Nations relating to Namibia and further rcaffirms that thc
only parties to the conílict in Namibia are. on the one
hand, South Africa, as the illegal occupying Powcr. and. on
the other. the Namibian people under the lcadership ofthc
South West Africa People's Organirntion. their sole and
authentic representative:
8. Commends the Namibian people's courage and
determination and proclaims its full support for the hernie
struggle they are waging under the leadership of the South
West Africa People's Organization. their sole and authentic representative. to achieve self-determination, freedom
and national independence in a united Namibia:
9. Strongly condemns the South African régime for its
continued illegal occupation of Namibia in defiance of the
resolutions of the United Nations rclating to Namibia:
10. Declares that South Africa's illcgal occupation of
Namibia constitutes an act of aggression against thc
Namibian people in terms of the Definition of Aggression
contained in General Assembly resolution 3314 (XXIX) of
14 December 1974 and supports the armed struggle of thc
Namibian people, under the leadership of the South Wcst
Africa People's Organization, to repel South Africa's
aggression and to achieve self-determination. freedom and
national independence in a united Namibia:
11. Reitera/es that, in accordance with the rcsolutions
of the United Nations, in particular Security Council resolution 432 (1978) of 27 July 1978 and General Assembly
resolutions S-9/2 of 3 May 1978 and 351227 A of 6 March
1981, Walvis Bay and the offshore islands of Namibia are
an integral part of Namibia and that ali attempts by South
Africa to annex them are therefore illegaL null and void:
12. Ca/Is upan the Security Council to declare categorically that Walvis Bay is an integral part of Namibia and
that the question should not be left as a matter for negotiation between an independent Namibia and South Africa:
13. Reaffirms that Security Council resolution 435
(1978), together with Council resolution 385 (1976), is the
only basis for a peaceful settlement of the question of
Namibia and calls for its immediate and unconditional
implementation without qualification or modification:
14. Firmly rejects the manoeuvrcs by the United States
of America and South Africa aimed at undermining thc
intemational consensus embodied in Security Council resolution 435 (1978) and at depriving the opprcssed people
of Namibia of their hard-won victories in thc struggle for
national liberation:

--- -·- -

27
----

15. Finnlr re¡ccts ami condemns thc persistent
attcmpts by· thc 'tJnitcd Statcs of America and South
Africa to cstablish a linkage or parallelism bctween thc
independence of Namibia and any extraneous issues. in
particular the withdrawal of Cuban forces from Angola,
and emphasizes unequivocally that ali such attempts are
designcd to delay the decolonization process in Namibia
and that thcy constitutc intcrference in the interna) affairs
of Angola:
16. Expresscs its apprcciat/011 to the front-line States
and thc South Wcst Africa Peoplc's Organization for their
statesmanlike and constructive attitude throughout the
consultations to implcment Security Council resolution
435 ( 1978):
17. Strong/r condcmns South Africa for obstructing
the implementation of Security Council resolutions 385
( 1976). 435 ( 1978) and 439 ( 1978) and for its manoeuvres.
in contravention of those resolutions. designed to consolidate its colonial and neo-colonial interests at the expense
of the legitimatc aspirations of the Namibian people for
gcnuinc self-detcrmination. frcedom and national indepcndcncc in a united Namibia:
18. Dcnounces ali fraudulcnt constitutional and political schemes through which thc illegal racist régime of
South Africa may attempt to perpetua te its colonial domination of Namibia and. in particular. calls upon the international community, cspecially ali Member States. to continuc to refrain from according any recognition or
cxtcnding any co-operation to any régime which the illegal
South African administration may impose upon the
Namibian people in disregard of the present resolution, of
Security Council resolutions 385 ( 1976). 435 (1978) and
439 ( 1978) and of other relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Council:
19. i',lronglr condcmns thc illegal South African
administration in Namibia for its manoeuvres. such as the
establishment of another puppet institution in the form of
the so-called State Council in direct violation of Security
Council resolution 439 ( 1978). aimed at perpetuating its
domination and cxploitation of thc people and natural
rcsources of thc Tcrritory:
20. Strong/_1• urges the Security Council to act decisivcly against any dilatory manoeuvres and fraudulent
sehemes of the illegal occupation régime aimed at frustrating the legitimate struggle of the Namibian people, under
the leadership ofthe South West Africa People's Organization. for self-determination and national liberation, as well
as at negating the achievcmcnts of their just struggle:
21. Declares that ali so-called laws and proclamations
issued by the illegal occupation régime in Namibia are illegaL null and void:
22. Ca/Is upon Member States and the specialized
agencies and other international organizations associated
with the United Nations to render sustained and increased
support as well as material, financial. military and oth,er
assistance to the South West Africa People's Organization
so as to enable it to intensify its struggle for the liberation
of Namibia:
23. Urges ali Governments and the specialized agencies and other intergovemmental organizations to provide
increased material assistance to the thousands of
Namibian refugees who have been forced by the apartheid
régime's oppressive policies to Hee Namibia, especially
into the neighbouring front-line States:
24. Ca/Is upon ali Governments, especially those
which have close links with South Africa. to support, in
co-operation with the United Nations Council for
Namibia, the actions of the United Nations to defend the

_28_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _G_e_ne_r_a_l_A_ss_e_m_b_ly_-_T_h_ir_ty_-_ei_g_ht_h_S_e_s_si_on _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __

national rights of the Namibian peoplc until independence:
25. Condemns the increased assistance rendered by the
major Western countries and Israel to South Africa in the
political, economic, financia] and particularly the military
fields, expresses its conviction that this assistance constitutes a hostile action against the people of Namibia and
the front-line States since it is bound to strengthen the military capability of the racist régime, and demands that
such assistance be immediately terminated:
26. Declares that the resolution on the need for development aid for Namibia, adopted by the European Parliament on 13 January 1983, 49 calling upon the European
Economic Community to extend aid to occupied Namibia
as well as to so-called "refugees from southern Angola" in
Namibia, ifimplemented, would flout international law by
implying recognition of South Africa's presence in
Namibia and would subsidize Pretoria's illegal administration of the Territory, while encouraging its acts of aggression against Angola and the occupation of a part of Angolan territory;
27. Notes, in this connection, the declaration of the
European Parliament of 14 November 1983 concerning
the resolution on the need for development aid for
Namibia, which the Parliament adopted on 13 January
1983, and the letter of 15 November 1983 from the President of the European Parliament to the Secretary-General
underlining that the European Parliament and the European Community support and respect the framework
established by the United Nations in respect of
Namibia; 50
28. Condemns, in this connection, the visit in August
1983 by four members of the European Parliament to
Namibia and the parts of Angolan territory occupied by
South Africa:
29. Strongly condemns South Africa for its military
build-up in Namibia, its introduction of compulsory military service for Namibians, its recruitment and training of
Namibians for tribal armies, its use of mercenaries to suppress the Namibian people and to carry out its military
attacks against independent African States, its threats and
acts of subversion and aggression against those States and
the forcible displacement of Namibians from their homes:
30. Strongf.v condemns South Africa for its persistent
acts of subversion and aggression against Angola, including the occupation of a part of its territory, and calls upon
South Africa to cease ali acts of aggression against and
withdraw ali its troops from that country;
31. Condemns the use of the territory of Namibia by
the racist régime of South Africa as a staging ground from
which to launch armed attacks against neighbouring African States, particularly the repeated unprovoked acts of
aggression against and invasion of Angola, including occupation ofparts ofthat country, in order to intimidate those
States and, inter afia, to prevent them from supporting the
legitimate struggle of the Namibian and South African
peoples for freedom and independence;
32. Condemns the continuing military and nuclear collaboration on the part of certain Western States and Israel
with the racist régime of South Africa, which is encouraging the Pretoria régime in its defiance of the international
community and obstructing efforts to eliminate apartheid
and bring South Africa's illegal occupation of Namibia to
an end, and urges those States to cease and desist forthwith
from such collaboration with South Africa, which is in
violation of the arms embargo imposed against South
19 Official Joumal of the European C'ommunities. No. C 42/53.
,o See Official Records of the General Assemhly. Thirly-eighrh Sess1on.
Supp/emenl No. 24 (A/38/24), annex IIL

Africa under Security Council resolution 418 (1977) of 4
November 1977:
33. Expressn its gral'e concem at the acquisition of
nuclear weapons capability by the racist régime of South
Africa, with its record of violence and aggression. and
declares that such acquisition constitutes a further attempt
on its part to terrorize and intimidate independent Statcs
in the region into submission, while also posing a dangcr
to ali mankind:
34. Strongl_r conde11111s the collusion by the Govcrnments of certain Western and other States, particular!)
those of the United States of Amcrica and Israel, with the
racist régime of South Africa in the nuclear field and calls
upon France and ali other States to refrain from supplying
the racist minority régime ofSouth Africa, directly or indirectly, with installations that might enable it to produce
uranium. plutonium or other nuclear materials, reactors or
military equipment:
35. Calls upon the international community to extcnd.
as a matter ofurgency, full support and assistance, including military assistance, to the front-line States in order to
enable them to defend their sovereignty and territorial
integrity against the repeated acts of aggression by South
Africa:
36. Condem11s South Africa's attempts to thwart the
work ofthe Southern African Development Co-ordination
Conference, and calls upon ali States to render ali possible
assistance to the Conference in its efforts to promote
regional economic co-operation and development:
3 7. Requesh the Secretary-General to continue to
develop, in consultation with the United Nations Development Programme, a comprehensive programme of
assistance to States that are neighbours of South Africa
and Namibia, on the understanding that such assistance
should not only envisage the overcoming of short-term
difficulties but be designed to enable those States to move
towards complete self-reliance, and requests thc SecretaryGeneral to report to the General Assembly at its thirtyninth session on the devclopment of this programme:
38. Requests ali specialized agencies and other organizations and institutions of the United Nations system to
co-operate with the Secretary-General in the development
of a comprehensivc programme of assistancc to States
neighbouring South Africa and Namibia:
39. Reiterares its cal/ upon ali States to takc legislative
and other appropriate measures to preven! the recruitment, training and transit of mercenaries for service in
Namibia:
40. Strongly condemns the illegal South African
administration for its massive repression of the people of
Namibia and their national liberation movement, thc
South West Africa People's Organization, with the intention ofestablishing an atmosphere ofintimidation and terror for the purpose ofimposing upon the Namibian people
a political arrangement aimed at undermining the territorial integrity and unity of Namibia as well as perpetuating
the systematic plunder of the natural resources of the Territory:
41. Demands that South Africa immediately releasc ali
Namibian political prisoners, including ali those imprisoned or detained under the so-called interna! security laws,
martial law or any other arbitrary measures, whether such
Namibians have been charged or tried or are being held
without charge in Namibia or South Africa:

11.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

42. Demands that South Africa account for ali "'disappeared" Namibians and release any who are still alive and
declares that South Africa shall be liable for damages to
compensate the victims, their families and the future lawful Government of an independent Namibia for the losses
sustained;
43. Reajjirms that the natural resources of Namibia are
the birthright of the Namibian people and expresses its
deep concern at the rapid depletion of the natural
resources of the Territory. particularly its uranium deposits, as a result oftheir reckless plunder by South Africa and
certain Western and other foreign economic interests. in
violation of the pertinent resolutions of the General
Assembly and of the Security CounciL of the advisory
opinion of the International Court of J ustice of 2 1 J uly
1971 42 and of Decree No. 1 for the Protection of the Natural Resources of Namibia: 48
44. Declares that ali activities of foreign economic
interests in Namibia are illegal under international law and
that consequently South Africa and ali the foreign economic interests operating in Namibia are liable to pay
damages to the future lawful Government of an independent Namibia;
45. Strongly condemns the activities of ali foreign economic interests operating in Namibia under the illegal
South African administration which are illegally exploiting
the resources of the Territory and demands that transnational corporations engaged in such exploitation comply
with ali the relevant resolutions of the U nited Nations by
immediately refraining from any new investment or activities in Namibia, by withdrawing from the Territory and
by putting an end to their co-operation with the illegal
South African administration:
46. Requests once again ali Member States to take ali
appropriate measures, including legislation and enforcement action, to ensure the ful] application of. and compliance by ali corporations and individuals within their jurisdiction with, the provisions of Decree No. 1 for the
Protection of the Natural Resources of Namibia:
4 7. Declares that, by their depletive exploitation of
natural resources and continued accumulation and repatriation of huge profits. the activities of foreign economic,
financia! and other interests operating at present in
Namibia constitute a major obstacle to its independence:
48. Calls upan the Governments of ali States, particularly those whose corporations are involved in the mining
and processing ofNamibian uranium. to take ali appropriate measures in the context of the implementation of
Decree No. 1 for the Protection of the Natural Resources
of Namibia, including the practice of requiring negative
certificates of origin, to prohibit and prevent State-owned
and other corporations, together with their subsidiaries.
from dealing in Namibian uranium and from engaging in
any uranium-prospecting activities in Namibia:
49. Requests the Governments ofthe Federal Republic
ofGermany, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, which operate the
Urenco uranium-enrichment piant, to have Namibian uranium specifically excluded from the Treaty of Almelo.
which reguiates the activities of U renco:
50. Deeply deplores the continued collaboration of the
Intemational Monetary Fund with South Africa in disregard of General Assembly resolution 3 7/2 of 21 October
1982, and calls upon the Fund to put an end to such collaboration;
SI A/32/144, annex l.
52 United Nations. Treatv Series. vol. 7 S. Nos 970-97.l.
53 !bid.. No. 972. p. I 35:

29

51. Reiteratn· its requcst to ali States. pending the
imposition of mandatory sanctions against South Africa.
to take legislative, administrative and other measures unilaterally and collectively. as appropriate, in order effectively to isolate South Africa politically, economically,
militarily and culturall~. in accordance with General
Assembly resolutions ES-8/2 and 36/121 B and 37/233A
of 20 December 1982:
52. Requests the Umted Nations Council for Namibia
to continue to follow the implementation ofthe provisions
of paragraph 51 abovc on the basis of information
received from States as well as from other sources:
53. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia,
in implementation of paragraph 15 of General Assembly
resolution ES-8/2 and of the relevant provisions of Assembly resolutions 36/121 B and 3 7/233 A. to continue to
monitor the bovcott of South Africa and to submit to the
Assembly at iÍs thirty-ninth session a comprehensive
report on ali contacts between ali States and South Africa,
containing an analysis of the information received from
Member States and other sources on the continuing political, economic. financia) and other relations of States and
their economic and other interest groups with South Africa
and of measures taken by States to termínate ali dealings
with the racist régime of South Africa:
54. Requests ali States to co-operate fully with the
United Nations Council for Namibia in the fulfilment of
its tasks conceming the implementation of General
Assembly resolutions ES-812, 36/121 B and 37/233 A and
to report to the Secretary-General by the thirty-ninth session ofthe Assembly on the measures taken by them in the
implementation of those resolutions:
55. Requests the Secretary-General to seek to ensure
that ali banks. corporations and other institutions with
which the United Nations has contracts are in compliance
with United Nations sanctions policies against South
Africa:
56. Declares that the liberation struggle in Namibia is
a conflict of an international character in terms of article 1,
paragraph 4. of Additional Protocol I 51 to the Geneva
Conventions of 12 August 1949 52 and, in this regard,
demands that the Conventions and Additional Protocol I
be applied by South Africa. and in particular that ali captured freedom fighters be accorded prisoner-of-war status
as called for by the Geneva Convention relative to the
Treatment of Prisoners of War 53 and Additional Protocol
thereto:
57. Declares that South Africa's defiance ofthe United
Nations. its illegal occupation ofthe Territory ofNamibia,
its war of repression against the Namibian people, its persistent acts of aggression launched from bases in Namibia
against independent African States. its policies of
apartheid and its development of nuclear weapons constitute a serious threat to intemational peace and security;
58. Strongly urges the Security Council, in the light of
the serious threat to international peace and security posed
by South Africa. to respond positively to the overwhelming demand of the international community by immediately imposing comprehensive mandatory sanctions
against that country, as provided for in Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations:
59. Calls upan the Security Council to adopt the necessary measures to tighten the arms embargo imposed
against South Africa under Council resolution 418 (1977)
and to ensure strict compliance with the embargo by ali
Sta tes:

Leneral Assembly-Thirty-eighth Session

30

60. Further ca/Is upon the Security Council to implement, as a matter of urgency, the recommendations contained in the report of the Committee establishcd by
Council resolution 421 ( 1977): 54
61. Deplores the decision of the Govcrnment of the
United Kingdom and Northern Ireland to supply radar
equipment to South Africa and urges the Security Council
Committee established in pursuance of resolution 421
(1977) to take appropriate action to ensure that the
mandatory arms embargo against South Afriea is not violated;
62. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session on the implementation of the present resolution.

Rccalling its call upon ali States, in view ofthe threat to
international peacc and security posed by South Africa, to
impose eomprehcnsivc mandatory sanctions against that
country in aecordancc with the provisions of the Chartcr, 55

Reaffirming that the Cuban forces are in Angola by a
sovereign act of the Government of Angola, in accordancc
with the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations,
and that the attempts to link their presence in that country
with Namibia's independence constitute interference in
the interna! affairs of Angola,
Reaffirming that the only parties to the conflict m
Namibia are, on the one hand, the Namibian people represented by the South West Africa People's Organization,
their sole and authentic representative, and, on the other,
the racist régime of South Africa which illegally occupies
Namibia,
Recafling its request to the Security Couneil, in the light
of the serious threat to international peace and security
posed by South Afriea, to respond positively to the overwhelming demand of the international community by
immediately imposing comprehensive mandatory sanetions against that country as provided for in Chapter VII
of the Charter of the United Nations,

Taking 110/c of the further reports of the Seeretary-Gencral dated 19 May 1983 56 and 29 August 1983 57 concerning the implcmentation of Security Council resolutions
435 ( 1978) and 439 ( 1978) concerning the question of
Namibia,
J _ S1rongl_1· co11de111ns South Africa for obstructing the
implementation of Security Council resolutions 385
( I 976), 435 ( 1978). 439 (1978) and 532 (1983) and for its
manoeuvres. in contravention of those resolutions.
dcsigned to consolidate its colonial and neo-colonial intercsts at the expense of the legitimate aspirations of the
Namibian peoplc for genuine self-determination, freedom
and national indcpendence in a united Namibia:
2. Reatfir111s the direct responsibility of the United
Nations for Namibia pending its achievement of genuine
sclf-dctermination and national independence:
3_ Reitera/es that Security Council resolution 435
( 1978), in which 1hc Council endorsed the United Nations
plan for the indepcndence ofNamibia, is the only basis for
a peaceful settlement of the question of Namibia and
demands its immediatc and unconditional implementation without qualification, modification or amendment or
the introduction of cxtraneous and irrelevant issues of
"linkage", "parallclism" or "reciprocity" insisted upon by
the United Statc~ of America and South Africa:
4. l-,'mphasi::es once again that the only parties to the
conflict in Namibia are. on the one hand. the Namibian
people reprcsentcd by the South West Africa People's
Organization, thcir sole and authentic representative, and,
on the other. the racist régime of South Africa, whieh illegally occupies Namibia:
5. Dcmands that South Africa urgently comply fully
and unconditionally with the resolutions of the Security
Council. in particular resolutions 385 ( 1976) and 435
( 1978) and subsequent resolutions of the Council relating
to Namibia:
6. Firm/_1' re¡ccls and cundemns the persistent attempts
by the United States of America and South Africa to establish a linkage or parallelism between the independence of
Namibia and any cxtraneous and irrelevant issues, in particular the prescnce of Cuban forces in Angola, and
emphasizes unequivocally that ali such attempts are
designed to delay the decolonization process in Namibia
and that they constitute interference in the interna! affairs
of Angola:
7. Ca/Is upon ali States to condemn and reject any
attempt to link the independence of Namibia with extrancous and irrelevant issues:
8. l-,'xpresscs 11s dismay at the fact that the Security
Council has been prevented by its three Western permancnt members from adopting effective measures against
South Africa in the discharge of its responsibilities for the
maintenance of international peace and security, and considers that comprehensive and mandatory sanctions under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, if univcrsally and effectivcly implemented, would ensure South
Africa's compliancc with the decisions of the United
Nations:

54 0/ficial Records of the Secunty Counc1/. Thll'l_\·-/1/ih Ycar. S11¡111/eme111
for Ju[y, August and Seplemher /980, documenl S114179.

15943.

79th plenary meeting
l Dccemher 1983

B
IMPLEMENTATION OF SECURITY CouNCII
RESOLUTION 435 (1978)

The General Asscmhly,
Indignan! at South Africa's refusal to comply with
Security Council resolutions 385 (1976) of 30 January
1976, 431 (1978) of 27 July 1978, 435 (1978) of 29 September 1978, 439 ( 1978) of 13 November 1978 and 532
(1983) of 31 May 1983 and at its manoeuvres aimed at
gaining international recognition for illegitimate groups
which it has installed in Namibia, and which are subservient to Pretoria's interests, in order to maintain its policies of domination and exploitation ofthe people and natural resources of Namibia,
Reaffirming the imperative need to proceed without any
further dela y with the implementation of Security Council
resolution 435 ( 1978), which, together with Council resolution 385 (1976), is the only basis for a peaceful settlcment of the question of Namibia,
Condemning the attempts by South Africa and the
United States of America to continuc to deny thc
Namibian people their inalienable right to selfdetermination and indepcndence by linking the independence of Namibia with totally irrelevant and extraneous

issues,

55 See resolution ES/8-2.
56 Official Records o{the Securily ( ·ouncil, Fhirt_i·-('[ghth !'car, S11p¡1/m1,·111
for April, May and June /Q83, dornmen\ SI 15776.

' 7 /hui .. S11¡,¡,/e111cw ,,,, • .111/r. A11g11.1·I and Sep/eml>er 1983. document

s:

-----~'L Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Commiltee_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _~-'1
9. Reques/s the Security Council to exercise its authority with regard to the implementation of its resolutions
385 (1976), 435 (1978) and 532 (1983) so as to bring about
the independence ofNamibia without further dclay, and to
act decisively against any dilatory manoeuvres and fraudulent schemes of the South African administration in
Namibia aimed at frustrating the legitima te struggle of the
Namibian people for independence:
10. Urges thc Security Council to impose comprehensivc mandatory sanctions against the racist régime of
South Africa under Chapter VII of thc Charter, in order to
ensure the total cessation of ali co-operation with that
régime, particularly in the military and nuclear fields, by
Governments, corporations, institutions and individuals:
11. Reques/s thc Secrctary-Gcneral to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session on the implementation of the present resolution.
79th p/cnarr meeting
J f)eccmhcr 1983

e
PROGRAMME OF WORK OF THE l!NITFD NATIONS
COUNCII FOR NAMIBIA

The General Assemhlr.
Having examined the report of thc l Jnited Nations
Council for Namibia, 40
Reaffirming that Namibia is the dircct responsibility of
the United Nations and that the Namibian people must be
enabled to attain self-dctermination and independencc in a
united Namibia,
Recalling its rcsolution 2248 (S-V) of 19 May I 967, by
which it established thc United Nations Council for
Namibia as the legal Administering Authority for Namibia
until independence,
Taking into considera/ion the Paris Declaration on
Namibia and the report of the Committee of the Whole
and the Programme of Action on Namibia adopted at the
International Conference in Support of the Strugglc of the
Namibian Pcople for Independence. 44
Convinced of the need for continued consultations with
the South West Africa People's Organization in the formulation and implementation of the programme of work of
the United Nations Council for Namibia, as well as in any
matter of interest to the Namibian people.
Deeply conscious of the urgent and continuing need to
press for the termination of South Africa's illegal occupation of Namibia and to put an end to its rcpression of the
Namibian people and its exploitation of the natural
resources of the Territory.
1. Approi·es the report of the United Nations Council
for Namibia, including thc rccommendations contained
therein, and decides to make adequate financia) provision
for their implementation:
2. Expresses its strong support for the efforts of the
United Nations Council for Namibia in the discharge of
the responsibilities entrusted to it both as the legal
Administering Authority for Namibia and as a policymaking organ of the United Nations:
3. Requests ali Member States to co-operatc fully with
the United Nations Council for Namibia in thc dischargc
of the mandatc cntrusted to it under thc provisions of
General Assembly resolution 2248 (S-V) and subscqucnt
resolutions of thc Asscmbly:

4. Decides that the United Nations Council for
Namibia, in thc discharge of its rcsponsibilities as the legal
Administering Authorit, for Namibia until independence,
shall:
(a) Continue to mobilize international support in order
to press for the speedy withdrawal of the illegal South African administration from Namibia in accordance with the
resolutions of the llnitcd Nations rclating to Namibia:
(h) Counter the policies of South Africa against the
Namibian pcople and against thc United Nations, as wcll
as against the United Nations Council for Namibia as the
legal Administering Authority for Namibia:
(e) Denounce and seek the rejection by ali States of ali
fraudulent constitutional or political schemes through
which South Africa may attempt to perpetuate its presence
in Namibia:
(d) Ensure non-recognition of any administration or
entitv installed at Windhoek not issuing from free elcctions in Namibia conducted under the supervision and
control ofthe United Nations. in aecordance with the rC'levant resolutions of the Seeurity Council, in particular rcsolution 439 ( 1978) of 13 NovC'mber 1978:
(e) Undcrtake a concertC'd dfort to eountC'r the
attcmpts to establish linkagC' or parallclism bctween the
dccolonization of Namibia and extraneous issues such as
the withdrawal of Cuban forces from Angola;
5. Decides that thc UnitC'd Nations Council for
Namibia shall:
(a) Consult Govcrnments in ordcr to furthcr the
implementation of U nited Nations resolutions on the
question of Namibia and to mobilize support for the cause
of Namibia:
(h) Represent Namibia in Unitcd Nations conferences
and intergovernmental and non-govcrnmental organizations, bodies and confcrenccs to ensure that the rights and
intcrests of Namibia shall bC' adequatdy protected:
6. Decides that Namibia, reprcsented by thC' United
Nations Council for Namibia, shall participate as a full
member in ali conforenccs and mectings organizC'd by the
United Nations to which ali States, or, in the case of
regional confC'rences and meC'tings. ali Afriean States are
invited:
7. Rcquests ali committees and other subsidiary bodies
of the General Assembh and of thC' Economic and Social
Council to continue to invite a representative of the
United Nations Council for Namibia to participate whenever the rights and interests of Namibians are discussed,
and to consult closely with the Council before submitting
any draft resolution which may involvC' thc rights and
interests of Namibians;
8. Rciteratcs its requcst to ali specialized agencies and
other organizations and institutions of the United Nations
systcm to grant full membership to Namibia, represented
by the United Nations Council for Namibia, so that the
Council may participate as the legal AdministC'ring
Authority for Namibia in the work of thosc agencies,
organizations and institutions:
9. Reitera/es its rcqucst to ali spC'cialized agencies and
other organizations of the United Nations system that
have not yet done so to grant a waiver of the assessment of
Namibia during the period in which it is representcd by
thC' United Nations Council for Namibia;
10. ,lgain requcsts ali intC'rgovcrnmental organizations, bodies and confcrences to ensure that the rights and
interC'sts of Namibia are protC'cted and to invite Namibia,
represented by the United Nations Council for Namibia,
to participate as a full member whenC'vC'r sueh rights and
intC'rcsts are involved:

32

General Assembly- Thirty-eighth Session

11. Takcs note of thc ratitication by the U nited
Nations Council for Namibia of the lJnitcd Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea; ' 8
12. Takes note of the acccssion by the U nited Nations
Council for Namibia, in its capacity as legal Administering
Authority for Namibia, to the Geneva Conventions of 12
August 1949 52 and the Additional Protocols thereto 59
and requests the Council to accede to such other international conventions as it may deem appropriate;
13. Takcs note of the signing by the United Nations
Council for Namibia, in its capacity as the legal Administering Authority for Namibia, of the Final Act of the
United Nations Conference on Succession of States in
respect of State Property, Archives and Debts; 60
14. Requests the lJnited Nations Council for Namibia
to promote and secure the implcmentation of the Programme of Action for Namibia adopted at the lnternational Conference in Support of the Struggle of the
Namibian Peoplc for lndependence; 44
15. Decides that the United Nations Council for
Namibia shall:
(a) Review the progrcss of the liberation struggle in
Namibia in its politicaL military and social aspects and
prepare periodic reports related thereto;
(h) Consider the compliance of Member States with
the relevant U nited Nations resolutions relating to
Namibia. taking into account the advisory opinion of the
lnternational Court of.lustice of21 Junc 1971: 42
(e) Consider the activities of foreign economic interests
operating in Namibia with a view to recommending
appropriate policies to the Cieneral Assembly in order to
counter the support which those foreign economic interests give to the illegal South African administration in
Namibia:
(d) Continue to examine the exploitation of and trade
in Namibian uranium by foreign economic interests and
report on its findings to the Cicneral Assembly at its thirtyninth session:
(e) Notify the Governments of States whose corporations. whether public or prívate. operate in Namibia ofthe
illegality of such operations;
(/) Send missions of consultation to Governments of
States whose corporations have investments in Namibia in
order to review with them ali possible action to discourage
the continuation of such investments;
(g) Contact administering and managing bodies of foreign corporations operating in Namibia regarding the illegal basis on which they are operating in the Territory;
(h) Contact specialiled agencies and international
institutions associated with the United Nations, in particular the International Monetary Fund, with a view to protecting Namibia's interests:
(i) Draw the attention of the specialized agencies to
Decree No. 1 for the Protection of the Natural Resources
of Namibia, 48 enacted by the United Nations Council for
Namibia on 27 September 1974:
U) Take ali measures to ensure compliance with the
provisions of Decree No. l for the Protection of the Natural Resources of Namibia, including consideration of the
institution of legal proceedings in the domestic courts of
States and other appropriate bodies;
(k) Undertake, in consultation with the South West
Africa People's Organization, urgent consultations with
the Commission of the European Communities and the
58 Offictal Records o( the Third huted Natwm Con/erenCl' ,m the Law Q(
the Sea, vol. XVII (llnited Nations publication, Sales No. E.84.V.2). document A/CONF.62/122.

European Parliament in order to ensure that no action is
taken which implies recognition of South Africa'~ illcgal
administration in Namibia;
(/) Conduct hearings, scminars and workshops in
ordcr to obtain relcvant information on thc exploitation of
the peoplc and resourccs of Namibia by South African and
other foreign interests and to expose such activities:
(m) Organizc regional symposia on the situation in
Namibia with a vicw to 111tcnsifying active support for the
Namibian cause;
(11) Prepare and publish reports on the political. economic. military, legal and social situation in and relating
to Namibia;
(o) Secure the territorial integrity of Namibia as a unitary Statc. including Walvis Bay and the offshore islands of
Namibia;
16. Decides to make adcquate linancíal pro, isíon in
thc section of the programme budgct of thl' llnited
Nations rclating to the llnited Nations Council for
Namibia to tinance the otlice of the South West Africa
Pcoplc's Organization in Ncw York in ordcr to ensure
appropriatc representation of the people of Namibia at the
United Nations through the South West Africa Pcople's
Organization:
17. Decides to continue to defray the expenses of represcntatives of the South West A frica Pcople's Organization, whenevcr thc llnitcd Nations Council for Namibia
so decides:
18. Requcsts the ll nited Nations Council for Namibia
to eontinue to consult with thc South Wcst Africa Peoplc's
Organization in thc formulation and implcmentation ofits
programmc of work, as well as in any mattcr of interest to
the Namibian people:
19. Requests thc United Nations Council for Namibia.
in the discharge of its responsibilities as the legal Administering Authority for Namibia, to hold a series of plenar1
meetings in Asia during 1984 and to rccommend appropriate action to thc General Assembly in the light ofSouth
Africa's refusal to implement Security Council resolution
435 ( 1978) of 29 Scptcmber 1978:
20. Requests the Sccretary-Gcncral to defray the cost
of the plenary mectings of the United Nations Council for
Namibia and to provide the nccessary staff and scrvicc~
for thcm:
21. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Presiden! of the United Nations Council for
Namibia, to revicw thc requirements in personnel and
facilities of ali units which service the Council so that the
Council may fully and effectively discharge ali tasks and
functions arising out of its mandate:
22. Rcquests thc Secretary-General to pnwide the
Office of the Unitcd Nations Commissioncr for Namibia
with the necessary resources in ordcr for it to strcngthen.
under the guidance of thc United Nations Council for
Namibia. the assistance programmcs and services for
Namibians, the implemcntation of Decree No. 1 for the
Protection of thc Natural Resources of Namibia, thc preparation of economic and legal studics and the existing
activities of dissemination of information undcrtaken b,
that Office.
79th p/cnarr 111ecting
I /)ecc111her 1983
59 A/32/144. annexe, 1 and 11.
60 A/CONF.117/15.

II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

--------------------

D
D1ssEMl'-ATION OF (',FORMATIO', A:\D MOBILIZATIO"I ()1,
INTERNATl01'AL PLBLIC OPll'<IO'\ 1:\ SLPPORT OF
NAMIBIA

The General Assemhly.
/laving examined thc rcport of thc Unitcd Nations
Council for Namibia 40 and thc relevant chaptcrs of thc
report of the Spccial Committee on the Situation with
Regard to the lmplementation of the Declaration on thc
Granting of Independencc to Colonial Countrics and Pcoples. 41
Recalling its rcsolutions 2145 (XXI) of 27 Octohcr
1966. 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967 and 371233 of 20
December 1982. as well as ali other resolutions ofthe General Assembly and the Security Council rclating to
Namibia.
Taking into consideration the Paris Declaration on
Namibia and the report of the Committee of the Wholc
and the Programmc of Action on Namibia adopted at thc
International Conference in Support of the Strugglc of the
Namibian People for lndependcnce. 44
Taking into considera/ion a/so the conclusions and rccommendations adopted at thc Regional Symposium in
Support of the Namibian Cause in Latin America. held at
San José. from 16 to 19 August 1983. hl
Stressing the urgent need to mobilize intcrnational public opinion on a continuous basis with a view to assisting
effectively the peoplc of Namibia in thc achievemcnt or
self-determination, freedom and independence in a unitcd
Namibia and. in particular, to intcnsify the world-widc
and continuous dissemination of information on the struggle for liberation being waged by the people of Namibia
under the leadership of thc South West Africa People',
Organization, their solc and authentic represcntative.
Recognizing thc important role that non-governmental
organizations are playing in the dissemination of information on Namibia and in the mobilization of international
public opinion in support of the Namibian cause.
Reiterating the importance of publicity asan instrumcnt
for furthering the mandate given by the General Assembl 1
to the United Nations Council for Namibia and mindful of
the pressing need for the Department of Public lnformation of the Secretariat to intensify its efforts to acquaint
world public opinion with ali aspects of the question of
Namibia. in accordance with policy guidclines formulated
by the Council,
l. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia.
in pursuance of its international campaign in support of
the struggle of the Namibian people for independence. to
continue to considcr ways and means of increasing the dissemination of information relating to Namibia:
2. Requests the Secretary-General to cnsurc that thc
Department of Public Information of thc Secretaria t. in ali
its activities of dissemination of information on the question of Namibia, follows the policy guidelincs laid down
by the United Nations Council for Namibia as the legal
Administering Authority for Namibia:
3. Requests the Secretary-General to direct the Department of Public Information, in addition to its responsibilities relating to southern Africa. to assist. as a matter ofpriority, the United Nations Council for Namibia in the
implementation of its programme of dissemination of
information in order that the Unitcd Nations may intcnsify its efforts to generate publicity and disseminate information with a view to mobilizing public support for thc
61 Official Records ofthe General Assemhl_r, Thirt1·-eighth Snswn. Supp/ement No. 24 (A/38/24). para. 576.

33

indcpendcncc of Namibia. particularly m the Wc,tern
Sta tes:
4. Decides to inten~ity 11, international campaign in
support of the cause of Namibia and to exposc and
den o unce the collusion of thc U nited Sta tes of Amcrica.
ccrtain othcr Western Statcs and Israel with thc South
A frican racists and. to this end. rcqucsts the l lnited
Nations Council for Namibia to include in its programme
of dissemination of information for 1984 thc following
acti,itics:
(a)
Prcparation and dissemination of puhlications on
thc political. economic military and social rnnsequences
of the illegal occupation of Namibia by South Africa. as
wcll a, on legal mattcrs. on the qucstion of thc territorial
integrit) of Namibia and on contacts between Mcmber
States and South Africa:
(/1) Production and d1sscmination of radio programmes in English. French. Cicrman and Spanish designed to
draw the attention of wmld public opinion to the curren!
situation in Namibia:
(e)
Production of matl'rial for puhlicity through radio
and telc,·ision broadcasts:
(d} Placement of adn-rtisemcnts in newspapers and
maga11nes:
(e) Production of lilms. tilm-strips and slide ,cts on
Namibia:
(() Production and disscmination of posters:
(g) Full utili1ation of the rcsources related to prcss
rcleascs. press confercnces and press brietings in ordcr to
maintain a constant flow of information to thc public on
ali aspects of thc question of Namibia:
(h) Production and dissemination of a comprehensin:
economic map of Namibia:
(i) Preparation and widc dissemination of a booklet
containing resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council relating to Namibia, togethcr with relevan! portions of Assembly resolutions on the activities of
fore1gn economic interests in Namibia and on military
acti,ities in Namibia:
(¡) Publicit) for ami distribution of an indexed referencc book on transnational corporations involvcd in
Namibia:
(A) Preparation and dissemination of a booklet hased
on a study on the implcmentation of Decrcc No. l for the
Protection ofthc Natural Resources ofNamibia. 48 enacted
bv thc Council on 27 Septemher 1974:
(/) Acquisition of books. pamphlcts and other materials relating to Namibia for further dissemination:
S. Rcquests the l lnited Nations Council for Namibia
to organize a symposium to be held at llnited Nations
Headquarters in 1984 with the partícipation of prominent
pcrsonalities. scholars. support groups, media personalities
and others from all parts ofthe world, in order to mark the
one hundrcdth anniversary of the hernie struggle of the
Namibian people against colonial occupation and the
plunder of the natural resources of their country and for
self-determination, frcedom and independence. and to
draw the attention of the world public, particularly in thc
Western countries, to the question of Namibia, with a
view to further mobilizing international support for the
just struggle of the Namibian people under the leadership
of the South West Africa Peoplc's Organization, their sole
and authentic representative. to bring about the spced)
independence of Namibia:

(;eneral Assembl) -Thirty-eighth Session

6. Req11es1s thc Sccrctary-Gcncral to allocatc. in consultation with the Unitcd Nations Council for Namibia.
sales numbers to publications on Namibia sclcctcd by thc
Council:
7. Requc1ts thc Secrctary-C,cncral to prov1dc thc
United Nations Council for Namibia with thc work programme of the Departmcnt of Public lnformation fór thc
year 1984 covering thc acti vi tics of disscmination of information on Namibia, followcd by pcriodic rcports on thc
programmcs undcrtakcn. including clctails of expenses
incurred:
8. Rcquests thc Sccrctary-Gcncral to group unclcr a single hcading. in the scction of thc proposed programme
budget of thc U nitecl Nations for thc biennium 1984-1985
relating to thc Dcpartment of Puhlic Information. ali thc
activities of the Department relating to the disscmination
of information on Namibia:
9. Requcst.1 the Secrctary-Gencral to direct that thc
United Nations Day studcnts' leaflet for 1984 he devoted
to the question of Namibia:
10. Requcsl\ Member Statcs to broadcast programmcs
on their national radio and tclevision networks ami to
publish material in their official ncws media. informing
their populations about the situation in Namibia and thc
obligation of Governments and pcoplcs to assist in thc
struggle of Namihians for indcpcnclcnce:
11. Requests the Unitcd Nations Council for Namibia.
in co-operation with the Department of Public lnformation and the Department of Confercncc Scrvices of thc
Secretariat, to continuc to inform and provide information
material to leading opinion makers. media leadcrs. academic institutions, trade unions, cultural organizations.
support groups and othcr conccrnccl pcrsons ancl nongovernmental organizations about the objcctives and functions ofthe United Nations Council for Namibia and thc
struggle of thc Namibian people under the leadcrship of
the South West Africa Peopte·s Organization and also to
hold consultations with. and seck the co-operation of.
those personalities and institutions by inviting them on
special occasions to participatc in the dclibcrations of thc
Council, and to establish for this purpose a regular and
expeditious pattern of distribution of information material
to political parties, universitics, libraries. churchcs, students, teachcrs, professional associations and others falling
into the general categories cnumerated abme:
12. Reques/s ali Mcmbcr States to commemorate and
publicize Namibia Day and to issue spccial postage stamps
for the occasion:
13. Reques1s the Sccretary-Gcncral to dircct thc
United Nations Postal Administration to issue a spccial
postage stamp on Namibia by thc cnd of 1984 in commemoration of Namibia Day:
14. Cal/s 11pon the Unitcd Nations Council for
Namibia to enlist thc support of non-governmental organizations in its efforts to mobilizc international public opinion in support of the liberation struggle of the Namibian
people and of their sote and authentic rcprcscntativc. the
South West Africa People's Organization:
15. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia
to prepare, update and continuallv disscminate lists of
non-governmental organizations frÓm ali over thc world.
in particular thosc in the major Western Statcs. in arder to
ensure better co-operation and co-ordination among nongovernmental organizations working in support of the
Namibian cause and against apartheid:

1h.
Req11csts thosc non-govcrnmcntal organizations
and support groups that are activcly cngaged in supporting
thc strugglc of the Namibian people under thc leadership
of the South Wcst A frica Peoplc's Organization, their sole
and authcnt1c rcprcsentative. to continue to intensify, in
co-operation with the Unitcd Nations Council for
Namibia. intcrnational action in support of the liberation
struggle of thc Namibian people, including assistancc to
the Council in the monitoring of the boycott of South
A.frica callcd for in C,eneral Asscmbly rcsolution ES-8/2 of
14 Scptcm ber 1981.
17. Decides to allocatc thc sum of $300.000 to be used
h'. the lJnited Nations Council for Namibia for its programmc of co-opcration with non-governmcntal organiza110ns. including support to confercnces in solidarity with
Namibia arranged hy those organizations. dissemination
of conclusions of such conferences and support to such
othcr activities as will promotc thc cause of the liberation
struggle ofthe Namibian people, subject to decisions ofthe
Council in each individual case on the recommendation of
thc South Wcst Africa Peoplc's Organization.

62 Ibid., Supp/emcnl No l4 (A, 1X ~4). part two, chap X and chap XI.
sect. B.

61
For the text of the Chaner of the l !nited Nations lnstitute for Namibia,
a, amended, see 0//1cwl Rccords o/ rhc (i('llcra/ Asscmh/1·. Thrrr1•-sr,·en1h Ses-

79th plcnarr 111ccting
I Dccemher 1983

E
lJNITH) NATIONS Ft"'iD FOR NAMIBIA

!he General .-lssc111h!_r.
!lal'1ng cxamincd thc parts of the report of thc United

Nations Council for Namibia relating to thc United
Nations Fund for Namibia. 6 ~
Rccal/ing its rcsolution 2679 (XXV) of 9 Dccember
1970. by which it cstablished the lfnited Nations Fund for
Namibia,
Rccalling a!sn 11s rcsolution 3112 (XXVIII) of 12
Deccmber 1973. h) which it appointcd thc Unitcd Nations
Council for Namibia trustcc of the United Nations Fund
for Namibia.
Rcca/ling its resolution 31 / 153 of 20 Deccmber 1976,
by which it dccided to launch thc Nationhood Programme
l'or Namibia.
Rccallingfúrthcr 1ts resolution 34/92 A of 12 Dcccmber
1979. by which it approved the Charter of the United
Nations Institutc for Namibia. and resolution 371233 E of
20 Deccmber 1982. by which it approvcd amendments to
thc Chartcr. 6 .1
1. Takes note of thc relevant parts of thc report of thc
l lnitcd Nations Council for Namibia:
,
[)cC1"dcs that thc United Nations Council for
Namibia shall:
(a) Continue to formulatc policies of assistancc to
Namibians and co-ordinate assistancc for Namibia providcd by thc specializcd agencies and other organizations
and institutions of the Unitcd Nations system:
(h) Continuc to act as trustec of thc U nited Nations
Fund for Namibia and, in this capacity, administer and
rnanagc thc Fund:
(e) Continue to provide broad guidelines and formulatc principies and policies for the United Nations lnstitutc for Namibia:
(1/) Continue to co-ordinate. plan and direct the
Nationhood Programmc for Namibia in consultation with

n \'urplcmcnt \'o _..,4 ( ·\ 17 ~4). annex IV.

111 1

11.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

the South West Africa People's Organization. with the aim
of consolidating ali measures of assistance by the specialized agencies and other organizations and ínstítutions of
the United Nations system ínto a comprehcnsive assistance programme:
(e) Continue to consult with the South West Africa
People's Organization in the formulation and implemcntation of assistancc programmes for Namibians:
(f) Report to the General Assembly at its thirty-ninth
session on activities in respect ofthe United Nations Fund
for Namibia, the United Nations lnstitute for Namibia
and the Nationhood Programme for Namibia:
3. Decides that the United Nations Fund for Namibia.
including the Trust Funds for the Nationhood Programme
for Namibia and the United Nations lnstitute for
Namibia, shall be the primary source of assistance to
Namibians;
4. Expresses its appreciation to ali States, specialized
agencies and other organizations of the United Nations
system, governmental and non-governmental organizations and individuals that have made voluntary contributions to the United Nations Fund for Namibia. the United
Nations Institute for Namibia and the Nationhood Programme for Namibia, and calls upon them to increase
their assistance to Namibians through those channels:
5. Decides to allocate as a temporary measure to the
United Nations Fund for Namibia the sum of $1 million
from the regular budget of the Unitcd Nations for 1984:
6. Requests the Secretary-General and the President of
the United Nations Council for Namibia to intensify
appeals to Governments, intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations and individuals for generous
voluntary contributions to the General Account of the
United Nations Fund for Namibia and to the Trust Funds
for the Nationhood Programme for Namibia and the
United Nations Institute for Namibia and. in this connection, emphasizes the need for contributions in order to
increase the number of scholarships awarded to Namibians under the United Nations Fund for Namibia:
7. Invites Governments to appeal once more to their
national organizations and institutions for voluntary contributions to the United Nations Fund for Namibia:
8. Urges the organizations of the United Nations system to waive agency support costs in respect of projects in
favour of Namibians financed from the United Nations
Fund for Namibia and other sources; and in cases where
such costs cannot be waived, urges the organizations to
treat contributions from the United Nations Fund for
Namibia as Government cash counterpart contributions in
accordance with decision 83/ 1O B of 24 June 1983 of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Development
Programme; 64
9. Commends the progress made in the implementation of the pre-independence components of the
Nationhood Programme for Namibia and requests the
United Nations Council for Namibia to elaborate and consider in due course policies and contingency plans regarding the transitional and post-independencc phases of the
Programme:
10. Commends the United Nations lnstitute for
Namibia for the effectiveness of its training programmes
for Namibians and its research activities on Namibia.
which contribute substantially to the struggle for freedom
of the Namibian people and to the establishment of an
independent State of Namibia:
64 See Ojficial Records o(rhc l-,'conom1c and Social Counnl. /983. Sup¡,lement No. 9 (E/1983/20). annex l.

35

11. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations and institutions of the United Nations system.
when planning and initiating their new measures of assistance to Namibians, to do so within the context of the
Nationhood Programme for Namibia and the United
Nations Institute for Namibia;
12. f;xpresses its appreciation to those specialized
agencies and other organizations and institutions of the
United Nations system that have contributed to the
Nationhood Programme for Namibia and calls upon them
to continue their participation in the Programme by:
(a) lmplementing projects approvcd by the United
Nations Council for Namibia:
(h) Preparing new project proposals at the request of
the Council:
(e) Allocating funds from their own financia] resources
for the implementation of the projects approved by the
Council;
13. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations and institutions of the United Nations system, in
the light ofthe urgent need to strengthen the programme of
assistance to the Namibian people, to make every effort to
expedite the execution of Nationhood Programme for
Namibia projects and other projects in favour of Namibians and to execute those projects on thc basis of procedurcs which will reflcct the role of the United Nations
Council for Namibia as thc legal Administering Authority
for Namibia:
14. Rcquests the U nited Nations Council for Namibia
to complete the preparation of and publish at an early
date, through the United Nations Institute for Namibia, a
comprehensive reference book on Namibia covering
aspects of the question of Namibia as considered by the
United Nations since íts inception, in accordance with the
outline prepared by the Council;
15. Requests the United Nations Institute for Namibia
to complete thc preparation, in co-operation with the
South Wcst Africa People's Organization, the Office ofthe
United Nations Commissioner for Namibia and the
United Nations Development Programme, of a comprehensive document on ali aspects of economic planning in
an independent Namibia, and requests the Secretary-Gencral to provide substantive support through the Office of
thc Commissioner for the preparation of that document:
16. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia
to complete the preparation of and publish at an early
date, in consultation with the Office ofthe United Nations
Commissioner for Namibia, a demographic study of the
Namibian population anda study ofits educational needs:
17. l'rges the specialized agencies and other organizations and institutions of the U nited Nations system to coopera te closely with the United Nations Institute for
Namibia in strengthening its programme of activities;
18. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Development Programme for its contribution to the
financing and administration of the Nationhood Programme for Namibia and the financing of the United
Nations Institute for Namibia and calls upon it to continue
to allocate, at the rcquest of the United Nations Council
for Namibia, funds from the indicative planning figure for
Namibia for the implementation ofthe projects within the
Nationhood Programmc and for the United Nations Institute for Namibia:
19. Ca/Is upon thc United Nations Development Programme to raise the indicative planning figure for
Namibia:

General Assembly-Thirty-eighth Session

36

20. Expresses its appreciation for the efforts of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to assist
Namibian refugees and requests him to expand those
efforts in view ofthe substantial increase in the number of
Namibian refugees;
21. Decides that Namibians shall continue to be eligible for assistance through the United Nations Educational
and Training Programme for Southern Africa and the
United Nations Trust Fund for South Africa:
22. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide the Office of the United Nations Commissioner for
Namibia with the necessary resources for the performance
of the responsibilities entrusted to it by the United
Nations Council for Namibia as the co-ordinating authority for the implementation of the Nationhood Programme
for Namibia, as well as other assistance programmes.
79th plenary meeting
1 December J983

38/37. Co-operation between the United Nations
and the Asian-African Legal Consultative
Committee
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 36/38 of 18 November 1981
and 37/8 of29 October 1982.
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on co-operation between the United Nations and the
Asian-African Legal Consultative Committee, 65
Having heard the statement of the Secretary-General of
the Asian-African Legal Consultative Committee 66 on the
continuing close and effective co-operation between the
two organizations,
l. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General;

2. Notes with deep satisfaction the ongoing close and
effective co-operation between the United Nations and the
Asian-African Legal Consultative Committee in the field
of progressive development and codification of international law and other areas of common interest;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take
steps to strengthen the co-operation between the United
Nations and the Asian-African Legal Consultative Committee in the field of progressive development and codification of international law and other areas of comrnon
interest;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session a report on
co-operation between the United Nations and the AsianAfrican Legal Consultative Committee:
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-ninth session the item entitled "Co-operation
between the United Nations and the Asian-African Legal
Consultative Committee".
82nd plenary meeting
5 December 1983
65 A/38/491.
66 Official Records of the General Assemh/y, Thirty-e1ghrh Sesswn, Plenarr

Meetings, 82nd meeting, paras. 88-104.
67 See also sect. l. footnote 7, and scct. X.B.3. decision 38/407.
68 Official Records ofthe General Assemhlv, Thirr1·-e1ghth Scssion. S11ppl<'ment No. 22 (A/38/22).
69 /bid., Supp/emem No . .?2A (A!38!2L Add.1 i

38/39.

Policies of apartheid of the Government of
South Africa 67
A
S1TUA []()!',; IN SOUTH AFRICA

The (icneral Assemb/_\'.
Recal/ing and rca/tim11ng its resolution 3 7/69 of 9
Decernber 1982.
Having considered the report of the Special Comrnittee
against Apartheid, 68 as well as its special report on recent
developrnents concerning relations between Israel and
South Africa, 69
Taking note of the declarations of conferences organized
or co-sponsored bj the Special Comrnittee, namely, the
International Conference of Trade Unions on Sanctions
and Other Actions against the Apartheid Régirne in South
Africa, held at Geneva on 1O and 11 June 1983. 70 the
lnternational Conference for Sanctions against Apartheid
in Sports. held in London from 27 to 29 June 1983, 71 the
lnternational Non-Governmental Organizations Conference on Action against Apartheid and Racism. held at
Geneva frorn 5 to 8 July 1983. 72 the International Conference on the Alliance between South Africa and Israel, held
at Vienna frorn 11 to 13 July 1983. 73 and the Latín American Regional Conference for Action against Apartheid,
held at Caracas frorn 16 to 18 September 1983. 74
Grave/y concerned over the threat to intemational peace
and security, and repeated breaches of the peace and acts
of aggression. caused by the policies and actions of the
racist rninority régirne of South Africa,
Condemning the racist minority régime of South Africa
for its repeated defiance ofthe United Nations, its oppression ofthe great majority ofthe people ofSouth Africa and
its ruthless repression of ali opponents of apartheid,
Strongly condemning the execution of Sirnon Mogoerane. Jerry Mosololi and Thabo Motaung, members of the
African National Congress of South Africa, in defiance of
appeals by the General Assernbly and the Security Council.
Reaffirming that apartheid is a crime against humanity.
Strongly convinced that peace and stability in southern
Africa require the total eradication of apartheid and the
exercise of the right of self-determination by ali the people
of South Africa, irrcspective of race, colour or creed,
Convinced that the racist minority régime of South
Africa has been encouraged to perpetrate those criminal
acts by the protection accorded to it by major Western
Powers against international sanctions and by their continued collaboration with it,
Recogni::ing that the policies and actions of certain
Western Powers and Israel are the rnain obstacles that
have frustrated international efforts for the elimination of
apartheid.
Condemning, in particular, the increased collaboration
by the Government of the United States of America with
the racist régime of South Africa, in pursuance of its policy
of so-called "constructive engagement", which has
encouraged the racist régime to entrench apartheid, intensify repression and escalate aggression against and
destabilization of independent African States.
70 A/38/272-S/15832, annex.
7
1 A/38/310-S/ 15882. annex.
n A!38!309-S 1 15881. annex
7J A/381311-S/ 1588.l annex.
7 4 A/381451-S/16009. anncx
