Re1olutions adopted on the reporll of the Fifth Committee

Having considered the Secretary-General's report on
the subject, 119
Convinced that, in the year of the commemoration
of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the United Nations
and on the threshold of the Second United Nations
Development Decade, it would be appropriate for
Member States to reaffirm their financial commitment
to the Organization,
1. Takes note of the study prepared by the Secretary-General;119
2. Requests the Secretary-General to examine the
possibility of preparing in due course additional data
relevant to General Assembly resolution 2617 (XXIV);
3. Recognizes, on the basis of the present study, that
a large share of the growth in money terms has been
applied for additional expenses in connexion with increases in the membership of the United Nations and
the specialized agencies, increases in the number of
working languages, a general rise in the cost of goods
and services and the maintenance of existing establishments;
4. Considers that, as a consequence of the adoption
of the International Development Strategy for the Second United Nations Development Decade,eo it is desirable that there should be a suitable p-owth in tho
activities undertaken by the United Nations system;
5. Considers it therefore important to achieve a
better harmonization of the programming and budgetary policies in the United Nations system through tho
establishment of closer links between the action of
bodies dealing with substantive issues and those dealina
with financial and budgetary questions, inter alia, with
a view to achieving a more rational and more effective
use of the resources that Member States put at tho
disposal of the United Nations system;
6. Urges the Governments of all Member States, in
accordance with their relative capacity to pay, to consider devoting an increasing level of resources to the
budgets and voluntary programmes of the United Nations system, on the basis of established programme
requirements, in order to enable the organizations of
that system to continue their present activities in a
more effective way and to undertake new activities for
the benefit of the world community as a whole;
7. Also urges the Governments of all Member States,
in a spirit of renewed dedication to the United Nations
and the principles embodied in the Charter, to maintain continuity in their contributions to the regular
budgets of the organizations of the United Nations
system, without detriment to increasing contributions
to the various voluntary programmes and funds.
1933rd plenary meeting,
17 December 1970.

1. Urges that the Government of the host country
make certain that the measures taken to ensure the
protection and security of diplomatic missions and
their diplomatic personnel are adequate to enable Permanent Missions to the United Nations to perform
properly the functions entrusted to them by their Governments;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to convene the
Informal Joint Committee on Host Country Relations
in January 1971 and thereafter as frequently as appropriate in order that it may be in a position to examine
carefully the matters specified in its terms of reference117
and to seek solutions to problems which fall within the
broad context of relations with the host country;

3. Recommends that the Committee undertake a
systematic consideration of the implementation of the
Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the
United Nations and the Agreement between the United
Nations and the United States of America regarding
the Headquarters of the United Nations, 118 as well as
conditions of life and obligations of members of Permanent Missions to the United Nations;
4. Authorizes the Committee to maintain and circulate summary records of its proceedings;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Committee, to report in a comprehensive
manner to the General Assembly at its twenty-sixth
session on the status of the work of the Committee with
particular reference to the extent to which existing
problems have been solved.
1933rd plenary meeting,
17 December 1970.
2748 (XXV). Harmonization and growth of pro•
grammes and budgets in the United Nations
system

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2617 (XXIV) of 17 December 1969, in which the Secretary-General was requested to submit to the General Assembly at its
twenty-fifth session an economic and financial analysis
of the nature of the increase in the activities, staff and
budget of the United Nations, clearly distinguishing
between the increase in money terms and that in real
terms, and also taking into account, inter aUa, the rise
in the contributions to the regular budgets of the specialized agencies,
111 Approved by the Committee at its first meeting on
6 April 1966.
118Resolution 169 (II) of 31 October 1947.

•

119

59 A/C.5/1307.
60 Resolution 2626

•

(XXV) .

•

Other decisions
Report of the Economic and Social Council
(Item 12)
At its 1932nd plenary meeting, on 16 December 1970, the General
Assembly took note of chapters XII and XIII (sections A, B and E) of the
report of the Economic and Social Council.61
8 1 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 3
(A/8003 and Corr.I).
