S/PV.9418

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9418th meeting

Thursday, 14 September 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Hasani/Mr. Hoxha. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Albania)

Members:

Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. França Danese
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Ishikane
Mrs. Frazier
Mr. Irachande Gouveia
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Advancing public-private humanitarian partnership
Letter dated 28 August 2023 from the Permanent Representative of Albania
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2023/631/Rev.1)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-26783 (E)
*2326783*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9418

Maintenance of international peace and security

address humanitarian needs. I thank Albania for
bringing this issue to the Council for the first time. I
come from the private sector myself, so it is a topic I
feel strongly about.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Advancing public-private humanitarian
partnership
Letter dated 28 August 2023 from the
Permanent Representative of Albania to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2023/631/Rev.1)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Belgium, Chile, Denmark, Egypt,
Germany, Guatemala, India, Italy, the Republic of
Korea, Morocco, Poland, Portugal, Slovenia, South
Africa, Thailand, Türkiye and Qatar to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Ms. Cindy McCain, Executive Director of the World
Food Programme; Mr. Jared Cohen, President of Global
Affairs and co-head of the Office of Applied Innovation
at Goldman Sachs; and Mr. Michael Miebach, Chief
Executive Officer at Mastercard.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite Her
Excellency Mrs. Hedda Samson, Deputy Head of
the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2023/631/Rev.1, which contains
the text of a letter dated 28 August 2023 from the
Permanent Representative of Albania to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council, transmitting a concept paper on the item
under consideration.
I now give the floor to Ms. McCain.
Ms. McCain: I thank you, Mr. President, for
inviting me to brief the Security Council on the vital
importance of partnering with the private sector to
2/32

14/09/2023

Thriving businesses and flourishing economies
are the critical engines that will power global efforts
to eradicate hunger and poverty and strengthen
international peace and security. Yet, sadly, the
humanitarian sector is today one of the world’s
biggest growth industries. Demand for World Food
Programme (WFP) services is rising relentlessly, and
this is happening across the United Nations and the
wider humanitarian system. War, economic turmoil
and, increasingly, climate change and environmental
degradation are driving millions of people into poverty
and despair each year.
As many as 783 million people do not know
when — or if — they will eat again. And the WFP
estimates that nearly 47 million people in over 50
countries are in Integrated Food Security Phase
Classification (IPC) phase 4: just one step away
from famine. The number of children caught in the
grip of starvation is overwhelming, and a staggering
45 million children under the age of five are now
estimated to have acute malnutrition.
I wish I could tell Council members that the surging
hunger seen in many parts of the world is the result
of one-off causes and will recede as circumstances
change. But it will not. We are now living with a series
of concurrent and long-term crises that will continue to
fuel global humanitarian needs. And that is happening
just as funding for humanitarian relief operations
is drying up. At the WFP we have had to make the
agonizing choice to cut food rations for millions of
vulnerable people, and more cuts are on the way. That
is the humanitarian community’s new reality — our
new normal — and we will be dealing with the fallout
for years to come. But it does not mean that we are
powerless to end this human suffering, and history tells
us that the private sector has a fundamental role to play.
The great strides made in the past 200 years in
reducing global poverty have largely been thanks to
economic growth powered by the private sector. More
recently, diseases such as HIV/AIDS and tuberculosis
have been brought under control with effective
public-private partnerships. Companies developed
the medicines and vaccines, while Governments and
humanitarian agencies got them where they needed to be.
23-26783

14/09/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

As we confront a new reality of sustained humanitarian
needs and shrinking budgets, it is time to rethink how
we engage and find new role models for cross-sectoral
partnerships. We need business leaders’ help to develop
the smart innovations and solutions required to both
build resilience and tackle the root causes of hunger and
poverty so that we can reduce humanitarian needs over
the long term. Private enterprise must lead efforts to
build essential infrastructure, supply affordable goods
and services, spur innovation, expand skills and create
new employment opportunities. And it is essential that
local businesses and private enterprise are front and
centre in that work.
Everywhere that the WFP has operations, we rely on
the ingenuity and entrepreneurialism of private-sector
partners to help us deliver on the ground. Everyone
benefits from that approach. Reducing poverty and
hunger is a necessary precondition for healthy workforces,
functioning markets and sustainable economic growth
and prosperity. When people and communities thrive,
so do businesses. We at the WFP have a track record
of partnering with companies that share our vision of
a world without hunger, and we are proud that they
trust us to deliver it. Partners such as Amazon, DHL
and Takeda have worked with us to reinforce our worldclass supply-chain and logistics networks, ensuring that
they serve the wider humanitarian community even
more effectively. We have also worked with analytics
firms to improve our data analysis capabilities, with
food companies to improve the nutrition of our food
baskets and with artificial-intelligence experts on a
satellite monitoring system to assess disaster zones
remotely. In addition, the WFP uses its own economic
and purchasing power to support business expansion,
job creation and community resilience in the countries
where we operate. Last year we sourced 50 per cent of
our food commodities locally and regionally, injecting
$1.6 billion into local markets.
We are also the world’s largest humanitarian provider
of cash and digital payments. Last year we distributed
more than $3.3 billion to 56 million vulnerable people
in 72 countries — capital that supports local businesses
and economies. That is transformational. That
programme has its roots in the innovative partnership
launched when the WFP and Mastercard joined forces
more than a decade ago. Mastercard shared its payments
and technology expertise with us to help us improve
and scale up our systems for delivering digital food
vouchers. The Mastercard team has been supporting

S/PV.9418

our mission to end hunger ever since, and I thank
Mr. Miebach for that.
But there is still so much more to do — more that the
humanitarian, private and public sectors can achieve by
working together in partnership, powering innovation
in science and technology, building new capacities,
sharing expertise and acumen and mobilizing the
resources and political will needed to confront the
new reality we are living with. None of us has all
the answers. But our sectors have many attributes in
common — a clear focus, a strong commitment to
delivering results and a sense of urgency about the
task at hand. Our collective challenge is to ramp up the
ambitious multisectoral partnerships that will enable
us to tackle hunger and poverty effectively and reduce
humanitarian needs over the long term.
The Security Council’s responsibility for
international peace and security will determine the
success of that shared endeavour. In the most fragile
places, such as Somalia, which I visited in May, the
private sector is often what keeps extremely vulnerable
populations afloat. But it also leaves them vulnerable to
shocks such as the war in Ukraine or sanctions regimes.
The Council’s responsibility to protect this space is
therefore all the more important, and I urge members to
be resolute in using its powers and influence to create
the broader conditions that can enable public-private
partnerships to flourish. Member State Governments
should also use their convening power and public-policy
levers to create an environment conducive to publicprivate partnerships so that they can drive grass-roots
development and be a forceful engine of opportunity
for vulnerable communities. The international financial
institutions can support those efforts with capital
finance, especially in relation to fragile States.
Finally, and critically, we need the private sector to
step up and embrace its responsibility to help build the
societies that enable their enterprises to succeed. If we
are serious about tackling climate change, delivering
decent sanitation, health and housing and opening up
new education and employment opportunities, we need
business to be on board. Private-sector profitability
can and must go hand in hand with the Sustainable
Development Goals. I know from my own experience
that it makes good business sense. So let us work together
to build new models of collaboration, encompassing
in-kind support, technology transfers, skills and
personnel exchanges, cutting-edge programme design
and rigorous systems of evidence and impact evaluation.

23-267833/32

S/PV.9418

Maintenance of international peace and security

The road ahead is long, and the challenges are
daunting. But we still have an opportunity to halt the
relentless growth in global humanitarian needs. With
determination, innovation and above all cross-sectoral
collaboration, we can successfully navigate our way
through a new and challenging landscape and bring
new hope to vulnerable communities around the world.
The President: I thank Ms. McCain for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Cohen.
Mr. Cohen: It is a privilege to appear before the
Security Council today. This meeting follows a crisis
that happened 760 days ago, 7,000 miles away. It
has largely faded from the headlines, but today is an
important reminder of the ongoing plight of the Afghan
people and continuing crises around the world. We all
remember when Kabul fell to the Taliban. Hundreds
of thousands of Afghans were put at risk. Most of
them had nowhere to go, and a significant portion of
the world’s countries closed their doors. But a few
countries opened them up, including some represented
around this table today. I remember at the time talking
to journalists, philanthropists and a number of world
leaders, asking what could be done. Overnight, that
group formed what could only be described as a
multisectoral, multinational network of goodwill. It
was Sheikh Mohammed bin Abdulrahman bin Jassim
Al-Thani, then Foreign Minister of Qatar and now Prime
Minister, who mobilized his country. Qatar evacuated,
resettled and transported tens of thousands of Afghan
women, girls and civil-society leaders to safety. Sheikh
Mohammed and his team did so with extraordinary
attention to detail, and his staff worked through some
extreme diplomatic complexities, as well as physical
risks on the ground, to achieve those goals. After the
evacuations, the then President of Iraq, Burhan Salih,
brought hundreds of Afghan university students to
the American University of Iraq in Sulaymaniyah.
And in bringing those hundreds of students to Iraq,
he managed to ensure that while the Taliban occupied
their university campus, those students missed not more
than two weeks of school. Prime Minister Edi Rama
of Albania personally greeted Afghan refugees on the
tarmac in Tirana. He transformed some of the country’s
crown jewels, its precious resort towns, into new homes
so that Afghans could rebuild their lives. I want to thank
Albania for championing humanitarianism through its
presidency of the Council and thereafter.
4/32

14/09/2023

Those are just a few examples of the people and
countries that stepped up two years ago. Around the
world, countless chief executive officers (CEOs),
as well as individuals with no business interests and
no connections, covered planes, resettlement, living
expenses and so much more. I think the fact that I last
addressed the Security Council more than a year ago
as an executive at Google (see S/PV.9069) and that
today, a year later, I am addressing it as an executive at
Goldman Sachs, is just one small point that shows the
breadth of private-sector commitment to humanitarian
assistance and crisis response. What happened in
Afghanistan was nothing short of a tragedy, and in
many respects represented humankind at its worst,
particularly considering that young girls are now no
longer allowed to go to school. But responses such as
those I have mentioned were a reminder to me, and I
hope to everyone in the Chamber, that such moments
can also bring out the best of humankind and what we
can all achieve together. That is why I am here today.
The task of crisis response is growing much more
urgent. The world is facing the greatest moment of
geopolitical uncertainty in more than two decades,
perhaps since the Cold War. But we cannot let
humanitarian crises become even more geopoliticized
than they already are. The mission of this body is
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Many of today’s crises would look fairly familiar
to the leaders who founded the Council 78 years
ago — pandemics, food shortages, floods and of course
the tragic 6.8 magnitude earthquake that occurred in
Morocco just last Friday. Other challenges are much
newer — cyberattacks, climate change, disinformation
and misinformation and even lethal drugs such as
fentanyl. And it is no secret that Russia’s war on Ukraine
and the competition between great Powers are making
the Council’s objective that much more challenging.
Our historic institutions must rise to today’s challenges.
Ambassador McCain highlighted how the World Food
Programme does that, in keeping with humanitarian
norms and principles.
I want to highlight two significant groups of global
players that did not have the same potential when this
body was founded 78 years ago. My hope in doing
that is that when the Council thinks about publicprivate partnership and humanitarian response, we can
broaden ideas about which public players matter and
what private-sector stakeholders can do.
23-26783

14/09/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

The first category that I want to highlight is an
emerging group of nations that I call geopolitical swing
States. They are stable, thriving countries that, while
they may not be permanent members of the Security
Council, have global agendas and the will, agency and
capacity to turn those agendas into realities. Whether it
is because of their differentiated position with supply
chains, their advantageous geography or resources or
their particular leaders’ vision of their role in the world,
those countries are having a tremendous impact while
at the same time expanding their ambitions around
the globe.
My main message is that many of the biggest
challenges in today’s era of great-Power competition
will not be solved by great Powers alone. I believe it is a
golden moment for geopolitical swing States to step up,
lead and expand their roles. I have highlighted Qatar’s
extraordinary role in Afghanistan and the difference that
it made. Prime Minister Kishida Fumio of Japan has not
only pledged more than $7 billion in aid for Ukraine,
his statements of support and visit to Kyiv have changed
how much of the world thinks about the war. He linked
peace and security in Eastern Europe to peace and
security globally. In many instances, geopolitical swing
States can accomplish things the great Powers cannot.
They offer new leaders who better represent a changing
world and have the flexible resources, diplomatic
leverage and credibility that can enable them to play
a meaningful leadership role, particularly within the
Global South. And we have just seen India do that by
hosting a successful Group of 20 (G20) Summit on the
heels of Indonesia’s similar hosting the previous year.
Those geopolitical swing States often function with the
speed and agility of business and have become some of
the most reliable partners for businesses looking to play
a role in crisis management.
That brings me to the second group that I want to
highlight — the private sector. A growing number of
companies have global interests and responsibilities.
The revenues of many multinationals rival the gross
domestic product of some G20 countries. The largest
employers in the world are businesses as well as
Governments. Five American companies have more
than 500,000 workers, as do many of their global
counterparts. That means they have more employees
than as many as 20 States members of the United
Nations have citizens.
Globalization did not just connect the world. It put
the private sector at the geopolitical table. But that seat

S/PV.9418

did not come with a clear playbook. Today’s global firms
have responsibilities to our shareholders, clients, staff
and communities, and to the rules-based international
order that makes it possible for us to do business. It is
a very complicated labyrinth for us to navigate. I will
therefore offer some principles for how we can fulfil
those responsibilities during crises.
First, we should not scramble to reinvent the wheel
every single time. Drawing on institutional memory
may be the difference between getting ahead of a crisis
or thousands of people dying. We need more sustained
partnerships with one another and the public sector.
Secondly, we need to act with speed and innovate
in real time. Resources are not always in the hands of
philanthropists and non-governmental organizations.
Governments have the principal responsibility,
but they can be slow to respond, particularly when
events are far away and complicated by perplexing
geopolitical dynamics. At Goldman Sachs, our primary
philanthropic vehicle for responding to humanitarian
crises is something that we call GS Gives. To date,
it has deployed more than $2.2 billion, working with
9,400 non-profits and with an impact in 140 different
countries around the world.
Thirdly, local connections matter. Goldman
Sachs relies on its people. We have more than 45,000
employees in 42 different countries. Our second largest
office outside New York City is in India, where we
have more than 8,000 employees. They are our primary
responsibility. When a crisis hits anywhere in the world,
our people are often directly affected, but they can also
help direct our response, and they do so. For example,
we have many Ukrainian colleagues and approximately
800 staff in Poland. They have volunteered at refugee
centres in Warsaw. They have donated medical supplies
and first-aid kits and funded scholarships and food
deliveries. They have sheltered Ukrainians in their own
homes. Some flew in from as far away as Frankfurt and
even Hong Kong to aid in the response. We have also
supported international organizations such as UNICEF
and local non-profits such as Ukraine Global Scholars.
Fourthly, expertise matters. If the CEOs of Fortune
100 companies were here, they would tell members that
they can offer much more than funding. Their expertise
sets them apart in business and in humanitarian
response. As an example, the White House announced
last March that the United States would welcome more
than 100,000 Ukrainian refugees — a historic objective.

23-267835/32

S/PV.9418

Maintenance of international peace and security

But the technological know-how to make that happen
quickly is not always in Government. It is in the private
sector. That is why, working with something called
Welcome.US, engineers at Goldman Sachs — we have
more than 10,000 — built Welcome Connect. It is a
platform to match American sponsors who want to help
with Ukrainian refugees. And we built it to serve as a
foundation for future refugee-resettlement initiatives.
We have seen other companies, including Mastercard,
rise to the challenge. The Council will be hearing more
from Mr. Miebach, who I think is one of the great CEOs
we have in this country. We can all do more.
I want to underline one more way that we can do
that. Our business is business. It makes everything
that I have mentioned possible and is also part of our
response to crises. In our case, we work through global
markets to allocate capital where and when it is needed.
One example is that after the 2011 earthquake and
tsunami in Japan, our 1,700-person staff in Tokyo were
at the office, dealing with extreme market volatility.
They provided equity hedging to insurance clients and
foreign-exchange liquidity through the Group of Seven
intervention. Those actions helped drive down the yen
and supported Japan’s export-focused economy during
a very trying period.
The private sector cannot do what Governments
do. That is not what I am suggesting, and neither are
we substitutes for non-governmental organizations. I
am not suggesting that either. But business is part of
the solution, and economic growth is the foundation of
sustainable recovery.
I will leave members with three final thoughts. The
first is that none of this is historic. It is the scale and the
opportunity that are historic. We have done it before.
During the Marshall Plan, businesses played a crucial
role in Europe’s recovery, and we did it with far fewer
companies in a much less globalized world.
Secondly, we are ready to do it again. Today’s
companies are identifying and embracing the
responsibilities and opportunities of geopolitics.
We are not afraid to do so. And it is a necessity of
doing business.
Thirdly, we are looking to the Council for leadership
and partnership. I ask that the Council put the private
sector on the agenda during the high-level week. We are
ready to take everyone’s calls.
The President: I thank Mr. Cohen for his briefing.
6/32

14/09/2023

I now give the floor to Mr. Miebach.
Mr. Miebach: I thank the members of the Council
for advancing the issue of how the world can address
its humanitarian needs. Many companies work with
United Nations agencies to tackle critical challenges
to peace and security. I am therefore humbled by the
invitation to address the Council and share our views on
how we can work better together. There is no doubt that
it is a critical topic, as we have heard from Ms. McCain
and Mr. Cohen. We need only look at Morocco and
Libya this week to see the overwhelming need for
coordinated responses.
Let me start with a thought on why companies need
to be involved. It is based on a shared, foundational
belief that businesses cannot succeed in a failing
world. Humanitarian crises affect our fellow citizens
and sometimes our colleagues. The work of supporting
global stability and predictability can therefore
become personal. During my time today, I will share
observations and learnings on three aspects that can
encourage companies like ours to help those who need
it most.
First, partnerships are not a new concept. However,
the challenges stretch beyond the capabilities of any
one sector. Coordination is key. Humanitarian relief
has long been the domain of Government, philanthropic
and development institutions. The private sector was
seen as a source of financial donations for supplies and
in-kind aid. That has changed. Money is still important,
but companies can offer much more. The private
sector stands ready to tackle the challenges at hand in
partnership with the public sector. We can use our core
competencies to strengthen infrastructure, innovate
new approaches and deliver solutions at scale. When
we succeed in that work, it unlocks greater inclusion,
equality and most importantly resilience. That is key,
especially for the most vulnerable, as there will be
more crises and challenges coming our way.
But we can and should change the dynamics. We
encourage the United Nations to be even more direct
and deliberate in its outreach to the private sector. When
like-minded groups come together, we can align on
objectives. That clarifies roles and responsibilities and
enables companies to do what they do best — solving
problems by building and deploying solutions with
commercial rigour. It is about putting the whole of
our businesses into service. That includes activating
our creativity, technology, relationships, data science
23-26783

14/09/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

and know-how to make it all happen again and again.
There are many partnership examples to consider, but
I think back to the surge in the coronavirus disease in
India in the spring of 2021. Many companies rushed
in to help, but they were all working in silos. It took
the Government and selected non-governmental
organizations to identify what the actual needs were.
From there, roles could be assigned so that the elements
with the right impact — doctors, field hospitals, beds
and respirators — could be delivered to where they
were needed most. Mastercard was right in the middle
of all that and saw the power of a coordinated response.
With structured public and private partnerships, we see
that one plus one can equal three.
Secondly, we all know that technology can
be transformational. When directed in the right
ways, technology can grow economies and expand
opportunities. But we should also clearly understand
that technology is not simply an app or even an end
product. It is a tool that can serve as a foundation — an
infrastructure — to do more. That digital infrastructure
has even greater impact when it reinforces privacy, trust
and equal access in a commercially sustainable way.
We need to ensure that technology is relevant to
the people who use it. We cannot simply take existing
solutions and bring them to new places. There needs
to be a very deep understanding of the local context
to appreciate how a solution can actually solve the
problem at hand. That approach has helped the World
Food Programme — and we thank Ms. McCain for its
partnership — and the International Federation of Red
Cross and Red Crescent Societies, among many other
organizations, to implement digital cash and voucher
assistance programmes in a way that makes a difference
locally. Digital cash programmes have since become
a fast, transparent, secure and more effective way to
deliver life-saving assistance at the last mile. Digital
cash helps the recipients maintain a sense of dignity,
even in vulnerable situations, because they individually
decide how to spend those funds.
The value of technology also lies in making
complex matters simple. Let us think about the sheer
amount of data that exists. We can use technology to
identify trends and make better decisions. For example,
when a natural disaster strikes, data can direct people
to the services they need. After the recent wildfires in
Hawaii, data helped people find nearby fuel stations
and other businesses that were still open. The same type
of insights can be used in many other ways, including

S/PV.9418

helping refugees determine the best places to resettle, as
in the example Mr. Cohen just gave us. Let us challenge
ourselves to uncover the ways in which technology
can be best used to help the most vulnerable. Let us
leverage artificial intelligence (AI) and generative AI
and other emerging technologies to do that.
The third dimension is capacity-building. It is
about driving the shift from response to preparedness
by reinforcing the skills and resources that the most
vulnerable need to survive and thrive. Let me illustrate
that with an example. In the Global South, smallholder
farmers represent 80 per cent of the agricultural
industry. Their processes have remained virtually the
same for generations, and many struggle to earn a
living wage. There is potential to help farmers to build
for their futures. One example is Christina Kibonde, a
coffee farmer in Uganda. For generations, her family
was dependent on middlemen to reach buyers. As a
result, she had a very limited view of market prices,
which restricted her earnings and opportunities.
Technology and partnerships helped break that cycle.
A technology platform called Farm Pass, developed
by Mastercard, created new access. The technology
ensured that Christina was digitally included. Today
she is connected directly with buyers, negotiating the
best price for her beans. That digital record — including
getting paid electronically — gives her access to
credit to expand her operations. Christina is now more
prepared for what may come, and so too are millions
of other smallholder farmers activating that platform.
It is a simple solution with the potential for long-term
impact, and a powerful example of capacity-building.
We must invest in key local capacities, which include
education, financial literacy, cybersecurity skills and
more, and do so ahead of time — not only in response
to crises. When we are successful in that work, we will
enable more people to create more opportunities for
their long-term future.
Even with our collective effort, we will not be
able to stop disasters. But we can help more people
prepare to be more resilient and have a say in their own
future. Thanks to engagements and dialogue such as
the one we are having today, I am optimistic about our
collective ability to deliver for our fellow citizens, and
I am grateful to the Albanian presidency for hosting our
dialogue. As I said, the United Nations has a willing and
committed partner in the private sector. We just need to
be engaged. We stand ready to put our technology to
work to solve real challenges. We are happy to leverage

23-267837/32

S/PV.9418

Maintenance of international peace and security

our competencies to strengthen skills to build more
capacity towards greater resilience. That is what the
world needs.
The President: I thank Mr. Miebach for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Albania.
I would like to thank the Executive Director of the
World Food Programme (WFP), Ms. McCain, for her
comprehensive presentation. I applaud her personal
commitment to the cause and the extraordinarily
important work that the WFP is doing in these
challenging times. I also want to thank Mr. Cohen and
Mr. Miebach. We commend them for their personal
work in the field of philanthropy and humanitarian
assistance, and we are also grateful for their involvement
and contribution to the initiative that we are gathered
here to discuss.
The world is facing an unprecedented level of
humanitarian need, driven by conflict, climate change
and the enduring impact of the coronavirus disease. In its
mid-year review of the Global Humanitarian Overview
2023, the United Nations assessed that nearly $55 billion
is required to assist 249 million people in need. Despite
continued generosity and resource mobilization efforts,
the current gap between what is needed and what is
available through donor contributions is huge. But
that is not a new phenomenon. Year after year, crisis
after crisis, we are faced with a shortage of funds
and available aid, despite the generosity of donors.
It is a shortage that has immense consequences for
millions upon millions of people affected by conflict,
natural catastrophes, climate change and the foodsecurity crisis.
We believe that a greater and more structured
contribution by the private sector can go a long way to
addressing that pressing shortfall. It is not only material
resources such as funds, food and medicine that the
private sector can contribute to that important effort,
which has a newfound urgency in the context of the war
in Ukraine and the disruption in food supplies that the
war has produced. The private sector can also assist by
offering access to cutting-edge technology, research
and development and operational capabilities. With
the private sector’s expertise and capabilities in fields
such as logistics, telecommunications, transport and
data analysis, humanitarian actors will gain improved
efficiency and effectiveness in their response efforts.
8/32

14/09/2023

As the Security Council and the United Nations
address accelerating humanitarian needs in conflict
zones or in areas affected by natural disasters, we
believe that it is imperative that we find ways to
strengthen the role of the private sector in humanitarian
operations. Albania also believes that it is imperative
that we identify the most problematic gaps and key
areas for improvement in crisis response while, at the
same time, exploring the mechanisms through which
the role of corporations or philanthropies in the crisis
response ecosystem can be formalized.
Albania first started exploring the possibility
of greater involvement by the private sector in
humanitarian operations in a genuine crisis setting. As
is well known and was mentioned earlier, beginning in
2021, Albania welcomed thousands of Afghan women,
men and children. My country is a small country that
lacks the resources and infrastructure needed to provide
shelter in dignified conditions for such a large number of
people. However, what we lacked in resources we made
up by adopting a new approach to humanitarian crisis
management that aimed to create synergies between
our public resources and those of private actors in order
to provide for thousands of desperate people. Working
closely with Schmidt Futures and the Yalda Hakim
Foundation — Mr. Cohen was personally involved in
all those efforts — we managed to conceive of a new
model for humanitarian operations that did not simply
enable us to provide accommodations, food and care for
our Afghan guests but, I believe, also provided us with
an out-of-the-box idea on how crisis management and
humanitarian aid can work if public and private actors
join forces.
During our humanitarian operations, we saw
first-hand how efficient the private sector can be
in providing humanitarian assistance and essential
logistical support in a timely manner, if we partner up
with them. It was from that experience that the idea
for a public-private humanitarian partnership was
born. Albania has worked hard with its partners, and in
particular Schmidt Futures, to explore the new idea and
how public-private humanitarian partnerships can be
advanced by building the private sector humanitarian
alliance. The alliance is conceived of as a platform
whose primary mission will be to mobilize resources
more efficiently within the first few days of any crisis
situation that requires humanitarian aid. It will connect
private sector and philanthropy actors to international
organizations, or non-governmental organizations, so
23-26783

14/09/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

that the necessary aid can flow through their existing
channels and mechanisms within the crucial first
days — all of which will be done in full compliance
with the United Nations principles of humanitarian
aid and those of all its crisis-response agencies. We
are happy and proud of what we have achieved so far,
together with Schmidt Futures and other partners,
including the founding members of the alliance and a
number of representatives here in attendance.
Throughout our work on that platform, we have been
thrilled to see the level of generosity and motivation
of major private sector companies and philanthropies.
We believe that advancing the idea of a public-private
humanitarian partnership is not only necessary, but the
right thing to do. We look forward to the consolidation of
the alliance and its work in the months and years ahead
for the benefit of a better response to the growing needs
worldwide. By working together, we can maximize the
impact of assistance, save more lives and build resilient
communities in the face of adversity.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I begin by thanking you,
Mr. President, for organizing today’s open debate on
this important issue. I also thank Executive Director
McCain, Mr. Cohen and Mr. Miebach for enriching our
discussion with their thoughts and insights.
Global humanitarian needs driven primarily
by conflict and climate change are today placing
unpredictable pressure on the global humanitarian
architecture. Emergency humanitarian assistance is
often left with the challenge of addressing multi-year
humanitarian emergencies. They include, inter alia,
major displacement, food insecurity and protection
crises. Modest resourcing and increasing gaps in
funding also continue to exacerbate an already-difficult
situation. As such, twenty-first-century humanitarian
action will require a realignment of its operating
modalities. The private sector can play a central role
in providing technological support, resources and
sustainable solutions to humanitarian challenges.
However, the new partnerships will also require
robust delineations and safeguards that preserve the
fundamental principles of humanitarian action.
The most effective way to reduce pressure on the
humanitarian system lies in the political resolution

S/PV.9418

of conflicts. From Syria to the occupied Palestinian
territories, Ukraine, Mali and the Sudan, protracted
conflicts compound humanitarian needs. They heighten
the population’s vulnerability by degrading social
services and critically damaging civilian infrastructure.
Finding just and lasting solutions to such conflicts will
have a dramatically positive impact for both affected
populations and the stability of the humanitarian
sector globally. Until that happens, humanitarian
organizations must continue to be supported and
resourced to save as many lives as possible. In that
respect, increased and unearmarked funding for
United Nations agencies, international organizations
and international non-governmental organizations
should be prioritized to depoliticize aid spending and
enable humanitarians to work where and when they
are most needed. That is an area in which the private
sector could greatly support global humanitarian needs.
Flexible, multi-year and core financial contributions
from the private sector would go a long way in bridging
the current major gaps in humanitarian response plans
across the globe at a time when it is greatly needed.
However, stringent safeguards must be put in place to
ensure the legitimate origin of all funds. The generation
of such resources must also be aligned to, and not be in
conflict with, principled humanitarian action.
Public-private partnerships in the humanitarian
space have the potential to strengthen the logistics
capacity of humanitarian organizations. They can
increase efficiency across their operations, from
recruitment to programme delivery, payments,
partnership and research into the development of
new technologies required to meet current and future
humanitarian needs. The incremental advancements
in public-private partnerships to date are encouraging.
Nevertheless, there are numerous ways that the private
sector can immediately contribute to humanitarian
efforts, showcasing its commitment to supporting
principled humanitarian action.
In the technology and communications sector,
private sector partners could provide more affordable
and efficient communication systems and renewable
energy solutions to humanitarian organizations. That
would significantly enhance humanitarian operations
in regions with poor connectivity and infrastructure. In
the medical field, reducing the prices of essential drugs
and medical equipment would enable humanitarian
medical teams to extend their support and operations
to a greater number of health centres. In the banking

23-267839/32

S/PV.9418

Maintenance of international peace and security

and financial sector, minimizing the costs of financial
transfers would facilitate the rapid allocation of
resources to field missions. Having an expert
understanding of humanitarian exceptions in sanctions
regimes would also contribute to that end. Those steps,
in many cases, are what humanitarian partners have
been calling on the private sector to help them with
for decades.
Within emergency humanitarian action, we must
ensure that our focus remains on delivering support to
people. That must be in line with the long-established
principles of neutrality, impartiality, independence and
humanity. Although the motivations of the private sector
and humanitarians may not be immediately apparent,
we are confident that there are various possibilities
for cooperation.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I would
like to begin by thanking all our briefers for their
very insightful remarks and ideas today. I also want
to commend you, Foreign Minister, and the Albanian
presidency on your initiative in hosting today’s open
debate. Public-private partnerships are crucial in the
humanitarian sector, and meetings such as this one are
an important opportunity to learn how we can all be
doing better. We welcome the Albanian presidency’s
innovation in bringing this topic to the forefront at the
Security Council and the connectivity platform it has
proposed, which will no doubt have enormous impact.
Year after year, global humanitarian needs
overwhelm the generous contributions of donors. This
year alone, the United Nations has appealed for over
$54 billion, and until now 80 per cent of those funds
remain unfulfilled. This disconnect matches what the
briefers today have made clear — we are facing a system
in crisis, and the architecture of the past can no longer
keep pace with the crises of the present. However, as
Mr. Cohen said, the institutional memory exists, and
we do not need to reinvent the wheel. Narrowing the
gap means ushering in a modified system, one in
which public-private humanitarian partnerships are no
longer considered simply useful additions to the core
of humanitarian work but are a crucial part of that core
work. That shift in model should be informed by the
lessons of past successes and failures.
Earlier this year, the earthquakes in Syria and
Turkey forced us to confront the gap in our capabilities.
Our Foreign Minister, His Highness Sheikh Abdullah
bin Zayed Al Nahyan, travelled to the region to try to
10/32

14/09/2023

offer his support, and he witnessed those gaps firsthand. That scenario has tragically played out again in
recent days in the Kingdom of Morocco and Libya as
we witnessed the devastating impacts of this week’s
earthquake and flooding. Our thoughts and condolences
are with the families and loved ones of those lost in
that tragedy.
In the aftermath of a natural disaster, Governments
and first responders need to launch complex processes
and responses and then scale them up, all the while
gathering and assessing information that feeds into
that response. It all unfolds in real time, and every
second counts. It is akin to building a plane while
flying. Embracing novel approaches and technologies
is a way to learn from such experiences and leverage
better responses, as Mr. Miebach outlined so clearly in
his remarks.
In response to what we have seen over the past
decade, the United Arab Emirates has been developing
a digital platform to support Governments’ ability to
better harness international support in the wake of
natural disasters. By serving as a central information
exchange and integrating advances in artificial
intelligence, including machine learning, this digital
tool could be used by disaster-hit countries to specify
the types of aid needed at specific locations and in what
quantities, so they get what they need when they need
it. Why? Because we have seen first-hand that that
gap exists. We look forward to working on this with
Governments, the private sector and humanitarian
organizations in the coming months, to launch a new
tool to turbocharge our crisis response capabilities.
We have learned in our own country through the
International Humanitarian City, the world’s largest
humanitarian logistics hub, why agility matters so
much in crisis response, but we need to see agility
writ large across the humanitarian sector. Based in the
United Arab Emirates, the International Humanitarian
City is host to 62 humanitarian organizations, including
major United Nations agencies, and 17 private sector
companies. It works closely with the private sector,
and its use of new technologies and public-private
partnerships is enabling aid to reach those in need as
quickly as possible.
Digital tools developed at the International
Humanitarian City are now being rolled out around the
world. However, even with the right tools in place, we
must shape an environment that is agile and ready to
23-26783

14/09/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

bridge the gap between the public and private sectors
in a humanitarian crisis. In the past, those types
of partnerships have not been without limitation,
however. At the onset of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, we lost crucial time. Across
the world, people died while countries reverted to old
habits in the race for vaccines. Meanwhile, protracted
disagreements over patents and intellectual property
continued. We must ensure that in a crisis, a system is
in place in which private sector organizations are fully
incentivized and enabled to partner with Governments
in the non-discriminatory delivery of support, and that
support must be equally accessible to all.
In the case of the United Arab Emirates, our worldclass aviation and logistics industries, with companies
like Etihad Airways, Emirates and DP World, played
a significant role in facilitating the country’s response
to COVID-19, but also in our global response. At the
height of the pandemic, the United Arab Emirates sent
192 flights with United Arab Emirates aid directly to
135 countries. Public-private partnerships, particularly
in a crisis, are thus not only good practice, but being
able to leverage that network has helped save lives. We
now need to use the time when we are not in urgent
crisis to adapt those lessons to our future responses and
institutionalize that partnership.
Finally, we cannot forget that existing humanitarian
needs continue to be amplified by our changing climate.
With a mismatch between the scale of the climate
challenge and the financing to solve it, private sector
organizations and capital are key to turning the tide
on decarbonization, adaptation and mitigation efforts.
Understanding this, earlier this month the United Arab
Emirates announced a new public-private initiative
between companies in the United Arab Emirates and
Africa50. The aim is to deploy $4.5 billion to accelerate
clean energy projects across the African continent.
Over the past five years, the United Arab Emirates
private sector has contributed more than $250 million
to humanitarian efforts globally, and as a country, we
will continue to do our part, leading on the development
of the public-private humanitarian partnership model
until the necessity and reality of global humanitarian
contributions are one and the same.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, Mr. President, I welcome you as you preside over
today’s meeting. I would also like to thank Executive

S/PV.9418

Director McCain, Mr. Cohen and Mr. Miebach for their
briefings just now.
The humanitarian cause, as a common endeavour
of all humankind, can build the greatest consensus
across different civilizations. The international
community should practice true multilateralism,
promote international humanitarianism, unite all
actors, including the public and private sectors and
civil society, step up investment, jointly face challenges
and continuously improve the humanitarian situation in
the relevant countries and regions.
First, we should keep up humanitarian investment.
The current global humanitarian landscape faces
unprecedented difficulties and challenges. According
to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Assistance report released this June, 360 million
people worldwide need humanitarian assistance, with a
yawning humanitarian funding gap of $43 billion. With
limited access to timely assistance, women and children
in many regions suffer from hunger and displacement,
which is heart-wrenching.
Today’s
meeting
calls
for
public-private
humanitarian partnership, which can be a useful
complement to scaling up humanitarian financing. For
a long time, multinational corporations have benefited
immensely from the resources and markets of developing
countries and thus bear the responsibility for helping the
relevant countries out of their humanitarian predicament
and have a duty to make greater contributions to the
livelihood and well-being of those countries’ peoples.
At the same time, official assistance from developed
countries is the main channel for international
humanitarian financing. Their financial commitments
should be fulfilled on time and in full. The participation
of the private sector should not lead to Governments
cutting their investments or shifting responsibility. It
is worth noting that, in some conflict-affected regions
and countries, humanitarian funding is being cut back
arbitrarily, exacerbating the humanitarian plight of the
local population — something that should not happen.
Secondly, we should adhere to fundamental
humanitarian principles. Humanitarian actions should
be carried out in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations and General Assembly resolution
46/182 and the principles of humanity, neutrality,
impartiality and independence, and in full respect
for the sovereignty, laws and customs of recipient
countries. Despite their different natures, both public

23-2678311/32

S/PV.9418

Maintenance of international peace and security

and private institutions should adhere to the principle
of non-interference in internal affairs when providing
international humanitarian assistance and should not
attach any political preconditions to their aid or impose
their will on others, let alone seek ulterior political
interests in that process. A few countries, under the
pretext of democracy and human rights, have all too
easily cut or even suspended humanitarian assistance
to Afghanistan and other countries, which will only
victimize innocent civilians, worsen the socioeconomic
crisis in Afghanistan and contravene the spirit
of humanitarianism.
For quite some time at the Security Council,
there has been constant controversy over the issue of
humanitarian access. We advocate against complicating
simple issues, especially politicizing issues of a
professional nature. We should resolve differences
through dialogue and consultation, guide our actions
on the basis of national conditions of the countries
concerned and find effective ways to ensure that
humanitarian supplies reach those in need quickly and
safely, without hindrance.
Thirdly, we should establish efficient partnerships
on an equal footing. Ultimately, humanitarian
assistance is to be effective and successful in benefiting
the recipient country, to be measured by how well it
is received among the population in that country.
When determining priorities, modalities and projects,
humanitarian agencies should not only communicate
with key donors, but also pay more heed to the views of
recipient countries and various local actors. The private
sector, in its participation in humanitarian action,
should make use of its comparative advantages and
be more relevant to the actual needs of the countries
concerned. It has been proven that by effectively
increasing the voice and representation of recipient
countries, humanitarian actions will be delivered in
a more efficient and targeted manner, with definitive
results that will better stand the test of time.
For some time, international humanitarian
assistance has been overly focused on certain countries.
Humanitarian assistance in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Somalia, Haiti, South Sudan and the
Sahel are severely underfunded. This is not normal and
cannot go on like this. We should therefore promote
coordination among United Nations humanitarian
agencies, allocate resources fairly and rationally and
help all countries in need.
12/32

14/09/2023

Fourthly, we should promote humanitarianism and
development in an integrated manner. Humanitarian
crises in some countries are rooted in their deteriorating
economic situation and the heightened threat from
climate change and energy and food crises, among
other situations, which all boils down to development
at the end of the day. The key to reducing humanitarian
needs and dependence on humanitarian assistance lies
in people-centred development. In some countries,
despite decades-long international humanitarian
actions and significant investments in human and
material resources, the humanitarian situation has
yet to be fundamentally alleviated, which merits
careful reflection.
China is of the view that we must look beyond
traditional means of humanitarian assistance and
attach greater importance to the path of economic
development. We must go further than short-term
help and seek long-term fundamental solutions. We
must rise above external blood transfusions and
enhance the ability to organically generate blood.
Humanitarian action should be effectively dovetailed
with the development strategies of the countries
concerned, with greater investment in infrastructure,
industrial and agricultural development, education
and training, among others. The private sector has a
unique role to play in promoting trade and investment,
financing cooperation, creating jobs, thereby aligning
humanitarian assistance more closely with sustainable
development. It is worth noting that illegal unilateral
sanctions severely affect the ability of the public sector
of the countries concerned to provide basic services
such as health care, education and the provision of food.
They interfere with the private sector’s regular activities
in trade, investment and business operation. As such,
they have become the biggest obstacle to publicprivate humanitarian cooperation. The international
community should jointly urge relevant countries to
immediately lift unilateral sanctions, eliminate their
negative effects and create favourable conditions for
international humanitarian actions.
During his recent meeting with the President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross in
Beijing, President Xi Jinping pointed out that China is
an active supporter, participant and contributor to the
international humanitarian cause. By putting forward
the collective Belt and Road Initiative, the Global
Development Initiative, the Global Security Initiative
and the Global Civilization Initiative, China hopes
23-26783

14/09/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

to work with other countries to promote economic
development, better livelihoods, mutual benefits and
win-win scenarios and to contribute Chinese ideas and
solutions in order to strengthen global governance and
address humanitarian issues.
Together with the international community, we
stand ready to continue to actively participate in
multilateral and bilateral humanitarian relief operations
and continue to provide support and assistance, within
our capacity, to countries in need.
Mr. França Danese (Brazil): I welcome you to
the Security Council, Mr. President. I thank Albania
for organizing this open debate. It is an opportunity
for us to reflect on innovative ways to increase the
effectiveness of humanitarian action. I also thank the
briefers for their insightful remarks.
Humanitarian action is not a means to put a conflict
to an end. It is a way to mitigate the suffering of the
most vulnerable, often in contexts of war. The more
effective the humanitarian aid, the more lives can be
spared, the more hope there will be after the conflict.
The 2005 humanitarian reform agenda was a crucial
step in that direction. The cluster approach improved
the distribution of tasks and made responsibilities
clearer. Nevertheless, the clusters are not self-sufficient.
Humanitarian providers do not operate in isolation
from economic actors and from the communities
they assist. They depend on suppliers, transportation
and logistics, banks, information and communication
technologies and a myriad of other services to discharge
their responsibilities. Public-private partnerships are
already a reality on the ground and exist out of sheer
necessity. We must explore even further the private
sector’s potential to support humanitarian assistance.
We must also ensure that the private sector will have
appropriate conditions to participate in humanitarian
assistance. For instance, in contexts where sanctions
apply, the fear of being held criminally accountable
have impelled banks and other companies to hinder
the provision of neutral assistance by humanitarian
providers. The United Nations Special Rapporteurs on
counter-terrorism and human rights and on the impact
of unilateral coercive measures have pointed out that
reality in various reports.
Brazil reiterates the importance of resolution 2664
(2022), which addresses the causes of overcompliance
of counter-terrorist financing regulations that impedes

S/PV.9418

the provision of impartial humanitarian assistance.
We are concerned about what we perceive as a trend
towards the growing politicization of humanitarian
responses and the selective application of international
humanitarian law. That trend is inconsistent with the
fundamental principles of neutrality, independence,
impartiality and humanity, which are inherent to
humanitarian action.
Brazil has seen an increase in the influx of refugees
and migrants from different regions of the world. To
rise up to the challenges brought by this situation, the
Brazilian Government took several measures to assist
those in need. Migrants, refugees and asylum-seekers,
without any kind of discrimination, benefit from full
access to public services, including health care and
vaccination, regardless of migratory status. We have
facilitated procedures to grant humanitarian visas to
a number of nationalities. Our migration law has been
reformed to facilitate regularization and socioeconomic
integration. Our refugee law is well advanced and
deeply rooted in humanitarian principles.
We have also established partnerships with the
private sector to enable the integration of refugees
and migrants into our society. We have created a
database of refugees’ and migrants’ curricula vitae
to which companies searching for employees have
direct access. Furthermore, the Government helped
to set up a fund, supported by private donors, to
finance part of the so-called interiorization strategy.
That aims to relocate Venezuelans who wish to do so
from the northern border of Brazil to other cities in
the country. In close partnership with civil society,
international organizations and the private sector, it
has already benefited more than 100,000 migrants,
relocated to nearly 1,000 Brazilian cities throughout
the country, offering them improved opportunities for
socioeconomic integration.
A whole-of-society approach to humanitarian aid
strengthens our power to assist people in the grip of
conflict, natural disasters and forced displacement. Let
us make full use of that powerful tool.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this important
and useful debate. And let me start by thanking Executive
Director McCain, Mr. Cohen and Mr. Miebach for their
informative briefings.
On Tuesday, we rose to offer our condolences to the
people of Libya and Morocco following their losses (see

23-2678313/32

S/PV.9418

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.9415). I do that again today, but this is also a tragic
reminder of the need for us to explore every avenue
to maximize our humanitarian response to the many
challenges the world faces today against a backdrop of
soaring humanitarian need. And in that, the role of the
private sector is becoming increasingly important. As
we have heard, private actors can provide knowledge,
expertise and investment to tackle humanitarian need,
reduce threats and build resilience.
The case of the FSO SAFER oil tanker in Yemen
is a good example of a private-public partnership that
had real impact to an item on the Council’s agenda. By
working together, public and private actors removed
over 1 million barrels of oil from the decaying FSO
SAFER oil tanker. In doing so, they averted a major
environmental, humanitarian and economic catastrophe.
I want to highlight three further areas in which
public and private actors can work together in this spirit.
First, we can bring together all efforts to sustain
peace. As the Council has heard many times, conflict is
the main driver of humanitarian need. The private sector
can play a role in peacebuilding and preventing conflict.
For example, the United Kingdom has supported the
development of peace bonds, a new investment category
to develop finance for peace. We should continue to
champion public-private collaboration in support of
international peace and security.
Secondly, we can use all the tools at our disposal to
get ahead of crises before they hit. In that context, the
United Kingdom has collaborated with humanitarian
and private actors on disaster risk financing. We
have supported the risk transfer mechanism of the
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent
Societies (IFRC), which has the potential to unlock
$22 million of private funding in humanitarian crises.
That could enable the IFRC to reach an additional
6 million vulnerable people.
Thirdly and finally, the private sector can support
better humanitarian responses through new technology.
For example, the United Kingdom has invested in
mobile innovation funds, which have supported rapid
detection and treatment of cholera. That includes a tool
to reduce the cholera detection time from three days to
just 30 minutes. That innovation is vital for a disease
which has been particularly devastating in Syria, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Myanmar
this year.
14/32

14/09/2023

It is clear that public-private partnerships have the
potential to transform humanitarian action, and we
look forward to continuing to work together to tap into
that potential.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I thank the briefers for their
very insightful briefings.
The world faces dire humanitarian crises. The
midyear update of the Global Humanitarian Overview
this year reveals $55 billion required to assist the
targeted 249 million people, but only approximately
$11 billion has been provided as of midyear. This
situation clearly threatens international peace and
security, necessitating urgent discussions and the
reinforcement of humanitarian aid, including through
public-private partnerships. This meeting therefore
provides a timely platform for this vital discourse.
One central question today is how the private
sector can bolster United Nations efforts to tackle
humanitarian crises stemming from conflict. I would
like to highlight a few successful collaborations in
that regard.
Fast Retailing, the parent company of UNIQLO,
has a 12-year partnership with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees under which
it has provided clothing to refugees, and recent efforts
include a sewing skills training project in Bangladesh
aimed at empowering 1,000 Rohingya refugee women
by 2025, promoting self-reliance.
NEC and Waseda University have collaborated
with the International Committee of the Red Cross on
landmine detection technology in pursuit of advancing
humanitarian assistance through innovation.
Toyota Tsusho has partnered with the World Food
Programme to establish a logistics training centre in
Ghana to enhance humanitarian aid supply capacity in
West Africa.
Those are fine examples of the private sector
finding a nexus between its business and humanitarian
needs, but the public sector can help in mobilizing
private funding as well. For example, in order to support
humanitarian efforts for displaced Ukrainians in the
wake of Russia’s unlawful aggression against Ukraine,
the Japan Bank for International Cooperation has
provided guarantees for the issuance of samurai bonds
amounting to ¥93 billion by the Polish Development
Bank. Those funds are designated to encompass critical
23-26783

14/09/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.9418

areas such as medical care, education, housing facilities
and social security.

promoting public-private partnership solutions in
addressing ever-increasing humanitarian needs.

Providing the public and private sector with an
opportunity to encounter each other on the global
stage is also important. Last weekend, former Foreign
Minister Hayashi visited Ukraine together with
representatives from Japanese private companies,
including Rakuten, which had already contributed
500 generators to Ukraine, to discuss with Ukrainian
leaders various issues, including Ukraine’s recovery
and reconstruction.

Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank Albania for convening this important open
debate. The briefings delivered by Ms. Cindy McCain,
Executive Director of the World Food Programme
(WFP), Mr. Jared Cohen and Mr. Michael Miebach
were particularly informative on the role of the
private sector in responding to the alarming global
humanitarian situation.

Moreover, as a co-convenor of the upcoming
second Global Refugee Forum in December, the
Japanese Government also aims to inspire wider
private sector involvement in improving refugee and
host communities’ living conditions with the global
refugee and displaced population exceeding 100 million
and growing.
I talked about facilitating the public-private
nexus, mitigating risks for private funding and
providing encounters, but in order to build a successful
partnership, we also need to interact. We need to hear
from the private sector more, rather than merely talking
in a lofty manner. Notably, the private sector is eager to
showcase its support for the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs). For instance, Keidanren, the Japan
Business Federation, which consists of 17 major
Japanese companies, met with various United Nations
agencies earlier this week to explore collaboration
opportunities for advancing the SDGs. By highlighting
that support for United Nations humanitarian action,
aligned with our commitment to achieving the SDGs,
we can harness that enthusiasm.
In 2017, the Japanese Government introduced the
Japan SDGs Award, motivating companies to promote
SDGs-related efforts by acknowledging and publicizing
their contributions. That award has in fact already
recognized several humanitarian initiatives, such
as Euglena, a biotechnology company that received
the award in 2022 for providing food assistance to
underprivileged farmers and Rohingya refugees in
Bangladesh. The founder of Euglena was also in New
York among the Keidanren delegation.
Neglecting humanitarian needs, which may further
destabilize fragile regions and exacerbate conflicts,
helps no one, whether in the public or private sphere. I
would like to conclude by reiterating that the Security
Council, together with the private sector, must continue

We are witnessing a worrisome and unprecedented
deterioration of humanitarian conditions in many
regions across the globe. We know that more than
360 million people around the world need humanitarian
aid, and we are also aware of the significant shortfall
in funding to cover urgent needs, amounting to nearly
$55 billion. Wherever wars and climate disasters
strike, humanitarian workers must respond to an
array of negative consequences that cause suffering to
civilian populations, including hunger, thirst, lack of
medicines, disrupted schooling, family separations,
sexual violence and other human rights violations.
Unfortunately, as we can clearly see, we the scale
of humanitarian needs is rising at the opposite pace
to that of available funding, which is struggling to be
mobilized. When funding is allocated to situations, it
can sometimes be to the detriment of certain wars that
have been all but forgotten because they are too far
away, too old and have become almost commonplace,
no longer attracting priority funding. Among those
forgotten situations are the African countries of the
Sahel, the Horn of Africa and the Lake Chad basin,
which are at the crossroads of multifaceted crises that
are hampering their economic growth, undermining
their resilience to internal and external challenges and
forcing them to resort to external humanitarian aid. In
that context, the resources needed for investment are
difficult to mobilize.
We welcome that Emergency Relief Coordinator
Martin Griffiths released $125 million on 5 September
from the Central Emergency Response Fund in aid
of 14 countries through the Fund’s underfunded
emergencies window. My country has shouldered its
share of the burden by contributing $2 million to the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees towards the humanitarian response plans
for two countries of the Central African region that
are bearing the full brunt of the consequences of the

23-2678315/32

S/PV.9418

Maintenance of international peace and security

crisis in the Sudan. It is clear that additional efforts are
needed from donors in order to cover the extent of the
needs. To date, only 30 per cent of all needs are funded.
We are a long way off, especially if we consider that in
many of those humanitarian situations, the prospects
for conflict resolution, development financing and
resource mobilization in the context of strengthening
adaptation to climate change are dwindling.
Multilateral humanitarian action requires adequate,
sufficient and predictable funding if it is to be effective.
Private actors are key partners in that regard, in a global
context in which hunger is rife and food insecurity and
malnutrition continue to gain ground. The response to
those persistent challenges must be built in cooperation
with international and regional financial institutions,
within the framework of partnerships aimed at boosting
economies and restoring the production capacities
necessary to enable countries to take their destiny
back into their own hands. That entails a commitment
to strengthening the humanitarian-peace-development
nexus by taking a long-term approach in carrying
out humanitarian responses and bearing in mind that
effectively helping a community, village or country
involves responding to emergencies, while at the
same time providing those affected with the ability to
prevent and adapt to crises. That is particularly true in
situations of natural disasters and climate crises, but
also in situations of armed conflict, in which there are
myriad negative impacts on basic infrastructure and
means of production.
According to the latest joint report by UNICEF,
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations, the WFP, the International Fund
for Agricultural Development and the World Health
Organization, between 691 million and 783 million
people suffered from hunger in 2022, an increase of
122 million as compared to 2019. Africa, where one in
five people suffer from hunger, remains the hardesthit region. That persistence of hunger in certain
regions, such as Africa, West Asia and the Caribbean,
demonstrates the limits of an approach based solely on
the provision of basic food aid. It is necessary to respond
to pressing needs while investing in economic recovery.
While it has become commonplace for United Nations
humanitarian aid programmes to include financial
services for populations as part of their modus operandi,
that type of aid would benefit from being systematized
and oriented towards the implementation of projects
designed to strengthen the resilience of populations,
16/32

14/09/2023

particularly with regard to women, and with the aim of
putting value into and fostering local know-how. In that
regard, the strengthening of synergies between United
Nations specialized agencies and the private sector must
be supported as part of the sharing of responsibilities.
As part of the efforts to explore new financing
and participation mechanisms, private companies, but
also other non-State actors, such as non-governmental
organizations, research institutes and think tanks, can be
effective partners in providing data, human or technical
capacity-building and monitoring resources with a view
to preventing conflicts or natural disasters. Science
must be leveraged for the benefit decision-making,
including through early-warning mechanisms for risk
management. We need to go beyond the framework
of traditional donors in order to make better use of
all the private-sector resources that could be used
for the benefit of humanitarian assistance. United
Nations specialized agencies and other humanitarian
partners could also increase the resilience of their
programmes by developing a partnership approach
with communities and population centres benefiting
from aid — for example, in areas facing protracted
conflict — by promoting the consumption of products
grown or processed by those communities. The idea of
a resilience index for humanitarian response should be
made systematic for long-term crises.
Another way of strengthening the private sector’s
participation in humanitarian responses is to increase
its means of harnessing the financial resources at its
disposal through innovative mechanisms. In that regard,
I would like to underscore the importance of climate
financing through innovative mechanisms, as well as
the need to increase the role of the United Nations in
the area of taxation, specifically through international
financial transactions.
I would like to conclude by reminding everyone
of the basic principles of respect for international
humanitarian law and compliance with Council
resolutions, in particular resolution 2417 (2018), on
food insecurity and armed conflict, and resolution
2573 (2021), which condemns the use of starvation as
a weapon of war. I also want to remind members that
no situation justifies the use of famine as a weapon of
war and that warring parties are obliged to facilitate
the access of humanitarian workers to all areas and
all people in need. Aid to the suffering should never
be politicized.
23-26783

14/09/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

In conclusion, I would like to commend the
extraordinary work of humanitarian personnel, who
often work in difficult situations, at times risking their
lives in hostile environments. Less than one month
after we marked World Humanitarian Day, I reiterate
my country’s support and gratitude to the people whose
job it is to assist those most in need and restore hope to
the most vulnerable.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
We thank Albania for organizing today’s debate on a
subject that is important for Switzerland, which has a
long tradition of humanitarianism. And of course I also
thank the briefers for their contributions.
I believe it is now obvious, and the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Albania has reminded us, that we
are facing a global humanitarian crisis. The world
is being ravaged by more than 100 armed conflicts
that are lasting longer and longer. The number of
displaced people has more than doubled in the past 10
years. The number of people with humanitarian needs
has increased more than fivefold, and the Executive
Director of the World Food Programme has shown us
shocking statistics on food insecurity. And as suffering
increases, funding decreases. In 2022, not quite half of
the world’s humanitarian needs were funded.
My first observation is as obvious as it is alarming.
The gap between humanitarian needs and the capacity
to meet them continues to widen. We know the reasons
for it — the adverse effects of climate change, weak
governance, the consequences of the recent pandemic
and armed conflicts. Conversely, any dispute that
is resolved peacefully and any conflict for which a
political solution is found help to reduce humanitarian
needs. The Council is on the front line in that regard.
My second, however, is encouraging. Humanitarian
needs can be reduced if we invest more in anticipatory
action, based on risk assessment and management, and
if we work in partnership. We are all aware that new
technologies can play an important role in that regard.
They make early-warning systems more effective, as they
also do for the processing of data, whose collection, use
and deployment must always be secure and responsible.
In addition, we cannot underestimate the importance
of stable and secure Internet connections, which enable
people to access both information and the help they
need to quickly reach others in need. At times, it is a
question of survival. Today’s meeting is particularly
timely if we are to take full advantage of technological

S/PV.9418

innovation, because we need to strengthen partnerships
between the public and private sectors. To illustrate
Switzerland’s wealth of experience in that area, I will
provide two quite straightforward examples.
First, the Humanitarian and Resilience Investing
initiative, launched in 2019 by the World Economic
Forum at Davos, aims to encourage private capital
investment in financially sustainable opportunities for
communities in fragile contexts.
Secondly, since the 1990s, Switzerland has been
supporting cash and voucher assistance. By focusing
on local markets and supporting and investing in small
businesses run by women, that assistance enables
people affected by a crisis or disaster to quickly cover
their most urgent needs. It also stimulates local demand,
while helping to create livelihoods throughout the value
chain, from producers to sellers. Collaboration with
the private sector has improved the efficiency of such
assistance and should be strengthened. Based on our
experience, we have drawn the following lessons.
First, public and private players can and must adopt
common approaches, in both the short and the long
term, if we are to meet the specific challenges of fragile
contexts. Such partnerships can make a difference for
millions of people on the ground.
Secondly, local actors must be at the centre of any
humanitarian response. Their expertise and networks
should be better integrated.
Lastly, despite the progress made in the past 10
years, the potential of public-private partnerships
remains underexploited. In fragile contexts, the ad
hoc promotion of mixed financing models can help to
reduce risks. In addition, raising awareness of ethical
practices in the private sector remains important.
Any action linked to private-sector involvement and
innovative financing must be based on humanitarian
principles and human rights. In fragile contexts, it is
also essential to strengthen the exercise of due diligence
on human rights, in accordance with the United Nations
Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights.
For Switzerland, those principles fully apply to all
our partnerships.
In conclusion, I would like to once again underscore
the responsibility of the Council. Experience with
public-private partnerships is also discussed in
the Economic and Social Council and the General
Assembly. Once again, in that regard, we call for closer

23-2678317/32

S/PV.9418

Maintenance of international peace and security

cooperation between the Security Council and the other
organs of the United Nations system.
Lastly, we always come back to the same key
conclusion. I want to stress the Council’s essential
role in conflict prevention with a view to reducing
humanitarian needs. The Council must continue
to seek the unity that will enable it to take action to
prevent and swiftly resolve conflicts in order to ensure
lasting peace.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Executive Director of the World Food Programme,
Mr. Cohen and Mr. Miebach for their briefings.
At the end of 2022, the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs estimated that humanitarian
needs for 2023 would increase to $51.5 billion, the first
time that it had announced such an amount. Regrettably,
as is often the case, other crises emerged — earthquakes
in Türkiye and Syria, the crisis in the Sudan and, very
recently, the devastating earthquake in Morocco and
flooding in Libya. In addition, global food insecurity,
caused by Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine,
continues to worsen. The initial estimates fell short
of reality.
The participation of the private sector in humanitarian
initiatives has considerably increased over the past 15
years. That is good news. The response to the war on
Ukraine and the commitment of the private sector to
that response are examples of what can be envisaged in
the future. In France and Europe, that partnership has
been strengthened with the signing of agreements with
businesses and companies that want to be involved in
humanitarian efforts, which is commendable. Together
with the World Food Programme, we are specifically
mobilizing the private sector to take part in the work of
the School Meals Coalition, whose first global meeting
will be held in Paris in October.
We must all be innovative, and the private sector
can be a valuable partner, not just in responding to
crises and disasters but in preventing and forecasting
them. To that end, it is our duty to give thought together
to modernization, innovation and the effectiveness of
humanitarian action. Nonetheless, a number of questions
arise that must be answered if we are to ensure respect
by all parties for humanitarian principles and prevent
unwanted effects. Exchanges such as today’s meeting
contribute to that, and we encourage them.
18/32

14/09/2023

Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s
open debate on an issue that is enormously important
and relevant. We also thank the briefers for their
introductory remarks.
With 360 million people around the world in need
of humanitarian assistance — an increase of 30 per
cent compared to last year — the gap between the need
for humanitarian assistance and funding is widening.
We agree with the Secretary-General with regard to
the chronic underfunding of humanitarian assistance
due to a shortfall of approximately $41 billion, which
is pushing the system to the limit. The recent release
of $125 million from the Central Emergency Response
Fund to boost underfunded humanitarian operations in
14 countries is a case in point.
In such a complex context, the private sector can
play a vital role, as today’s briefers noted in their
introductory statements. The expertise they can bring
and their capacity for innovation are certainly valuable
tools for scaling up and streamlining efforts to respond
to humanitarian needs. In many countries, the private
sector is a key member of communities affected by
humanitarian emergencies and is often among the first
responders on the ground.
It is encouraging to note that there are successful
experiences of public-private partnerships in the
humanitarian field. The Secretary-General’s reports
on strengthening the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance indicate positive results from
cooperation between the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the International Organization for Migration
with companies involved in technology, finance and
construction. In addition, the World Food Programme
works closely with partners in the private sector.
While there is no denying that private sector
involvement in humanitarian action offers great
potential, it also poses challenges. The following are
recommendations that could enhance the potential in
that respect.
First, initiatives aimed at strengthening the private
sector’s strategic engagement in the humanitarian,
development and peace agendas deserve to be
supported. In that regard, we support the work of the
Connecting Business Initiative, launched at the 2016
23-26783

14/09/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

World Humanitarian Summit and driven by OCHA and
the United Nations Development Programme.
Secondly, any form of public-private partnership
must adhere to the principles of humanity, neutrality,
impartiality and independence and be linked to
the international humanitarian system in order to
ensure coherence.
Thirdly, there is a need to strengthen the normative
framework for the relationship between OCHA
and the private sector, which is underpinned by the
United Nations Global Compact, the guidelines on
the cooperation between the United Nations and the
business sector and the OCHA-World Economic Forum
guiding principles for public-private collaboration for
humanitarian action.
Fourthly, public-private partnerships can be more
effective if they build on each party’s strengths, respond
to needs identified by the affected populations, promote
local capacity-building and establish a clear distinction
between humanitarian and commercial activities.
I should point out the centrality of that issue
in terms of food security and even in terms of the
spectre of hunger and conflict. The Black Sea Grain
Initiative is an example that involved efforts by many
actors. Moreover, by involving trade on the one hand
and humanitarian support on the other, its impact was
central not only in Ukraine, but in acutely food-insecure
countries that depend on the assistance that the World
Food Programme can provide.
In conclusion, we believe that developing
partnerships between humanitarian actors and the
private sector, with the shared goal of alleviating
human suffering, is a valuable tool to ensure that the
most vulnerable receive the support that they need.
Mr.
Irachande
Gouveia
(Mozambique):
Mozambique thanks the Albanian presidency for
convening this important open debate. We also thank
Ms. McCain, Mr. Cohen and Mr. Miebach for their
pertinent contributions.
We live in an increasingly interconnected
and complex world, faced with multiple crisis and
emergencies — some manmade and others natural, but
all of them competing for limited resources, time and
attention. In that context, building collaborative efforts
and partnerships is more than ever not only a strategic
move, but a moral and survival imperative.

S/PV.9418

People in need of humanitarian assistance, refugees
and their families face unspeakable odds. After all they
have endured and survived, they should not have to face
the agony of death just because our global humanitarian
architecture cannot evolve or innovate. The latest
numbers make that urgency more acute. According to
the latest update of the Global Humanitarian Overview
2023, approximately 363 million people worldwide are
in need of humanitarian assistance. The estimated cost
to meet that assistance is $55 billion. In the meantime,
the gap between financial requirements and resources
was evaluated at $41 billion. In a world of plenty and
riches, that cannot be allowed to be the new normal. It
is a scar on our collective conscience.
Against that backdrop, partnerships between
Governments, private sector entities and multilateral
agencies, notably the United Nations and other
key humanitarian actors, need to be given proper
consideration. After all, from the recent fight against
the coronavirus disease pandemic to efforts towards the
eradication of endemics such as malaria, including in my
own country, and the conquest of some of humankind’s
last frontiers, public-private partnerships have proven
their worth. The humanitarian sector should not be
an exception.
Those partnerships brought not only financial
resources but also innovation, agility and a resultsoriented approach often homed in competitive markets.
Their ability to rapidly mobilize resources, combined
with a deep understanding of local market dynamics,
provides unique synergies with Governments. In regions
marred by conflicts or affected by natural disasters,
private entities have long played an instrumental role
in rebuilding infrastructure, creating jobs and fostering
community resilience under the guidance of local
entities. That needs to be scaled up.
A critical examination reveals three primary arenas
in which the private sector can magnify the impact
of humanitarian assistance: finance, logistics and
technology. In finance, the private sector’s capability to
harness funds can bridge oft-mentioned funding gaps,
while innovative financial instruments can ensure
sustained support for protracted crises. Logistics, a
forte of many private enterprises, when merged with
the expansive reach of humanitarian agencies, ensures
that aid reaches the last mile promptly. Technology, in
today’s digitalized era, can revolutionize humanitarian
responses.
From
data-driven
decision-making
to the development of cutting-edge solutions for

23-2678319/32

S/PV.9418

Maintenance of international peace and security

communication, surveillance, early warning and
resource distribution, private tech enterprises can
enhance the scale, efficiency and effectiveness
of interventions.
The essence of public-private collaboration should
be rooted in the practices of Member States. First
and foremost, national Governments are primarily
responsible for supporting their affected communities.
While partnerships are valuable, they should not
overshadow or diminish a Government’s fundamental
duty to care for its citizens during crises.
Secondly, the sacred humanitarian principles of
humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence
must always guide entities and institutions offering
emergency relief to refugees and displaced individuals.
Our experience in disaster management in Mozambique
evolved from the civil-war period in the 1980s to
the coordination of post-emergency interventions
in the 1990s, culminating in 2020 in the creation of
our own National Institute of Disaster Management.
Initially an entity under the aegis of the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs, coordinating external aid, the National
Institute of Disaster Management has evolved into
a fully autonomous and legally independent entity,
pioneering various aspects of the integration of
public-private partnerships, enhancing coordination
and guaranteeing quick delivery. Now it is at the
forefront of our efforts in building resilience in the
face of climate-related challenges and other natural and
human-made emergencies.
In conclusion, we believe that in the face of the
enormous challenges to humanitarian assistance, we
need a paradigm shift in that area that takes account
of new agents and forms. Social entrepreneurs and
millennials are using frontier technology such as
blockchain, artificial intelligence and other technologies
to achieve sustainable development. I am sure they will
invest in a cause as noble as humanitarian assistance if
given the chance. Considering its long association in this
regard as a past and current recipient of humanitarian
aid, the African continent has a lot to contribute to such
discussions, and we look forward to doing so.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I thank Ms. Cindy McCain, Executive
Director of the World Food Programme, as well as
Mr. Cohen and Mr. Miebach, for their briefings.
We share the view that the provision of humanitarian
assistance to populations in need remains one of the most
20/32

14/09/2023

important areas of the work of the United Nations and its
specialized agencies. Given the increase year on year in
the world’s humanitarian needs, the issue of mobilizing
more support, including financial support, to ensure
the implementation of the relevant United Nations
projects and programmes grows ever more resonant.
As has already been mentioned, according to the most
recent estimates by the Office for the Coordination for
Humanitarian Affairs, more than 360 million people
around the world are currently in need of some form of
humanitarian assistance. In order to implement all its
country-specific humanitarian appeals for the current
year, the United Nations needs $55.2 billion, of which
only 29 per cent, or $15.8 billion, has been received. In
other words, the shortfall in donations is now almost
double the entire annual amount — $20 billion — of
funding requested by the humanitarian wing of the
United Nations as recently as 2016.
It is notable that Ukraine steadily remains the
leader in attracting donor attention. This year alone,
the United Nations has already received $1.83 billion
to provide humanitarian aid to Ukraine, which is
$300 million more than the support given to the longsuffering population of Syria and $1 billion more than
the aid to the ordinary people of Afghanistan, who
have endured the bitter taste of the NATO and United
States experiments in democratization in full. As we
know, many of those people are now so desperate that
they agree to sell their organs, while some are selling
their children in order to find a way to feed the rest of
the family. Some of our colleagues prefer not to talk
about that, however. I particularly want to emphasize
the situation in African States whose independent
economic and agricultural development has for decades
been deliberately limited by their former colonial
masters and is exacerbated by neocolonial instruments
that only worsen their dependence.
As we understand it, against the backdrop of a
truly dangerous situation in which the humanitarian
needs in the world are only growing, Western donors
have no alternative but to look for ways to shift the
financial responsibility for the consequences of the
crises they have unleashed all over the world onto
others and maintain the possibility that they can
continue to sponsor coups and wars for the benefit of
their conglomorates and arms manufacturers, without
being distracted by any incidental protests. We have
repeatedly drawn the Council’s attention to that issue.
We have also continued to study the so-called proactive
23-26783

14/09/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

approach to humanitarian assistance advocated by our
colleagues, as well as the possibility of coupling it with
development efforts. We have seen that donors allow
development projects to be part of humanitarian aid
efforts in some countries but not in others.
We nonetheless believe that it is justified to involve
business in the form of public-private partnerships, both
bilaterally and in international humanitarian activities.
The private sector accounts for only $115.7 million
in the provision of humanitarian funding, which is
clearly inadequate. However, it is not just about raw
numbers. Joint work with private entities often leads
to more effective solutions to humanitarian problems,
strengthens the resource base of humanitarian
operations and thereby increases the number of lives
saved, which is the international community’s key task.
At the same time, Governments’ consent to receive
assistance must remain an absolute requirement for
commercial entities’ participation in international
humanitarian operations, along with strict adherence to
the principles of neutrality, humanity, impartiality and
independence in providing that assistance. Beyond that,
with regard to public-private partnerships, we believe
that the principle of having no economic or political
interests or conditions in relation to recipient countries
should be respected. In that context, we welcome
healthy market competition among the suppliers of
humanitarian goods and services within the framework
of United Nations procurement and support organizing
those efforts on a non-discriminatory basis. The
procedure for economic operators’ participation
in international tenders should be transparent and
clearly understood, and should not be influenced by
third parties. That is also the responsibility of the
Secretariat. We would like to remind the Council
that the agreement between the United Nations and
the European Union (EU) on their programme of
cooperation on humanitarian aid was predicated on the
condition that suppliers cannot be operators that come
under EU sanctions. I am referring to the Financial and
Administrative Framework Agreement. The SecretaryGeneral clarified at the time that he would continue to
be guided only by sanctions adopted by the Security
Council. It would be interesting to know what that EU
demand, which is irrelevant to the United nations as
a donor, and the judicious response of the SecretaryGeneral mean in practice.
We would be remiss if we failed to once again draw
the Council’s attention to the illegitimate unilateral

S/PV.9418

restrictive measures imposed by the countries of the
collective West and the so-called over-compliance
effect on the corporate sector, which continue to have a
negative impact on the work of the entire international
humanitarian system, including, as we have said, on
promising public-private partnership projects. The
West’s vaunted humanitarian exemptions from its
sanctions packages do not work in practice, as the
Special Procedures of the Human Rights Council have
convincingly and factually documented. As the United
Nations findings show, even when economic operators
deliver assistance to those in need, they must be able to
demonstrate post facto that the aid was of a humanitarian
nature, and if not may be subject to prosecution,
including criminal prosecution. In such circumstances,
it is easier for businesses to minimize their risks and
refrain from being involved in such operations in the
first place. It is the populations of States in need that
suffer the most as a result. The people of Syria who went
through the devastating earthquake know about that
first-hand. They are also fully aware of who it was that
deprived them of bread and doomed them to destitution
by occupying their lands and plundering Syrian wheat
from the fertile lands beyond the Euphrates.
We draw attention to the fact that, in the concept
note (S/2023/631/Rev.1, annex) that the President’s
delegation prepared for today’s open debate, only the
Black Sea Grain Initiative was cited as a successful
example of public-private partnership. It seems that
that fact best proves the thesis we have long voiced
about the initiative being purely commercial, and
not at all humanitarian, in nature. It is obviously
a partnership between Western Governments and
Western corporations, which this year have profited
on grain exports twice over, on both the export of
Ukrainian products owned by their largest corporations
and the sale of processed goods by European countries
that, as they assure us, perform only a transit role — at
even higher costs. The lion’s share of those exports
is feed grain and corn fodder at clearly commercial
prices. At the same time, concessional deliveries to
the poorest countries, including through the World
Food Programme, amounted to a mere 1 million tons
of grain, which account for 0.2 per cent of global
trade. We therefore have a rhetorical question to put
forward — what is the humanitarian objective of
those deliveries?
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): We begin by thanking
Albania for convening this important and novel open

23-2678321/32

S/PV.9418

Maintenance of international peace and security

debate and note with appreciation the insightful
briefings by Ms. Cindy McCain, Mr. Jared Cohen and
Mr. Michael Miebach.
The unprecedented level of humanitarian needs
globally, which is being driven strongly by such factors
as conflicts, insecurity, climate change, natural disasters
and the prevailing global economic headwinds, should
perforce require all of us to reconsider how we mobilize
support at all levels for effective responses. As the
August update of the Global Humanitarian Overview
indicates, 248 million of the 363 million people in
need of assistance around the world require some
$55.2 billion if we are to be able to respond to their
needs. With a staggering financial requirement gap of
$39 billion at this point in the year, new opportunities
beyond the known limits should be explored to better
understand how the interests of the private sector can
be made to dovetail with a universal and solidaritybased framework of multilateralism in delivering
humanitarian assistance to those most in need. In
that regard, Ghana welcomes this intergovernmental
opportunity for discussions on sustaining the private
sector’s involvement in humanitarian action and would
like to highlight four main points.
First, we hold that public-private partnerships
for humanitarian action should be based on shared
principles and values that respect the core consensus
of the international community on humanitarian action,
which is based on humanity, neutrality, impartiality
and independence. Without common principles, we
face the risk of undermining the convergence that we
seek between the influence of the market and that of
humanitarian actors. In that context, we believe that
the work that has been done by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the World
Economic Forum in developing guiding principles
for public-private collaboration for humanitarian
action, the Agenda for Humanity and the principles
jointly developed by a number of United Nations
funds and programmes with private sector companies
for humanitarian payments can serve as a basis for
deepening collaboration in response to growing
humanitarian needs.
Secondly, it is important to underscore that
partnerships for humanitarian action should be
undergirded by the application of emerging technologies
as a strategic goal to anticipate needs and enhance
the reach and scale of humanitarian responses, but
also the efficiency and effectiveness of humanitarian
22/32

14/09/2023

performance. Equally important is the need for United
Nations humanitarian actors to continue to embrace new
technologies in the humanitarian architecture; to pick up
early-warning signals, coordinate and deploy resources
when doing so can be most effective; and to identify
the needs of the victims in ways that can help create
sustainable and self-reliant humanitarian outcomes.
Thirdly, we encourage the strong development of
public-private partnerships at the regional level to help
diversify capabilities, create regional resilience and
nurture home-grown experiences and solutions. We
therefore call for cooperation between the private sector
companies on the African continent and such regional
humanitarian frameworks as the African Union’s
humanitarian policy and the Economic Community of
West African States humanitarian policy, in order to
advance sustainable regional humanitarian outcomes.
We are mindful that, in advancing Africa’s stability
and resilience, we would also reduce the risks faced by
the continent’s private sector companies and facilitate
the interest of our Governments in fulfilling national
aspirations. We therefore encourage the continuing
development of a conducive environment that
sharpens the convergence of interests and mobilizes
joined-up action in dealing effectively with regional
humanitarian crises.
Fourthly, at the heart of addressing the global
humanitarian crisis is the need to prioritize investments
that address the root causes of growing humanitarian
needs. In that regard, we call for critical attention to
be paid to the structural and institutional drivers that
are affecting governance and development and call for
all segments of society, particularly women and youth,
to be at the forefront of national processes — they
cannot be left behind. We also urge the Peacebuilding
Commission to continue to play a role, in particular in
helping countries resolve fragilities, including conflict
triggers, the impact of climate change and postcoronavirus disease recovery processes.
In conclusion, Ghana believes that, even as we
enhance public-private partnerships for humanitarian
action, solidarity must be sustained and strengthened
among Member States for times of great humanitarian
crisis. We therefore believe that the call to donors,
including for this year, would remain an important
one in filling financing gaps in humanitarian response
plans. We support the Secretary-General’s call in that
regard. Finally, as we look forward to a well-structured
partnership in dealing with humanitarian crises across
23-26783

14/09/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

the world, Ghana remains hopeful that such partnerships
at the national, regional and international levels will
help unlock innovative, effective and efficient ways
to deliver on resilient and sustainable societies, for the
benefit of the peoples of our shared world.
Ms. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank you, Mr. President, for hosting
this important discussion. We thank Executive
Director McCain for working to make the World Food
Programme a leader in advancing partnerships with
the private sector. We also thank our private sector
briefers, who have offered a compelling road map for
other companies to follow.
As the Security Council knows all too well, the
world’s most vulnerable are at a moment of great peril.
Humanitarian needs are growing at a blistering pace,
and the gap between the funding provided and United
Nations-assessed needs stands at nearly $40 billion.
Every day, it feels as if we see a new humanitarian crisis
emerge. Just this Tuesday, we witnessed the catastrophic
flooding that swept through Libya, claiming thousands
of lives, and over the weekend, we watched in horror as
a devastating earthquake rocked Morocco. We offer our
condolences to the peoples of Libya and Morocco, and
we stand in solidarity with them at this difficult time.
During our briefing yesterday (see S/PV.9417),
I shared that I had recently returned from a trip to
Chad’s border with the Sudan. The refugees that I
met with were deeply traumatized. Women and girls
had been victims of sexual violence, and children and
babies were severely malnourished. This is a grave
humanitarian emergency. And while the aid workers I
met are heroically working to save lives, they need the
international community to provide them with more
resources. I encourage everyone in this Chamber and
others to give more.
This moment calls for bold action. It calls for
breaking out of our business-as-usual model; it calls for
thinking holistically about how we address increasingly
protracted crises; and it calls for everyone, not just
Member States, but everyone with the means, to do
their part. And that is why today’s debate on how to
better engage the private sector is so important.
In recent years, four of the largest logistics
corporations — UPS, Agility, Maersk and DP
World — regularly joined forces in the logistic cluster,
led by the World Food Programme. The Connecting
Business initiative of the Office for the Coordination

S/PV.9418

of Humanitarian Affairs has broken ground, creating
a network of independent chambers of commerce
and private foundations committed to humanitarian
response efforts. In places like Haiti, where gang
violence is impeding humanitarian access, the private
sector is playing a vital role. Through Airlink, a
disaster logistics non-profit commercial and private
aviation organization and partner of the United States
Agency for International Development, we have created
a humanitarian air bridge. Commercial airlines have
donated capacity on their existing routes to transport
aid, while logistics providers ensured the smooth
movement of life-saving supplies. The result was a
watershed partnership that ensured cholera treatment
reached people in need.
The private sector has also stepped up to provide
aid to the Ukrainian people, who are suffering from
the devastating consequences of Putin’s brutal war
of aggression. Last year, private sector organizations
contributed cash and in-kind assistance to the Ukrainian
response, as well as elsewhere in the world, and the
World Central Kitchen, a pioneer in public-private
partnerships, has worked with local restaurants to feed
refugees on Ukraine’s border and around the world.
Earlier this year, the private sector also contributed
hundreds of millions of dollars to the earthquake
response in Türkiye. Closer to home, the United States
has been proud to work with organizations like the Tent
Partnership for Refugees, which has mobilized its 300plus corporate members to help refugees become jobready and to provide them with work.
These examples are only a scratch of the surface.
For too long we have turned exclusively to the private
sector for financing. To its credit, it has shown
enormous generosity. But in 2023, we know they
have so much more to offer. Their capacities, knowhow and innovations are tremendously needed. The
public sector must do more to proactively work with
the private sector, especially as we look to advance the
Sustainable Development Goals. The public sector must
harness the expertise of the private sector and translate
it into action. It is past time to invest and scale up this
relationship, and it is past time for us to welcome the
private sector through the front door. The world’s most
vulnerable are counting on us. Let us act with urgency,
and let us move forward in solidarity.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than three minutes
to carry out its work expeditiously. Flashing lights on

23-2678323/32

S/PV.9418

Maintenance of international peace and security

the collars of the microphones will prompt speakers to
bring their remarks to a close after three minutes.
I now give the floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your appointment as Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Republic of Albania, and to thank Albania for
convening this important meeting to consider ways
to advance the various partnerships to enhance the
efficiency of humanitarian assistance. I also thank
all the briefers — from the World Food Programme,
Goldman Sachs and Mastercard, respectively.
I join all those who expressed their condolences for
the victims of the recent earthquake in the Maghreb
and the floods in Libya. Egypt expresses its solidarity
with the two fraternal peoples and countries.
It is worrisome that reports of the United Nations
estimate that 345 million people are facing severe
food insecurity, which portends a real catastrophe, as
humanitarian needs have reached record levels, and
that 360 million people need urgent humanitarian
assistance. Accordingly, I would like to present Egypt’s
vision of how to overcome those challenges.
First, Egypt stresses the need to address the root
causes of the increasing humanitarian needs through
a comprehensive approach aimed at integrating the
achievement of sustainable development, on the
one hand, with considering the urgent need to settle
conflicts and humanitarian crises in accordance with
fixed standards consistent with the Charter of the
United Nations, on the other — all while boosting
economic growth rates and employment, eradicating
poverty, preserving State institutions and building their
capacities to face various challenges so as to ensure
sustainable peace and stability. I also echo the remarks
of Mr. Harold Agyeman, Permanent Representative of
Ghana, with regard to peacebuilding.
Secondly, Egypt notes the close link between
the high rates of hunger and food insecurity and the
increasing rates of armed conflicts, which confirms
the need for concerted international efforts to quickly
achieve Sustainable Development Goal 2, on eradicating
hunger and achieving food security. My country calls
for humanitarian partnerships to take that into account.
Thirdly, Egypt stresses the need for concerted
international efforts to support countries hosting
increasing numbers of migrants and refugees, displaced
24/32

14/09/2023

due to humanitarian reasons, especially in the light of
the global economic crisis that is casting a shadow on
developing countries. Egypt notes that it hosted nearly
9 million migrants and refugees from 58 countries.
We are committed to ensuring that they can enjoy all
basic services while they live and share their daily lives
with Egyptians outside of refugee camps. Ensuring
the sustainability of the efforts of countries hosting
those affected by humanitarian crises, including Egypt,
requires increased international support.
Fourthly, Egypt urges the private sector to play a
greater role in bridging the funding gap between donor
contributions and the needs of humanitarian operations.
We stress the importance of ensuring that efforts to
expand the number of partners providing humanitarian
assistance should not take place without considering
two main points. The first is full commitment to the
principles of humanitarian action, namely, neutrality,
independence, non-politicization and non-interference
in the internal affairs of beneficiary countries. The
second is recognition that partnerships with various
actors, including the private sector, should not be
a pretext for States and donors to not honour their
financial commitments to humanitarian operations on
the basis of the principle of international solidarity.
Egypt continues its national efforts, through the
Egyptian Agency of Partnership for Development, to
provide capacity-building support to African States.
Egypt is committed to supporting the efforts of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and stresses the responsibility of the private sector at
the national level, as well as the responsibility of the
international community.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Türkiye.
Mrs. Güven (Türkiye): I would like to express our
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for convening an
open debate on this important topic.
Humanitarian needs across the world are surging in
an era marked by overlapping crises, natural disasters,
conflicts, inequalities and increased uncertainty.
The lack of progress, even regress in some of the
Sustainable Development Goals is a great concern
for us all. The current level of development financing
and other means of implementation are far from
satisfactory. Investment gaps are hardly narrowing.
Funding for humanitarian operations is decreasing day
by day. The gap between funding requirements and
23-26783

14/09/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

donor contributions puts immense pressure on both
recipients and donor countries. Exploring innovative
approaches is therefore key to making humanitarian
operations more effective and inclusive. Finding longterm solutions to humanitarian crises is a necessity for
the promotion of the humanitarian-development nexus.
Against that backdrop, Türkiye has capitalized on
the fundamentals of its enterprising and humanitarian
foreign policy. My country has advocated for global
cooperation and effective multilateralism, as reflected
in its comprehensive and long-standing partnership
with the United Nations. That partnership has also
enabled the private sector to play its role. In that regard,
we hosted the first World Humanitarian Summit, in
2016. The Summit also served as a unique platform
for Governments, the United Nations, the private
sector and non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
to discuss new ways to address the most pressing
global challenges.
Türkiye’s solid partnership with the United Nations,
complemented by the private sector, has also made the
difference in addressing conflicts unfolding in our
region. Türkiye, together with the United Nations,
played a key role in the implementation of the Black
Sea Grain Initiative. The Initiative ensured the export
of over 33 million metric tons of grain and foodstuffs.
Through commercial vessels, the Initiative proved itself
to become a textbook example of good public-private
humanitarian partnership. Türkiye is continuing its
efforts to resume the Initiative by taking into account
the concerns of all stakeholders involved.
Türkiye’s partnership with the United Nations
has also been designed to promote the humanitariandevelopment nexus and to strengthen the role of the
private sector in that equation. In that respect, Türkiye
is the co-founder of the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP)’s Istanbul International Centre
for Private Sector in Development, facilitating the
contribution of the private sector towards achieving the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Türkiye also hosts and supports the United Nations
Technology Bank for the Least Developed Countries.
The Bank plays a crucial role as an important global
actor in the development efforts of the least developed
countries in science, technology and innovation,
together with relevant partners within and outside the
United Nations system, including the private sector.

S/PV.9418

Last but not least, Türkiye’s long-term recovery
vision, which was set in the aftermath of the devastating
earthquakes that hit Türkiye, is based on the principle
of build back better. It is indeed a good example of the
multi-stakeholder collaboration among Governments,
international organizations and the private sector. The
vision is developed by the Turkish authorities with
the contributions of the UNDP, the World Bank, the
European Union and supported by close cooperation
among the public and private sectors, as well as NGOs.
It aims to build greener and smarter with disaster
resilience and energy efficiency while building
permanent housing in the earthquake-affected areas.
It is our collective responsibility to find adequate
ways and means to fill the gaps and explore new
ways of collaboration among different actors in the
humanitarian and development fields. To that end,
Türkiye will continue to utilize its potential emanating
from its strong State tradition, central geographical
position, robust institutions and strong human resources.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Van Schalkwyk (South Africa): We thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this open debate. It is
especially pertinent considering the national disasters
that have occurred in Morocco and in Libya. We convey
our sympathies to our sister countries. We thank those
that briefed us today on this topic.
Armed conflict continues to cause and significantly
contribute to the worsening global humanitarian crisis.
It is the main cause of forced displacement, including
internal displacements, and protracted refugee
situations. The emergence of new conflicts also further
exacerbates already dire humanitarian situations.
While South Africa’s particular humanitarian
risk profile is primarily weather-related, we focus on
providing humanitarian assistance in conflict-induced
humanitarian contexts.
The South African Government continues to
establish public-private partnerships and recognizes that
innovative partnerships can leverage local and industry
expertise to strengthen emergency preparedness and
response. That also addresses challenges of limited
resources and other constraints to response.
The provision of humanitarian assistance often
requires the need to strengthen partnerships with
the United Nations and other humanitarian actors.

23-2678325/32

S/PV.9418

Maintenance of international peace and security

That necessitates that we support United Nationsled humanitarian responses that recall the Guiding
Principles for Public-Private Collaboration for
Humanitarian Action and ensures that the main
humanitarian principles of humanity, neutrality and
impartiality are respected and adhered to. Advancing
public-private humanitarian partnerships that respect
those principles could further help in strengthening
coordinated humanitarian responses and making them
more efficient and impactful. We believe that we should
prevent companies that are involved in conflict from
engaging in humanitarian action to avoid the obvious
conflict of interest.
The private sector can mitigate the occurrence
of conflict-driven humanitarian crises through clear
arrangements and procedures on the distribution of
humanitarian assistance. That includes the distribution
and mobilization of resources; establishing new finance
mechanisms for humanitarian relief in collaboration with
relevant agencies; the focus on sustainable financing
mechanisms, such as risk transfer or insurance, to
enhance resilience within States; and providing
enhanced technology for effective response. South
Africa has also leveraged partnerships to provide relief
items through wholesale and retail stores by voucher
system. That safeguards livelihoods in the various
sectors and ensures a return to normal operations.
South Africa will always maintain that conflict
should be prevented first to avoid the consequent
humanitarian situations. Likewise, it is important
to strengthen resilience at all levels and address
climate-induced humanitarian crises.
Finally,
we
reiterate
that
public-private
humanitarian partnership should be undertaken in a
manner that upholds the humanitarian principles, as
well as through cooperation with the United Nations
system and recognized humanitarian partners.
The President: I now give the floor to Mrs. Samson.
Mrs. Samson: I join others in expressing the
solidarity and the condolences of the European Union
(EU) to Morocco and Libya. We stand ready to support
them and are already doing so.
I am pleased to speak today on behalf of the
European Union and its member States.
The candidate countries Türkiye, Montenegro,
Serbia, Albania, the Republic of Moldova and Bosnia
and Herzegovina, the potential candidate country
26/32

14/09/2023

Georgia, as well as Monaco, align themselves with
this statement.
The gap between humanitarian needs and donor
funding is alarming. The combined impacts of climate
change, rising food prices and armed conflicts worldwide,
including Russia’s aggression against Ukraine, have
pushed humanitarian needs to unprecedented levels.
The international community should find creative new
ways to address the gap and achieve a more balanced
funding structure. Involving private sector actors, in
partnership with traditional public sector actors, can
improve the humanitarian response, particularly in two
ways: logistics and financing.
Logistics represents 60 to 80 per cent of all
emergency humanitarian spending. Optimizing
logistics will therefore help to close the funding gap. The
private sector can contribute specific logistical skills,
including supply chain management. New practices
and perspectives from global and local companies can
increase efficiency and even improve humanitarian
access. One example is the Logistics Emergency Team,
which is comprised of four of the largest global logistics
and transportation companies, working together to
support the Global Logistics Cluster and providing pro
bono support for emergency response and large-scale
natural disasters.
The EU is increasing its collaboration with the
private sector to fill logistical gaps in humanitarian
operations. We encourage strategic supply chain
management, following the humanitarian logistics
policy. New initiatives such as the European
Humanitarian Response Capacity can also contribute
to that collaborative spirit.
The EU also welcomes the Secretary-General’s
proposal for an emergency platform, which should
involve relevant actors from all parts of the world,
including the private sector, civil society and subject
matter experts. We are committed to engaging in
discussions towards an ambitious outcome document of
the Summit of the Future that includes that platform.
Funding is another area for partnership. While
there is some potential for increasing philanthropic
donations, the indications from the private sector itself
show greater potential in encouraging private sector
investment. Blended finance, which combines public
sector donations with private sector investment, has
been used extensively in development cooperation. That
practice can be expanded, especially in humanitarian
23-26783

14/09/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

contexts with long-term needs, in which marketbuilding and recovery can replace emergency financing.
The European Commission first committed to
exploring humanitarian blended finance in its 2021
communication on humanitarian aid. The Commission
has launched pilot projects to demonstrate how
humanitarian grants can attract private investment
in fragile contexts. The first projects began in 2022,
with the International Rescue Committee and the
Danish Refugee Council, combining €1.6 million in
grant financing, with contributions from development
banks and private financiers. The European Union is
committed to continuing to pursue innovative ways to
bridge the humanitarian funding gap.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Massari (Italy): Italy aligns itself with the
statement just delivered on behalf of the European
Union, and I would like to add a few remarks in my
national capacity.
The humanitarian challenge we face is
unprecedented. There is little to add to the words of
the Executive Director of the World Food Programme
today and the many appeals by the Secretary-General
and Under-Secretary-General Griffiths. The situation
is appalling: the underfunding of all humanitarian
initiatives is shown in every report. The private sector
can come to the rescue, and public-private cooperation
is a natural result of that. We need to act now, and publicprivate humanitarian partnership is one of the ways to
do that. Italy is grateful to the Albanian presidency for
placing this subject to the Security Council’s agenda.
This year’s humanitarian affairs segment of the
Economic and Social Council addressed the involvement
of the private sector in the humanitarian response
as well. Food security, the protection of civilians in
armed conflict and all the other humanitarian crises
require deeper and broader partnerships for achieving
resilience and sustainable solutions. The humanitarian
resolution that was adopted in June (Economic and
Social Council resolution 2023/16), albeit through
complex negotiations, clearly highlights the importance
of strengthening coordination among humanitarian
organizations, Governments and civil society actors
to ensure a comprehensive and effective response. The
private sector is an essential part of that picture.

S/PV.9418

In order to address and minimize the humanitarian
consequences of conflicts, climate change and
environmental risks, early warning and anticipatory
action are crucial. To realize that we need political
solutions, and we need to be faster, more effective and
less risk-averse across humanitarian and development
efforts — all aspects in which the private sector can
contribute to the efforts made by the public sector.
Development aid sometimes does not reach those who
are most vulnerable. That paradigm needs to shift, and
it needs to shift now. In order to address the drivers of
food insecurity, we should rely on flexible and urgent
funding, especially towards anticipatory action and
financing. Starting a humanitarian response before a
foreseeable shock is much faster, more dignified, more
cost-efficient and saves more lives. Anticipatory action
must be applied and improved.
The United Nations Food Systems Summit
Stocktaking Moment, held in Rome in July, dedicated
a whole session to the space industry’s contribution to
preventing food insecurity. Italy believes that publicprivate humanitarian partnership should build on such
initiatives. Public-private joint efforts can provide
the technological added value of solutions designed
and engineered by the private sector only. Broader
partnerships across the silos of humanitarian action are
much needed. That should include partnerships with the
private sector, academia, civil society, local and regional
actors, women, young people and foundations, as well
as, of course, the United Nations, Governments, donors
and international non-governmental organizations.
That is also the only way to overcome the overarching
issue of funding.
Private sector foundations have a large unexpressed
potential in leading and encouraging private
investments in the humanitarian sector as well. For
those partnerships to be successful, we need to work
collectively before, during and after crisis. There are
limits to what a humanitarian response can achieve,
yet our efforts will be more effective if we leverage the
unique capacities and mandates that the public sector
brings to bear across the entire response.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovenia.
Mr. Malovrh (Slovenia): I would first like to
express my appreciation to Albania for organizing this
important open debate and extend my gratitude to the
briefers for their informative presentations.

23-2678327/32

S/PV.9418

Maintenance of international peace and security

The challenges facing humankind today are
numerous and severe, ranging from climate change
and environmental degradation to economic inequality,
cybersecurity, natural disasters, political instability,
conflicts and other crises. Those challenges often occur
simultaneously, placing a disproportionate burden on
smaller developing nations and their communities.
It is evident that individuals, or often single States
alone, cannot bear those burdens, and that traditional
resources are insufficient to address the escalating
needs and costs. In the light of that context, it becomes
increasingly clear that forging partnerships between
the public and private sectors is essential. Such
collaborations can serve as a vital complement, pooling
expertise and tapping into new and existing resources.
They can play a pivotal role in addressing pressing needs
and costs, while also leveraging modern technology.
Slovenia actively supports the further development
of public-private partnerships in humanitarian
affairs, as outlined in our newly adopted guidelines
for cooperation with development and humanitarian
non-governmental organizations. Past and ongoing
practices have demonstrated that such partnerships
exhibit great speed, flexibility and cost-effectiveness
in addressing humanitarian needs, particularly on the
ground where they are most needed. However, it is
crucial to uphold certain principles when considering
those partnerships, with a particular emphasis on
distinguishing between humanitarian and commercial
activities. Building local capacities, strengthening
resilience, early action and post-conflict rehabilitation
are increasingly important aspects to consider. In our
assessment, it is imperative to invest more, including
through public-private partnerships, in prevention
efforts such as education and awareness-raising. That
will help mitigate humanitarian crises and enhance
their efficiency and effectiveness.
Furthermore, we must emphasize the importance
of the protection of human rights, especially for
individuals in vulnerable situations. Slovenia places
special emphasis on food security, access to drinking
water and the fight against gender-based violence in our
humanitarian aid efforts. We are proud to have initiated
projects in sub-Saharan Africa, the Middle East and
countries such as Uganda, South Sudan and Lebanon.
I would also like to highlight the absolute
necessity of the unhindered provision of humanitarian
aid, particularly in the midst of armed conflicts,
when humanitarian aid becomes the only lifeline.
28/32

14/09/2023

Collaboration with the private sector can significantly
enhance aid delivery, given its flexibility, human
resources and access to modern technology. That, in
turn, can lead to cost reductions and ultimately increase
the quality and quantity of aid delivered.
In conclusion, I want to emphasize our recognition
of the need to enhance humanitarian assistance and
acknowledge the potential for the further development
of public-private partnerships. However, we must
always prioritize the well-being and interests of the
people at the centre of those efforts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Hwang (Republic of Korea): Let me begin by
expressing my delegation’s heartfelt condolences to the
peoples and Governments of Libya and Morocco.
The topic of today’s open debate is particularly
relevant, as we are now witnessing humanitarian
needs rising virtually everywhere, stemming mainly
from conflicts and natural disasters. Meanwhile, the
funding gap between those humanitarian needs and
the resources required to address them continues to
widen. Simultaneously, the increasingly complex and
intertwined nature of humanitarian crises necessitates
greater engagement from the private sector, with
its resources, experience, advanced technology and
logistics capacities. That is why partnerships with the
private sector have proven both effective and efficient
in numerous humanitarian aid operations across
the globe.
Given that no country or region can enjoy true
peace and security unless the humanitarian needs
of its inhabitants are met, public-private partnership
is a welcome trend, as it helps to alleviate and
prevent the root causes of humanitarian situations.
Encouraging such partnerships can serve to assist in
the implementation of humanitarian-developmentpeace nexus programmes. In addition, public-private
partnerships can be used as an opportunity to bring in
private social entrepreneurs who leverage cutting-edge
technologies, such as artificial intelligence and the
blockchain, into the humanitarian assistance domain. A
notable example is the collaboration between the World
Food Programme and Mastercard. Mastercard’s digital
technology and electronic prepaid cards have enabled
millions of Syrian refugees to purchase food and other
necessities without having to wait in long lines. In a
similar vein, the role of the United Parcel Service in
23-26783

14/09/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

the delivery of humanitarian aid is now indispensable
in many regions. Additionally, IKEA’s partnership with
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees has been crucial in delivering 80,000
innovative refugee housing units to displaced people in
80 countries worldwide.
The Korean Government is increasingly expanding
its cooperation with private partners for humanitarian
aid operations. Today Korea’s public-private
partnerships encompass a wide range of emergency
relief, disaster risk reduction, early recovery, aid
for refugees and displaced people and gender-based
violence prevention. Examples where we have witnessed
positive outcomes include the assistance provided by
Korean non-governmental organizations (NGOs) to
female Rohingya refugees in Bangladesh in 2018. The
NGOs demonstrated their experience, know-how and
sensitivity in psychosocial counselling and trauma
therapy for the victims of sexual violence. Korea
has been similarly engaged in refugee community
assistance in Kenya and Uganda, emergency health care
and food assistance in areas affected by the coronavirus
disease in Peru and the Philippines, drought response
efforts in Ethiopia and rapid emergency assistance
for earthquake-stricken communities in Türkiye this
past February.
As an incoming member of the Security Council,
the Republic of Korea is committed to assuming greater
responsibilities and increasing its contributions to the
international community. To that end, we are planning
an unprecedented increase in our humanitarian aid
budget for next year. We will be continuing our
efforts for more effective and efficient humanitarian
assistance with creative and innovative public-private
partnership projects.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Denmark.
Ms. Lassen (Denmark): On behalf of the Nordic
countries — Finland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden and,
my own country, Denmark — I would like to thank
Albania for convening today’s open debate and for
the opportunity to advance the Security Council’s
discussions on public-private partnership solutions
and their role in addressing humanitarian needs in the
context of international peace and security. Let me also
thank all the briefers for their valuable insights.
We would like to focus on three issues — the
private sector as an invaluable actor in saving lives,

S/PV.9418

the private sector as a key source of innovation and the
need for strengthened coordination among all actors,
including the private sector, in addressing current and
future humanitarian needs.
First, in a world where humanitarian needs are
fast outpacing the funding available for life-saving
aid, as we have heard today, there is an urgent need
for all actors to step up. In recent years we have seen
an increase in private-sector funding for humanitarian
emergencies, based on the principles of solidarity and
responsibility-sharing. That trend is a welcome and
much-needed development. The Nordic countries have
a long tradition of providing humanitarian relief and
are frequently among the top humanitarian contributors
globally. However, we can all do more to create
synergies and further collaborate with the private
sector. The Black Sea Grain Initiative was an example
where the public and private sectors came together to
avoid a further deterioration of the global food crisis.
We deplore Russia’s decision to withdraw from it and
call on Russia to resume the Initiative.
Secondly, the private sector creates 90 per cent
of job opportunities in the developing world and
thereby provides an essential pathway to self-reliance.
Businesses bring expertise and resources to build
local markets that can provide sustainable access to
goods and services. The further development of local
economies benefits and empowers communities and
reduces dependency on humanitarian aid. The private
sector is helping to innovate further in several key
areas of humanitarian action, from logistics and shelter
to communications and information technology. The
Council has often discussed the digital transformation
of peacekeeping, which is inspired to a large extent by
the technological advances available within the private
sector. Technological advances in the private sector
hold similar promise for humanitarian actors.
Thirdly, the growing complexity of today’s
humanitarian emergencies is so vast that an adequate
response is impossible without the coordinated action
of all relevant actors, including the private sector. We
need to ensure that we have an inclusive humanitarian
architecture in place that enables the meaningful
participation of the private sector. Where relevant, our
programming and operating models should streamline
private-sector engagement across sectors and provide
openness and predictability on opportunities for
collaboration. That is especially important in the context
of the Nordic countries’ commitment to developing

23-2678329/32

S/PV.9418

Maintenance of international peace and security

14/09/2023

localized solutions, which truly engage and empower
communities for the benefit of peace and stability.

Delhi, that human-centric development paradigm will
remain our guiding principle in future.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guatemala.

Mrs. Kamboj (India): I thank you very much,
Mr. President, for convening today’s crucial open
debate. We agree with you that maintaining international
peace and security is a fundamental goal outlined in
the Charter of the United Nations. And it is a fact that
traditional diplomatic and military approaches alone
are no longer adequate to addressing the complex
challenges that threaten global stability today.

Ms. Rodríguez Mancia (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): We would like to thank the delegation of
Albania, in particular Albania’s Minister for Europe and
Foreign Affairs, for presiding over the Security Council
for the month of September and convening today’s
important open debate. We also thank the Executive
Director of the World Food Programme and Mr. Cohen
and Mr. Miebach for their inspiring contributions.

So what is the path forward? If we are to tackle those
challenges effectively, there is a growing need to foster
stronger public-private humanitarian partnerships,
which represent a progressive approach to addressing
global peace and security challenges by providing a
unique platform for collaboration among Governments,
non-governmental organizations, civil society and
private-sector entities. It is essential, however, to put
guardrails in place, strike the right balance between
interests, maintain ethical standards and ensure
accountability as a prerequisite for the effectiveness of
those partnerships.

I would like to begin by expressing our solidarity
with the Government and the people of Morocco
following the devastating earthquake that just occurred
there, as well as with the people and the Government
of Libya in the wake of the effects of Storm Daniel. We
extend our heartfelt condolences to the families of the
victims and wish a speedy recovery to the injured and
rapid rebuilding for the communities affected.

As far as my country, India, is concerned, it has
been a proponent of public-private partnerships in
humanitarian and disaster relief operations both
internally and abroad. To that end, the National
Disaster Management Agency of India has collaborated
with multiple stakeholders to leverage their strengths,
resources and capacities to effectively address
challenges in disaster management. During natural
disasters, public-private partnerships have proved
highly effective in mobilizing resources and providing
financial support, technology, essential supplies and
even manpower.
In the international arena, India has consistently
been a reliable first responder in humanitarian and
disaster relief situations. Whether through Operation
Kaveri in the Sudan, Operation Dost in Türkiye,
Operation Ganga in Ukraine, Operation Shakti in
Afghanistan and even Operation Rahat in Yemen, we
have worked seamlessly with multiple stakeholders
on the ground to ensure early relief and recovery. Our
actions are rooted in an ethos that views the world as
one vast family, and as Prime Minister Modi stated at
the recent and successful Group of 20 Summit in New
30/32

Protracted crises caused by conflicts remain a driver
of humanitarian needs, in particular among civilians,
who are the worst affected by armed conflict. Conflicts
increase the likelihood of famine and malnutrition, in
particular for women and girls. The myriad current
crises, especially armed conflicts, including the illegal,
unjustified and unprovoked aggression of the Russian
Federation against Ukraine and its continued actions
imperilling global food security, have resulted in a
macroeconomic destabilization of food prices, which in
turn has had devastating consequences. They include
forced displacement and the loss of access to livelihoods
and income, thereby requiring the deployment of a
humanitarian response.
Achieving peace and prosperity in a world of
threats requires Member States to find new ways to
act collectively and cooperatively at all levels. That
requires adapting to the realities of today. The New
Agenda for Peace, recently presented by the SecretaryGeneral, is built around the fundamental principles of
trust, solidarity and universality. Those principles are
the foundations of the Charter of the United Nations in
pursuit of the Sustainable Development Goals, as well
as the mission to prevent and respond to humanitarian
crises and conflicts in a coherent and complementary
manner, thereby contributing to the maintenance of
international peace.
23-26783

14/09/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

There is an urgent need to strengthen the
humanitarian response architecture through strategic
partnerships such as those involving innovation,
research and business efficiency, which are necessary
to improve the reach of humanitarian assistance.
An important benchmark for public-private
partnerships in humanitarian response was the Black
Sea Grain Initiative, which ensured global food
security and alleviated hunger worldwide with a special
emphasis on those regions in conflict. We once again
express our regret that the Russian Federation has
terminated it.
The adaptation of new techniques, including the
integration of new digital technologies and advances
in medicine and satellite mapping, are essential to the
quality of humanitarian response. Research and business
development constitute a critical contribution to
protecting the most vulnerable and acting immediately
to save lives and improving the security environment
and humanitarian response, with a focus on building
more resilient and peaceful communities.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium.
Mr. Lagatie (Belgium): At the outset, let me express
our condolences to the people of Morocco and Libya.
I thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
timely and important solutions-oriented debate on
advancing public-private humanitarian partnerships. I
also thank the briefers for their informative outlines.
I would like to stress the following points in the
name of the Benelux countries, namely, Luxembourg,
the Kingdom of the Netherlands and my own country,
Belgium. We of course align ourselves with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
The principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality
and independence are fundamental for humanitarian
action. It seems important to recall those key principles
of humanitarian aid, as well as respect for international
humanitarian law, in this setting, in particular regarding
the Russian aggression against Ukraine and the recent
withdrawal of the Russian Federation from the Black
Sea Grain Initiative, which directly affects global food
security. The same goes for the blocking of the crossborder mechanism for the delivery of humanitarian aid
into Syria.

S/PV.9418

Ukraine and Syria are unfortunately not the only
countries affected. The Security Council is regularly
briefed by Under-Secretary-General Martin Griffiths
and other United Nations actors about the terrible
sufferings that are also imposed on populations in the
Sudan, Yemen, Afghanistan, in and around Myanmar,
the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, in the Sahel and sadly in many other places
around the world. The list of forgotten crises is way
too long. There should not be a hierarchy among those
crises. They all deserve the same attention from the
United Nations, as they all deserve equal political
backing and financing from us, as Member States. That
is one of the reasons that the Benelux countries greatly
resort to core funding.
This year marks the twentieth anniversary of
the adoption of the principles and good practice
of humanitarian donorship to be implemented by
donors. They are aimed at improving the coherence
and effectiveness of donor action, as well as its
accountability. Some of the key elements of good
humanitarian donorship could be taken on board
by private actors or in the framework of publicprivate partnerships.
First, we must guarantee the protection of civilians
and those no longer taking part in hostilities, as well as
facilitating their return to normal lives.
Secondly, we must strengthen the capacity of
affected countries and local communities in order to
ensure that Governments and local communities are
better able to meet their responsibilities and coordinate
effectively with humanitarian partners.
Thirdly,
we
must
provide
humanitarian
assistance in ways that are supportive of recovery and
sustainable development.
Fourthly, we must support and promote the central
and unique role of the United Nations.
Lastly, we must strive to ensure predictability
and flexibility in funding to the United Nations and
other key humanitarian actors — for instance, through
core funding.
Finally let me, point out some best practices and
potential sources of inspiration.
The Benelux countries support innovative
humanitarian approaches such as the launch of the first
humanitarian impact bond — a financial instrument to

23-2678331/32

S/PV.9418

Maintenance of international peace and security

encourage social investments by the private sector for
the benefit of victims of conflict — and humanitarian
innovation accelerators, which are aimed at supporting
technology-powered solutions that address pressing
global challenges faced in the humanitarian space.
Another creative example is the organization of
humanitarian hackathons involving multiple actors in
the field of new technologies.
Science and technology are indispensable in
addressing today’s interconnected challenges. The
United Nations and its Member States stand to benefit
from a stronger and more flexible interface between
science, policy and society while strictly upholding the
humanitarian principles. The Benelux countries further
welcome the Secretary-General’s creation last month of
a Scientific Advisory Board. I take this opportunity
in my national capacity to stress the important work

32/32

14/09/2023

initiated by the new Group of Friends on Science
for Action.
Lastly, the Benelux countries believe in fostering
links between humanitarian aid and sustainable
development. The private sector could and should play
a concrete role in that regard as well. We call on all
donors and humanitarian actors to think outside the box
and to analyse how innovations in the fields of research,
industry and the private sector could be adapted and
scaled up in different humanitarian contexts.
The President: There are still a number of speakers
remaining on my list for this meeting. Given the lateness
of the hour, with the concurrence of the members of the
Council, I intend to suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1 p.m.

23-26783
