UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1998/732
10 August 1998
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 7 AUGUST 1998 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL ADDRESSED
TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to convey the attached communication, dated
6 August 1998, which I have received from the Secretary-General of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization.
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members
of the Security Council.

(Signed)

98-23280 (E)

100898

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1998/732
English
Page 2

Annex
Letter dated 6 August 1998 from the Secretary-General
of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization addressed to
the Secretary-General

In accordance with Security Council resolution 1088 (1996), I attach the
nineteenth monthly report on operations of the Stabilization Force (SFOR). I
would appreciate your making this report available to the Security Council.

(Signed)

Javier SOLANA

/...

S/1998/732
English
Page 3

Appendix
Nineteenth monthly report to the Security Council on
the operations of the Stabilization Force

1.
There are approximately 34,000 troops currently deployed in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Croatia, with contributions from all countries of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and, with the departure of Malaysian troops
from the theatre at the end of June, from 21 non-NATO countries.
2.
Over the reporting period (21 June-20 July), SFOR continued to conduct
surveillance and reconnaissance by means of ground and air patrols.
Approximately 2,900 sorties were flown by combat aircraft, with the SFOR
helicopter fleet flying approximately 117 hours.
3.
SFOR has continued to monitor crossing points on the border with the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and to inspect government factories in order to
help ensure compliance with the prohibition on the transport of weapons
established by Security Council resolution 1160 (1998). No reports of
non-compliance have been received.
4.
Following the restructuring agreement concluded by the Office of the
High Representative in February, SFOR has now withdrawn from three transmission
towers used by Srpska Radio Television at Duja Nijva, Udrigovo and Leotar. It
continued to secure the two remaining towers, at Veliki Zep in Multi-National
Division North (MND(N)) and at Trebevic in MND (South-East).
Cooperation and compliance by the parties
5.
The parties remain substantially compliant with the most military
provisions of the Peace Agreement across the whole area of operations. However,
over the reporting period there have again been isolated instances of arson
attacks and inter-ethnic tensions.
6.
SFOR continues to monitor compliance with the Common Licence Plate
Programme and, over the reporting period, confiscated two Bosnian Serb military
vehicles for a 30-day period for non-compliance with the Programme.
7.
Over the reporting period, SFOR troops conducted a total of 304
military weapons storage site inspections: 75 Bosniac; 57 Bosnian Croat;
144 Bosnian Serb; and 28 Federation. Only minor discrepancies were noted. On
9 July, SFOR confiscated an SA-2 Fan Song radar unit from the Bosnian Serbs
following unauthorized radar activity on 21 May in Banja Luka.
8.
The Police Anti-Terrorist Brigade (PATB) and the Police Unit for the
Protection of Persons and Buildings of the Republika Srpska Specialist Police
remain compliant with the terms of the Peace Agreement and with the requirements
established by SFOR on 15 August 1997. The Restructuring and Training Programme
led by the United Nations International Police Task Force (IPTF) and monitored
by SFOR began in early June, and 405 PATB officers had completed human dignity
training by 11 July.
/...

S/1998/732
English
Page 4

9.
One illegal checkpoint was identified on 5 July and was dismantled
without incident.
10. Over the reporting period, SFOR monitored a total of 1,463 training
and movement activities: 505 Bosniac; 83 Bosnian Croat; 783 Bosnian Serb; and
92 Federation. SFOR imposed a training and movement ban from 6 to 12 July on
Logistic Base 2204 of the Federation armed forces because of non-compliance
during an activity conducted on 1 July. In addition, a ban was placed from 8 to
14 July on the 2nd Battalion Training Centre of the Bosnian Croat armed forces
because of non-compliance during an exercise conducted from 19 to 30 June.
11. SFOR troops monitored 167 demining operations: 55 Bosniac; 57 Bosnian
Croat; and 55 Bosnian Serb. A total of 29 anti-tank mines, 234 anti-personnel
mines and 22 items of unexploded ordnance were removed. The lower than normal
figures for this period reflect the upgrading and refresher training undertaken
by all entity armed forces deminers between 1 and 12 July. All teams returned
to the field on 13 July. There are currently no bans imposed on the entity
armed forces for non-compliance with demining operations.
Cooperation with international organizations
12. Within its capabilities, SFOR continued to provide assistance to the
international organizations in theatre, working routinely with the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), IPTF, the Office of the High
Representative, the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
13. SFOR continues to support OSCE in its preparations for the September
elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina through the provision of a secure
environment for voter registration. The registration of parties, candidates and
alliances took place as intended by the Provisional Elections Commission without
incident.
14. SFOR continues to provide assistance to the Office of the High
Representative in the field of civil air traffic. Approval from the Council of
Ministers is still awaited for the revisions to the Memorandum of Understanding
which will permit cargo operations and allow commercial aircraft to remain
overnight at Sarajevo airport. The inaugural flight into Mostar airport took
place on 7 July.
15. SFOR continues to play an active role in providing support to the
Office of the High Representative’s efforts to establish joint institutions,
particularly the Standing Committee on Military Matters (SCMM). At the SCMM
meeting of 2 July, the programme of work for the coming six months was
discussed. Issues to be considered include the potential for joint activities
between the entity armed forces and the proposals put forward by SFOR for the
use of military helicopters to cross the inter-entity boundary line when
carrying senior government officials from the joint institutions and entity
governments.

/...

S/1998/732
English
Page 5

Outlook
16. Tension is expected to rise in the run-up to the September elections.
The return of refugees and displaced persons is also likely to be accompanied by
increased tension and acts of intimidation and violence. SFOR will continue to
help ensure the provision of a secure environment to support and promote
returns, in accordance with its mandate.

-----
