ASSEMBLY
ELEVENTH SESSION
Official Records

8>

CONTENTS

fundamental human rights, to establish c
der which justice and respect for obliga
maintained and to promote social progr
freedom.
4. Not quite a year ago, I bade you fare
faith in the United Nations strengthened
receiving you with that faith racked by an
diminished.
5. The tenth session was of outstanding
and marked a great step forward along
trust. The months that followed were fu
but recent dramatic events, deeply to be re
counts, have jeopardized the peace of the w
the effectiveness of the Organization to th
6. The debates and decisions of the Gene
meeting in emergency special session are p
United Nations has reacted with prudenc
This eleventh regular session has the du
not only to safeguard and to supplement th
but also to take the effective measures nec
sure their speedy and faithful implement
7. The object of world concern and world
ion is the action .of the General Assem
Security Council in whatever pertains to
relations between States, because the pea
mediate future depends on whether or no
tions are good.
8. We, however, who are convinced tha
Nations is also working gradually to chan
of history and to produce conditions in
peace cannot be overthrown, must pause b
to the efficient work so unobtrusively carrie
many and varied organs, councils or
through which t.'J.e United Nations contr
economic, intellectual, social, industrial, ag
human development and to the greater
people of the world. It is this great work, s
and effective, which will raise living stan
men and will some day banish fear.
9. That purpose 'will ~J.ever be achieved, ho
the interests of States or individuws tak
over the notion of the,r duties and even ov
ness ot their rights.
10. If these orgaris persevere in their tas
General Assembly and the Security C{)u

Poge

Agenda item 1:
Opening of the session by the Chairman of the delegation of Chile....................................
Agenda item 2:
Minute of silent prayer or meditation.... . . . .•. . . •. .. ••
Address by Mr. Maza, Temporary President, Chairman of
the del~gation of Chile...............................
Agenda item 3:
Appointment of a Credentials Committee..............
Agenda item 4:
Election of the President.............................
Address by Prince Wan \,uaithayakon, President of the
eleventh session of the General Assembly:.............
Statement by the President regarding the procedure for
. the admission of the Sudan, Morocco and Tunisia to
membership of the United Nations....................
Agenda item 25:
Admission of new Members tc the United Nations......
Applications for membership of the Sudan, Morocco
arId Tunisia ..............••....•.•...•.•.••••..•
Establishment of L;e Ad Hoc Political Committee........

1
1
1
2
2
2
3
3
3
5

President: Prince WAN WAITHAYAKON
(Thailand) •

AGENDA ITEM 1

Opening of the session by the Chairman of the
delegation of Chile

1. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (t'.ran..<;lated

from Spanish) : I declare open the eleveI!-th regul~r ses-

sion of the General Assembly of the Umted Nations.
AGENDA ITEM 2

Minute of !Silent prayer or meditation

2. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (tran.rl.ated
from Spanish) : In accordance with rule 64 of the rules

of procedure, I invite the representatives to riJe and
to observe one minute of sile.,ce dedicated to prayer
or meditation.
The representatives stood in s.ilence.

TIle Prini~tl official records of the Gener
are published in fascicle f{)'rm, iherecoro of e
·being issued sr:parately. In order that ~he fa
sub.seque~tly be' bound in volumes by organ
the/Jagination is conti1luoUS throughout eac
. ,' records of a· single botly. Atlke end of· th
, .pr.efatory fascicle is ismed fot" eacl; senes,
table o/contents, list of members,agentla
prefato,,'!} matter.
4ftet'. the clpse pf the .session, collated sets
willbePltu:ed on sale for If;/! general public
..

,

Address' by .Mr. 'Mmsa, Temporary F,residem,
,'

Montl.ay, 12 Nove

Chairman 0/ the deleg~uon of Chr,le

3. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (translated

from Spanish) : I extend a warm welcome tc? the r~
resentative.s of the pe~ples oftpe wor.1d who,. ~ a SPl~t

of good WIll, have come to this e1eventh~sS1on of tile
United Nations General Assembly detenmned to ~ve
mankind from the scourge of war, to reaffirm faith in
1

confidence in the work of the United Nations and in the
binding force of its decisions.
11. As a living organism which is growing, developing
and progressing, the United Nations must gradually
adapt itself to changing circumstances. That means that
there is an urgent need to embark upon certain changes
in the Charter, which the General Assembly did not
succeed in doing at the last regular session. Among the
necessary changes, there must be an hJcrease in the
membership of the councils, particularly of the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council. A membership of eleven and eighteen respectively for those
two Councils was proportionate to the fifty nations which
signed the Charter at San Francisco, but does not
adequately represent the seventy-six countries now
Members of the Organization, at, ,1 still less the even
larger number which will result rim admissions at this
and future sessions. Other changes are also necessary,
such as the elimination of the veto in the Security Council, which will one day have to be undertaken in accordance with the principle of the sovereign equality
of all Members, as referred to in the Charter.
12. Over the past eleven years, I have on many occasions acted as representative of a country which has
demonstrated its indestructible faith in the United Nations. Now, as I relinquish my duties ina spirit of
gratitude, I think that I am entitled to express my sincere and fervent hope that, with God's help, the United
Nations will continue and redouble its untiring efforts
to achieve human justice and world peace.
AGENDA !TEM 3

Appointment of a Credentials Committee

13. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (translated
front Spanish) : The first order of business in the organization of the work of this session is the appointment of a Credentials Committee as provided in rule 28
of the rules of procedure. In accordance. with that rule,
I should like to propose to the Assembly that the following Member States should be appointed to the
Credentials Committee for the eleventh regular session:
Argentina, Brazil, Burma, Iraq, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Spain, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and
United States of America.
14. If there are no objections to the list which I have
proposed, I shall take it that the C~~ntials Committee
will consist of the States mentioned.
I t was so decided.
AGENDA ITEM 4

Election of the President

~-

15. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (transl(J,ted
from S f"l,nish) : The election of the President for the
eleventh regular session will be held in accordance with
rules 31 and 94 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly. Rule 94 provides: "All elections shall
be held by secret ballot. There shall be no nominations."
The Assembly will therefore proceed immediately to
the vote.
At the invitation of the Temporary Preside.nt, Mr.
Trujillo (Ecuador) and Mr. Deressa (Ethiopia) acted
as tellers.
A vote was taken by secret ballot.

·,\ii...... '~,~~).("~';c'''"''':.~i''_"''''''''',l':.''",<::.·''",''''''''·,·:::.=<;:;''''t'''';..,:,,.''""'"'''''H_':"'''"''''''''='"'.''~'' __ ~ ~''_''-'''

Number of va
Abstentions:
NZtmber of me
Req~tired majo
Number of vo
Prince Wan
Having obtain
Waithayakon (T
eleventh session
the Chai1-.
Address by Pr
of the elevent

16. The PRES
kindness of my f
this high office o
sion of the Gene
cerely, for this i
also for my coun
porter of the Uni
recognition of th
Africa.
J 7. I consider
from the Chairm
Mr. Maza, durin
during the emer
over our proceed
patience-qualitie
of trial for the U
18. The tragic s
grave and grim,
to the afflicted p
matter of reassura
for its part, has
instrument of p
thoughts of the
weighed heavily
the United Nati
peace throughout
19. The United
into operation, an
special sessions
vened, in accorda
lution [377 (V
exercise of the ve
General Assembl
the situations. Th
cease.,fire, with a
drawal of foreign
an emergency in
secure and supe
been established.
a report is being
20. For the sett
fore, much still
Nations. I am co
sembly can be re
confidence is stre
, can count on the
for invaluable as
Secretary-Genera
ment, and the ou
ficiency which M
taking it deserve
admiration from u

during the present session, and we have among us many
members of gov, nunents to share in our deliberations.
The United Nations is not only a world organization
for peace, but it is practically a world-wide organization for peace, and the General Assembly is now truly
a world forum for the discussion of any problem of
peace in any part of the world. Of course, there is
diversity in our Organization and in the Ge..~eral Assembly, but out of diversity there can come harmony.
Indeed, the United Nations is a centre for harmonizing
the actions of nations for peace and international CO'operation.
22. The unifying influence of the United Nations
Charter was clearly demonstrated at the Asian-African
Conference at Bandung. \Ve can be certain that if the
purposes and principles of the Charter are adhered
to, the world will enjoy peace not only in the negative
sense of non-war, but also in the positive sense of happiness in tranquillity, which i~ the meaning of peace
in my country and in the United Nations Charter.
23. The world must be saved from the scourge of war.
The recent establishment of the International Atomic
Energy Agency reminds us that the use of atomic
energy is for peace and not ror wa,} and, if a real attempt could be made to bring about a positive step
forward in the matter of disarmament, it would be
hailed by all man'cind.
24. The world must also be given the blessings of
peace, namely, freedom on the basis of the principle
of equal rights and self-determination of peoples, justice
on the basis of international law, and social progress
and better standards of life in larger freedom.
25. The present session of the General Assembly is
starting its work in an atmosphere which, in the United
Nations as in the country in which we meet, is one of
renewed dedication to the cause of peace, and I am
confident that, with a united spirit of tolerance and good
will, our deliberations will be blessed with successful
results for the peace, freedom, justice and economic and
social well-being of mankind.

the new Members to full participation
the General Assembly and by hearing
of their delegations in this hall.
29. 'Since that time, we have all been
that the Security Council has unani
mended the admission of three addit
On 6 February 1956, the Security Co
resolution recommending the admission
on 20 July 1956, it recommended th
Morocco; and on 26 July 1956 it recom
mission of Tunisia. At the meetings wh
mendations were adopted, the hope
by members of the Council that step
enable the General Assembly to make a
cision on the admission of the applican
beginning of the eleventh session, thus m
the inclusion of their representatives in
of welcome for the new Members and
tion in the work of the Assembly from
30. I understand that the Secretary
these observations in mind, some mon
formal consultations with all the perm
discussed this matter of the procedure
followeq at the beginning of this sessio
marskjold has informed me that he foun
response from Members in this regard
out that the general question of the ad
Members appears as item 25 in the pro
[A/3191].
31. I would now propose, bearing in
visions of rules 40 and 67 of our rule
that we approve item 25 fo_' incluson
for the purpose, I repeat, of consideri
the applications of the Sudan, Morocc
32. I will now put this proposal to the
The proposal was adopted by 73 votes

Statement by the President regarding the pro·
cedure jor the admission oj the Su,dan, Mo.
ro~co and Tunisia to memb~rsh¥.p oj the United
Nations

ApPLICATIONS FOR MEMBERSHIP OF
MOROCCO AND TUNISIA

26. The PRESIDENT: The next item on the
agenda for this afternoon is one which it gives me
particular pleasure to place before the Assembly, the
item concerning the admission of the Sudan, Morocco
and Tunisia to membership in the United Nations.
27. The consideration of this item at this stage represents a recourse to a special procedure calculated to
meet the special circunlst;:.nces of the present case, and
it does not constitute a precedent. P,=rhaps I might
be allowed to review the circumstances that have made
it desirable and appropriate to raise the issue today
before the usual measures relating to the adoption of
the agenda have been taken.
2K As we all recall the very last days of the tenth
session, the General Assembly, on the recommendation of the Security Council, decided to admit sixteen
additional countries to membership in the United Nations [555th meeting].
Owing to the late date on
which the de<;ision was made, there was no opportunity
to prepare a fitting reception for the new Members.

AGENDA ITEM 25

Admission of new Members to the U

33. The PRESIDENT: We turn now
tion of the Sudan for membership in t
tions. I should like to draw the Assem
to the resolution of the Security Coun
plication ofthe Sudan [A/3125J, and to
lution sponsored by Afghanistan, Bur
Ceylon, Egypt, Ethiopia,. India, Indone
Jordan, Laos, Lebanon, Liberia, Liby
kistan, Philippines, Saudi Arabia, Sy
Turkey and Yemen [A/3326 and Add
34. I should like to suggest that memb
of the interventions in the general de
an opportunity to express their views on
step that has been taken in the life of t
tions through its increased membership
make observations on the individual
that the new Members, upon whose app
is being taken today, will have an opp
spond to the affirmative action taken he
mony of welcome which has been.
tomorrow afternoon.
35. Before proceeding with the vote, I
express wh!1t I believe is the general

Organization, which derives its strength from the vitality and diversity of its Members, with their rich
national cultures and distinct personalities.
36. We shall now proceed to vote on the recommendation concerning the Sudan contained in the joint draft
resolution [A/3326 and Add.1].
A vote was taken by roll call.
The Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, having been
drawn by lot by the President, was called upon to vote
first.
In favour: Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic,
Union of South Africa, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay,
Venezuela, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, Albalma,
Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bolivia, Bradl,
Bulgaria, Burma, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Cambodia, Canada, Ceylon, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, .czechoslovakia, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Ethiopia, Finland, France, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti,
Hond.uras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran,
Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jordan, Laos, Lebanon,
Liberia, Libya, Luxembourg, Mexico, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway; Pakistan,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Spain, Sweden, Syria,
Thailand, Turkey.
Against: None.
The recommendation was adopted unanimously.
The delegation of the Sudan was esc01·ted to its place
in the General Assembly hall.
37. The PRESIDENT: I will now put to the Assembly the question of the admission of Morocco to
membership in the United Nations. The Assembly has
before it in this conexion the text of a Security Council
resolution [A/3152] and a draft resolution sponsored
by. Afghanistan, Burma, Cambodia, Ceylon, Egypt,
Ethiopia, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Jordan, Laos,
Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Nepal, Pakistan, Philippines,
Saudi Arabia, Syria, Thailand, Turkey and Yemen
[A/3327 and Add.i].
38. I need not dwell on the qualifications of Morocco
for membership; we are all well aware of them. But
may I, on behalf of the Assembly, say that the vote
which is about to be taken will be the formal expression of a deep satisfaction in the knowledge that in
future we will have the benefit of the co-operation of
the representatives of a proud and ancient civilization,
whose new nationhood marks yet another step in the
road of peace, freedom ~.nd progress to which the
Charter points.
39. We shall now proceed to vote on the recommendation concerning Morocco contained in the joint draft
resolution [A/3327 and Add.l].
A vote was taken. by roll call.
China, having bei1n drawn by lot by the President,
was called upon to vote first.
. In favour: China, Colombia, Costa. Rica, Cuba,
Cz~choslovakia, Denmark, Dominican Republic,. Ecuador,Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Finland, France,
Greece, .Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Ice-

Nicaragua, N
Peru, Philipp
Arabia, Spain
key, Ukraini
South Africa
United Kingd
land, United
Yemen, Yugo
Australia, Au
Burma, Byelo
bodia, Canada
Against: N
The recom
The delega
in the Gener
40. TJ:e PR
Assemhly the
I would draw
Council resol
to a draft reso
Cambodia, C
Iran, Iraq, J
Nepal, Pakis
Thailand, Tu
41. The Ge
applications o
decide upon a
of Africa, wh
and pressing
its willingnes
of the United
ing, it will b
particular vie
sincerity of p
liberations in
42. We sha
mendation co
3328 and Add
A vote wa
Argentina,
dent, was ca
In favour:
Bolivia, Braz
Socialist Rep
China, Colom
Denmark, D
Salvador, Et
mala, Haiti,
donesia, Iran,
Lebanon, Lib
rocco, Nepal
Norway, Pak
pines, Poland
Sudan, Swed
Soviet Socia
Union of Sov
of Great Brit
of America, U
Afghanistan,
Against: N
The recomm
The delega
in the gener

his memorandum on tile organization of the eleventh
regular session of the General Assembly [AIB URI
142], which was circulated to members on 8 November 1956, states that he assumes that the Assembly will
wish to establish an Ad Hoc Political Committee.
Since the Assembly's decision on this question has a
bearing on the composition of the General Committee,
I would suggest that the decision be taken now, so that
the Chairman of the Ad Hoc Political Committee may
be elected immediately, along with the chairmen of
the other Main Committees of the Assembly.
44. In connexion with the establishment of this committee, the Secretary-General has recommended that

Printed in u.s.A.

considered the memorandum and su
sembly its recommendations thereon
45. Unless I hear any objections
for the establishment of an Ad H
mittee, I will consider that the Ass
to establish such a committee for th
whose Chairman, under rule 38 of
cedure, will be included in the m
General Committee.
It was so decided.

The meeting rose at 4.2

S-77001-
