S/PV.8107

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8107th meeting

Friday, 17 November 2017, 6.15 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Cardi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Italy)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Mrs. Haley
Mr. Bermúdez Álvarez

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-38981 (E)
*1738981*

S/PV.8107

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 6.20 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2017/970, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Japan.
I now give the floor to those members of the Council
who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): The use of chemical weapons
is entirely unacceptable under any circumstances.
There is full agreement within the Security Council on
this point, and it is shared by the entire international
community. We jointly condemn in the strongest
possible terms the use of chemical weapons in Syria,
which has resulted in the deaths of many civilians.
Members of the Security Council also share the
view that the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism (JIM), an important Council product of
2015, should continue to work.
Yesterday, however, two draft resolutions — both of
which proposed to extend the JIM’s mandate for another
12 months — failed to be adopted. Japan has proposed
a draft resolution (S/2017/970) to allow for further
discussions among Council members to consider the
future of the JIM. We hope that the proposed report to
be submitted by the Secretary-General on proposals for
the structure and methodology of the JIM, reflecting
the views of Council members, will help us to find the
best way forward.
Chemical-weapons use in Syria continues. Until all
perpetrators have been identified, the work of the JIM
should continue. The Council is ultimately responsible
for ensuring accountability for the use of chemical
weapons, and the JIM is vitally important for pursuing
that task. Japan hopes that the Council can adopt the
draft resolution.
The President: The Council is ready to proceed to
the vote on the draft resolution before it. I shall put the
draft resolution to the vote now.
2/8

17/11/2017

A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Egypt, Ethiopia, France, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan,
Senegal, Sweden, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America and Uruguay
Against:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of) and Russian
Federation
Abstaining:
China
The President (spoke in Spanish): The draft
resolution received 12 votes in favour, 2 against and 1
abstention. The draft resolution has not been adopted,
owing to the negative vote of one permanent member
of the Council.
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): In a world
in which the Council’s time and attention could be
productively devoted to 100 different things, Russia is
wasting our time. Conflicts are raging. Outlaw States
are acquiring nuclear weapons. The human dignity of
millions is violated every day. Brutal regimes are using
chemical weapons on their own people.
All the members of the Council and their staff have
worked for months on preserving and strengthening the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical WeaponsUnited Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM).
We have worked knowing that lives were at stake. We
have worked knowing that the international chemical
weapons non-proliferation regime was also at stake.
And all that time — hundreds of hours — has been for
nothing.
As we have long suspected, Russia does not
now and has never had any intention of making this
time productive for the Council and the international
community. Russia’s veto — its second in 24
hours — shows us that Russia has no interest in finding
common ground with the rest of the Council to save the
JIM. Russia will not agree to any mechanism that might
shine a spotlight on the use of chemical weapons by its
ally, the Syrian regime. It is as simple and shameful as
that.
Japan’s draft resolution (S/2017970) — a shortterm measure to buy us more time to find a way
17-38981

17/11/2017

The situation in the Middle East

forward — was a stop-gap measure. But it was our last,
best chance to stay united. The adoption of the draft
resolution would have shown the world that the Council
will always try to overcome our differences, especially
when confronted by the most serious threats to peace
and security.
In recent weeks, all Council members have professed
an interest in credible, impartial investigations of
chemical-weapons use in Syria, and all Council
members have underscored the need for the JIM to
employ high standards and present credible evidence.
Japan’s draft resolution tried to build on these points
of agreement. Russia was one of the voices calling
for an independent and impartial JIM. In the draft
resolution it offered yesterday (S/2017/968), it called
on the Secretary-General to solicit recommendations
from Council members to strengthen the JIM. As a sign
of their willingness to compromise and their openness
to addressing Russia’s concerns, the Japanese included
in their draft resolution a provision that is virtually
identical to the Russian language.
I invite my colleagues to examine the two draft
resolutions side by side. The language in the draft
resolution just vetoed by our Russian friends was
virtually the same as the text in their own resolution,
and still they saw fit to waste our time. Russia’s
actions — today and in recent weeks — have been
designed to delay, to distract and ultimately to defeat
the effort to secure accountability for chemical weapons
attacks in Syria. Russia never invited Council members
to provide input on its own draft resolution — a text
that yesterday received only four votes in favour. And
Russia declined to propose any textual edits to the
United States draft. We even incorporated elements
of the Russian draft into our own in the hope that
they would engage with us. Indeed, from the very
beginning, Russia has not negotiated with any of us.
Russia has just dictated and demanded. That is not how
the Security Council is supposed to work. That is not
how the Security Council can work.
I want to extend the sincere thanks of the United
States to those Council members that worked so
hard — and gave Russia a second, third, fourth and
fifth chance — to protect innocent civilians from
chemical attacks. It is a credit to them and a win for
the cause of the non-proliferation of chemical weapons
that the draft resolution received such broad support.

S/PV. 8107

There remains overwhelming international
support for investigating chemical weapons attacks
in Syria and for holding accountable the perpetrators.
To the families of the victims of chemical weapons in
Syria — and to the Syrian children, women and men
who may be victims of future attacks — I extend our
most sincere apologies. They should know that the
United States, along with the rest of the Council, will
not give up on seeking justice for their lost loved ones
and protection for their families. They should know
that Russia can obstruct the Council but that it cannot
obstruct the truth. With the unity of the Council, or
alone and unrestrained by Russia’s obstructionism, we
will continue to fight for justice and accountability in
Syria.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to thank the Japanese delegation
for submitting draft resolution S/2017/970 today.
As we reiterated yesterday (see S/PV.8105),
experience has proved throughout the existence of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical WeaponsUnited Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM)
that there is an urgent need to improve its working
methods, in particular by conducting field visits to
the sites where the use of chemical weapons is being
investigated — including the inspection, recording
and collection of evidence and samples in a timely
fashion — and by considering all potential scenarios
relating to the use of chemical weapons. Egypt has tried
to ensure that any draft resolution of the Security Council
on the extension of the JIM mandate would guarantee
these measures without delving into technicalities that
would undermine the implementation or independence
of the Mechanism, and in a way that would provide a
solid and sound foundation for its conclusions.
In line with the position that we have expressed
previously and reiterated yesterday in explaining our
abstention in the voting on the two draft resolutions
that were before us, and also in line with our resolve
to guard against the recurrent use of chemical weapons
against our brethren in Syria and the need to identify
the perpetrators of earlier crimes, we supported the
Japanese draft today because it provides an opportunity
to maintain that international tool, open broad prospects
for the restructuring and development of the working
methods of the Mechanism, and promote its credibility
and the independence of its investigations.

17-389813/8

S/PV.8107

The situation in the Middle East

We therefore express our regret that the Council
could not adopt the draft resolution today and deplore
the lack of trust among its members. However, we
reiterate that we remain willing to work with our
partners in the Security Council in the remaining
weeks of our membership to consider any alternative
that would achieve the purposes of the JIM in Syria.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
is appalled by the result of the voting as a result of
Russia’s veto — its third on the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism (JIM), its fifth on the Syrian
chemical dossier this year, and its eleventh on Syria. Let
us be clear. We respect and will always respect Russia,
to which we are linked by many ties, but this growing
number of vetoes raises questions. The question
raised today is especially grave because it is fraught
with potential consequences for the fight against the
proliferation and use of chemical weapons. Today’s
veto poses a serious threat to our common security.
What is at stake? If the JIM mandate is not renewed
before midnight, it will be dissolved. That means
that months of joint and good faith effort against the
proliferation and use of chemical weapons in Syria
will disappear with it. The goal of draft resolution
S/2017/970, submitted by Japan — whose commitment
I warmly commend — was a purely technical renewal
of the regime for one month. It did not require a political
statement of position, much less of ideology. It was
a neutral, technical text that would have given us the
time necessary to consider and discuss — in a word,
to reach agreement and demonstrate to the entire world
that the Council can meet its responsibilities.
If we do not take care, the outcome of today’s
voting as a result of Russia’s veto could have a threefold
effect. First, without any new development before
midnight, it would signify ipso facto the end of the JIM,
a mechanism created by the Council at the initiative of
Russia and the United States to combat the proliferation
and use of chemical weapons in Syria. Secondly, the
vote threatens to undermine the mechanics of the
international chemical non-proliferation regime. It will
be interpreted by some as giving carte blanche to the
proliferation and use of such weapons elsewhere, since
we have been collectively incapable of preventing or
punishing it in Syria. Moreover, it threatens to create a
fertile breeding ground for chemical terrorism, which
we will fear. Thirdly, given the fact that the international
chemical non-proliferation regime is highly evolved, its
4/8

17/11/2017

weakening could establish a dangerous and potentially
fatal precedent for the other non-proliferation regimes,
which the community of nations drafted and developed
patiently year after year, stone upon stone, over
preceding decades and which constitute the backbone
of our collective security.
If all of this should come about, we will pay a heavy
price for it. We must therefore not be discouraged by
these disastrous possibilities. If we believe in what we
do — if each of us believes that we are here for a reason
and with a mission — it is impossible to give up. We
have no right to do so. I therefore wish to share France’s
deep conviction that today’s disastrous vote cannot
be the final word. France will resign itself neither to
this apparent failure nor to political games that fall far
short of what is at stake. In the face of the enormity
and gravity of those stakes, we have no right to give up
while the eyes of the entire world are upon us. We have
no right to be discouraged. My country can be relied
upon to pursue its efforts in all appropriate forums in
order to combat impunity in Syria and elsewhere and to
promote, everywhere and at all times, the strengthening
of the non-proliferation regimes on which everyone’s
security depends.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): Last month, I
was disappointed that a simple technical rollover of
the mandate of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism (JIM) was blocked by Russia. Yesterday,
I was deeply disappointed that, even after extensive
efforts to reach an agreement, a further reasonable
attempt to renew the mandate was again vetoed by
Russia. That veto seriously damaged my hope that those
using chemical weapons in Syria would be identified
and held to account.
But now, I am frankly astounded that Russia has
rebuffed Japan’s perfectly sensible proposal to ask the
Secretary-General and the Director General of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
to consider the structure and methodology of the
JIM. This third veto in a month clearly exposes — if
it was not already obvious — Russia’s determination
to protect its Syrian ally, regardless of the harm it
causes to the ban on the use of chemical weapons, to
the wider international system of rules, and to Russia’s
own reputation.
The Council set up the JIM unanimously as the most
appropriate mechanism to investigate allegations of
17-38981

17/11/2017

The situation in the Middle East

chemical-weapons use in Syria, and since its inception
it has had many successes. Its experienced and expert
staff have demonstrated complete impartiality. Its
investigations have been professional, thorough and
rigorous. It has concluded that the Syrian regime
is responsible for blatant, repeated use of chemical
weapons against its own people in an increasingly
reckless and deadly manner. It has also found that
Da’esh is responsible for the use of chemical weapons
in Syria. The failure to renew the JIM is a failure to
uncover the truth behind the conduct of all actors who
used chemical weapons in Syria.
As I said yesterday (see S/PV.8105), those of us who
are committed to upholding the international system
will not cease in our efforts to stop the use of chemical
weapons and to identify and hold to account those who
use these vile weapons. We will keep going not only to
bring justice to those who have suffered from the use of
these despicable weapons, but also to deter those who
might think of doing so in the future.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I will be brief. In my grief,
I do not need to repeat what I said in the Chamber
yesterday (see S/PV.8105) about the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism (JIM) and the importance of
maintaining it. We appreciate the efforts made by you,
Mr. President, and other partners in trying your very
best to extend the mandate of the JIM. We deeply regret
that again this was not possible. We believe that we all
as, members of the Council, have the responsibility to
do everything possible to ensure accountability for the
use of chemical weapons and that there is no further
proliferation of such weapons.
Therefore we ask that informal consultations
be convened immediately following this meeting to
ensure that we are absolutely convinced that we have
exhausted every avenue and every effort before the
mandate of the JIM expires later tonight.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I can hardly find
the words to express my frustration over the voting
outcome. We did not have any illusions about it, but
some hope remained until the very last moment. It
vanished very quickly, however. Ukraine voted in
favour of draft resolution S/2017/970, fully realizing its
crucial importance, not only for the existence of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical WeaponsUnited Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM),
but, ultimately, for the entire non-proliferation regime.

S/PV. 8107

I wish to recall that Ukraine was among those
States that supported the technical rollover of the JIM’s
mandate for one year as the best option. We were trying
hard to avoid a repetition of last year, when mandate
negotiations in 2016 put a strain on the Mechanism’s
activities. This year, the world is witnessing an even
more dramatic situation. The obstruction by one
Security Council member deprived the JIM of any
chance of continuing its important work. Yesterday’s
and today’s meetings have clearly demonstrated that
the Russian Federation will never allow an independent
investigation of the horrible crimes in Syria to take
place, regardless of the document proposed.
Despite numerous attempts and the faithful efforts
of the Council’s majority to secure the JIM, Russia is the
only country that preferred to do its utmost to protect
both the Al-Assad regime and the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant from being held accountable. It did so
intentionally and in an extremely cynical way. Given
the fact that the vast majority of incidents in which
chemical weapons were probably used have not yet
been investigated, we do not exclude the possibility that
the Russian side might also be interested in preventing
the JIM from uncovering the truth about those cases.
Such desperate efforts to shut down the JIM at all costs
actually raise a serious question regarding the identity
of those who possibly directly sponsored such crimes.
The Russian delegation continues to recall
that, together with the United States, it initiated the
establishment of the JIM. It should now take full
responsibility for unilaterally killing it. It is our strong
belief that, notwithstanding the current situation,
we have to continue to spare no effort to avert the
increasing risk of the further use of chemical weapons,
while bearing in mind the innocent victims who have
already paid the ultimate price. Preventing such crimes
in the future is vital and necessary.
In conclusion, the Russian delegation sees no
problem in interrupting the JIM’s mandate. Let us not
fool ourselves. Once the JIM’s mandate ends tonight,
there will be nothing to roll over. In their statements,
many delegations committed to continuing to work on
the JIM. We should realize that, as of tomorrow, we
will have to begin those efforts from scratch.
Mr. Bermúdez Álvarez (Uruguay) (spoke
in Spanish): Uruguay voted in favour of draft
resolution S/2017/970, introduced by Japan for the
following reasons.

17-389815/8

S/PV.8107

The situation in the Middle East

First, the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism (JIM) was established by resolution 2235
(2015). It is our Mechanism.
Secondly, if the JIM were allowed to pursue its
work on the use of chemical weapons on a regular
basis, it would identify those responsible for the use
of those banned weapons, which constitutes atrocious
crimes directed against innocent civilians. The JIM is
crucial for combating impunity.
Thirdly, based on my second point, the work of the
JIM could be a deterrent to the use of those weapons in
other conflicts.
Fourthly, in such a long-standing and complex
conflict as that in Syria, whose political and
humanitarian dimensions we assess every week in the
Security Council, along with the chemical weapons
dossier, it is best to have a dedicated mechanism like
the JIM to address it.
Fifthly, as we said yesterday (see S/PV.8105),
it is paradoxical that the Security Council, which
established the JIM in the first place, has decided to
sign its death warrant.
In conclusion, we call once again for an end to
the current polarization and impasse in the Security
Council, and for the time necessary to be set aside to
save the Mechanism. To that end, we echo the request
made by the representative of Sweden.
Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): As we said yesterday
(see S/PV.8105), Kazakhstan attaches great importance
to the continuation of the work of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM). The possible
ways of improving the structure and the mandate of the
Mechanism are a subject worthy of further discussion
and negotiations. In that regard, the proposed technical
draft resolution has a special provision for the
possibility of a break in the continued operation of the
Mechanism, and is acceptable to my delegation. That is
why we supported draft resolution S/2017/970.
It is regrettable that we were unable to save the
Joint Investigative Mechanism. My delegation calls
on the parties concerned to continue dialogue so as
to find common ground. Should there be a need with
regard to mediation assistance in order to bring the two
sides together and reconcile their divergent positions,
Kazakhstan stands ready to take such an initiative.
6/8

17/11/2017

Time is of the essence, and we see a great need for all
of us to arrive at a mutually satisfying path leading
towards a unified vision for the future of the JIM.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): I will also be very brief. First of
all, allow me to thank Japan for introducing draft
resolution S/2017/970, which was intended to provide
a solution to this difficult process. This morning
during consultations, we once again condemned the
use of chemical weapons and advocated for the need
of an independent and impartial investigation to
identify those responsible for those atrocity crimes.
Similarly, we expressed our concern about the lack
of communication among members of the Security
Council that has currently led us to exactly the same
situation as yesterday (see S/PV.8105).
We once can express our gratitude for the draft
proposal. We endorse many of its principles, but we
regret the fact that without the participation and input
of all actors, we will predictably repeat the same
scenario. In that vein, we believe that we continue to be
faced with the task of ensuring that the use of chemical
weapons in Syria or anywhere else is duly investigated.
We believe that the Council must continue to work on
this issue until we reach a full consensus so as to avoid
repeating the situations in which we find ourselves
today, and found ourselves yesterday.
My delegation therefore joins the representative of
Sweden in proposing that, at the end of this meeting,
we meet for informal consultations on the matter.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
situation in Syria is at a critical stage. The political
process is facing important opportunities. Any action
taken on the Syrian issue must focus on further
advancing the overall political process and strive
for long-term stability and security in that country.
We have repeatedly explained our position on the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical WeaponsUnited Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM).
Significant differences persist among Council Members
on the issue. It is imperative for the parties to remain
calm, exercise restraint and find an appropriate solution
that is acceptable to all through patient consultations.
Given the major differences among Council
Members, forcing a vote does not contribute to
resolving the issue of chemical weapons in Syria
or serve to safeguard the unity and authority of the
Council, nor does it help to advance the political
17-38981

17/11/2017

The situation in the Middle East

process in Syria. China felt that it had to abstain in
voting on draft resolution S/2017/970. We once again
regret the division seen on the Council today.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian delegation has participated in
good faith in all the consultations, multilateral and
bilateral, designed to bring the positions of Security
Council members closer on the extension of the mandate
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism
(JIM) to investigate instances of chemical weapons
used in Syria. Any attempt to present things differently
amounts to nothing but intentional disinformation.
We note the initiative of our Japanese colleagues,
which they presented with the intention of helping to
find a way out of the situation. But we cannot support
their proposal for a short technical extension of the
JIM’s mandate. We informed the members of the
Council of that decision and explained our reasons. The
draft resolution (S/2017/970) was nevertheless put to the
vote. This step has nothing to do with anxiety about the
fate of the Mechanism, since everyone knows that it is
winding up its work today. As far as we are concerned,
no extension of the JIM’s mandate is possible unless
we fix the fundamental shortcomings in its work. Any
other possibility can be excluded since the Mechanism
leadership — already covered with shame thanks to its
fictitious investigation of the episode of sarin use in
Khan Shaykhun — has signed on to the unsubstantiated
accusations that have been made against Syria.
I do not really know whether those who have been
condemning Russia so vehemently today have actually
read the report or our comments on it. Japan’s draft
resolution has presented the Secretary-General with the
impossible task of submitting proposals that reflect the
views of the members of the Security Council. As our
heated discussion has emphasized, in many respects
they are diametrically opposed.
We cannot consider the subject of extending the
JIM in isolation from the general context. Yesterday’s
Security Council meeting, which was politically
loaded in ways that had very little to do with chemical
weapons in Syria, left a very unpleasant aftertaste.
We are even more alarmed about what is going on
in the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons. The United States delegation introduced
a draft resolution (S/2017/962) that essentially paves
the way for giving Syria an ultimatum. What are

S/PV. 8107

they trying to achieve? Destruction of the results of
the unprecedented collective efforts to accomplish
Syria’s chemical demilitarization that Russia and the
United States launched? Have they thought about the
consequences of the steps they have taken in New York
and The Hague for a political settlement in Syria? What
is going on now in the Security Council in New York,
and what they came up with in The Hague, are links in
a single chain.
Opinions have been voiced that a failure on the
part of the Security Council to come to a decision on
extending the JIM might reflect badly on the Council’s
authority and dignity. We suggest looking at it from
the other direction. Will it really add to the Security
Council’s authority if we extend the life of a body
that for the past two years has been rubber-stamping
unsubstantiated accusations against Syria, as if nothing
had happened? Is that worth making the Security
Council an accomplice in a grandiose fraud? Did it
look good when, at the April meeting convened after
the American air strike on the Shayrat airbase (see
S/PV.7922), many delegations either acted as if nothing
had happened or flat-out supported an act of aggression
against a sovereign State?
There is absolutely no basis for assuming that
ending the work of the JIM signals the emergence
of some kind of new challenges to the regime of the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
whose implementation Russia views with the greatest
possible feeling of responsibility. That has been our
historical role, and we cherish it. The non-proliferation
regime depends on international instruments that have
nothing to do with the JIM. But what really needs
attention is the growing threat of chemical terrorism in
the Middle East.
What has been going on here today is like a bad
play. Russia is blamed for shutting down the JIM. The
people claiming that seem to have short memories.
Have they forgotten that yesterday it was they who shut
it down by voting against the draft resolution submitted
by Russia, China and Bolivia (S/2017/968)? Yesterday,
when a vote was taken (see S/PV.8105) on the RussianChinese draft resolution submitted by Bolivia, the
Council had a good opportunity to give the Mechanism
a new chance by improving and strengthening it. But
the effort was blocked — effectively vetoed by three
permanent members of the Council. Do not bother
trying to lay the responsibility on Russia now. It was
a conscious choice on the part of those whose priority

17-389817/8

S/PV.8107

The situation in the Middle East

clearly has nothing to do with ensuring an objective
investigation of chemical crimes in the region but is
all about keeping the pressure on Syria and having
confrontations with Russia.
There is no need to create drama out of the end of
the JIM’s work. There is nothing preventing Council
members from continuing to discuss the question of
improving this instrument with a view to its possible
resumption of its work in the future. But for that it
is essential to come to a common understanding of
the importance of eliminating the JIM’s systemic
shortcomings, which have ruined it. Our draft resolution
remains on the table. If those who are concerned
about renewing its activities really want it, they can
get involved in meaningful work on its text and stop
dealing in political propaganda.
The President: I will now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Italy.
Italy supported the draft resolution put forward by
Japan (S/2017/970) and would like to thank the Japanese
delegation for its effort. We have already affirmed
many times, including in this Chamber yesterday, the

8/8

17/11/2017

importance we attach to the global non-proliferation
architecture and to ensuring accountability for
violations of its norms. In our view, the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM) is a crucial tool in
that regard, and we are not ready to simply accept that
its existence is over. We are once again disappointed in
the result of the vote. We have until midnight. If there is
even the slightest chance of renewing the JIM’s mandate
by then, we will work constructively to draft that last
chance. Otherwise, we will continue striving to find
agreement on an issue of crucial importance to us all
and to the Council’s ability to fulfil its responsibilities.
Italy also supports Sweden’s proposal in that regard.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more speakers inscribed on the list
of speakers. I now invite Council members to informal
consultations, as requested by Sweden, to continue our
discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 7.05 p.m.

17-38981
