S/2001/1320

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
28 December 2001
Original: English

Letter dated 26 December 2001 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council
As you will recall, in a letter dated 12 July 2001 to the President of the
Security Council, I informed members of the Council of the state of the appeal for
voluntary contributions to the Special Court for Sierra Leone, in particular the
revised budget estimates reflecting a scaled-down operation of the Court. On the
basis of indications received of contributions in funds for the first year of operation
of the Court, I then made a determination that, if obtained in the amount pledged,
such contributions would be sufficient to commence the establishment and operation
of the Court. As of 30 November 2001, the Secretariat has received contributions in
the amount of US$ 14.8 million for the first year — a shortfall of $1.4 million —
and pledges in the amounts of $13.0 million and $7.4 million for the two subsequent
years — a shortfall of approximately $19.6 million.
The Council and the Secretariat have an understanding that the implementation
of the Agreement on the Establishment of the Special Court for Sierra Leone would
commence only after it could be ascertained that sufficient contributions were in
hand to finance the establishment of the Court and 12 months of its operation, and
that pledges had been received equal to the anticipated expenses of the following 24
months. While the first year of operation of the Court is virtually funded, the
shortfall in the pledges for the second and third years of operation remains quite
high.
I am persuaded, however, of the political will of States and their commitment
to the success and continued viability of the Court. I have therefore taken the
decision to authorize the commencement of the operation of the Court, beginning
with the dispatch of a planning mission to Freetown. The purpose of the mission
will be to discuss with the Government of Sierra Leone the practical arrangements
for the establishment and operation of the Court, including premises, the provision
of local personnel and services, and the launching of the investigative and
prosecutorial process. The mission, scheduled from 7 to 18 January 2002, will be led
by the Office of Legal Affairs of the Secretariat, and will be composed, in addition,
of experts in all aspects of the operation of the Court and representatives of the
members of the Management Committee.
The last pending issue between the Secretariat and the Government of Sierra
Leone — the question of the temporal jurisdiction of the Court — has now been
resolved. By a letter dated 7 December 2001, the Government of Sierra Leone has
indicated that while maintaining its position of principle, it will be willing to

01-71852 (E) 311201

*0171852*

S/2001/1320

conclude the Agreement with the temporal jurisdiction set as originally agreed as of
30 November 1996. It is expected that the Agreement with the Government of Sierra
Leone will be signed at the conclusion of the mission, thus establishing the legal
framework for the establishment and operation of the Court.
Having authorized the commencement of the operation of the Special Court for
Sierra Leone, I wish nevertheless to reiterate the concerns expressed in my previous
communications to the Council regarding the difficulties inherent in securing funds
on the basis of voluntary contributions for an operation which engages the services
of a great number of Sierra Leonean and international personnel. While trusting that
members of the Council who called for the establishment of the Court would ensure
that it successfully accomplishes its operation, I reserve the right to revert to at any
time in the course of the operation of the Court, and request the Council to consider,
the financing of any residual shortfall through assessed contributions or an alternate
means of financing. Members of the Council will note that, once the Court is
established, the United Nations, as a signatory to the Agreement on its
establishment, will assume certain obligations, inter alia, vis-à-vis persons detained
under the Court’s authority or in regard to contractual relationship. Furthermore, it
should be borne in mind that a shift to assessed contributions would automatically
require the application of the administrative regime of the United Nations, including
the full involvement of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions and the Fifth Committee of the General Assembly.
Upon the return of the planning mission to Headquarters, I will report to
members of the Council on the recommendations on the organization of the start-up
phase and all aspects of the establishment and operation of the Court.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

2
