S/PV.8685

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8685th meeting

Monday, 16 December 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Norman-Chalet. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Adom
Mr. Trullols Yabra
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Ugarelli
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Kuzmin
Ms. Mogashoa
Mr. Roscoe

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa
Intercommunal violence and terrorism in West Africa

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-40921 (E)
*1940921*

S/PV.8685

Peace and security in Africa

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
Intercommunal violence and terrorism in
West Africa
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in the meeting:
Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel; and Mr. Smaïl
Chergui, African Union Commissioner for Peace
and Security.
Mr. Chambas and Mr. Chergui are joining today’s
meeting via video-teleconference from Dakar and
Addis Ababa, respectively.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I give the floor to Mr. Chambas.
Mr. Chambas: Let me start by thanking the United
States and Côte d’Ivoire for organizing today’s briefing.
Intercommunal violence is a vast theme. I will attempt
to highlight some of the dynamics in West Africa
and the Sahel, as well as relevant responses that have
brought together local, national and regional actors.
As Security Council members are aware, the
region has been shaken by unprecedented violence in
recent months. Last week’s horrific attacks against the
Inates military camp in the Niger continue to haunt
the region. The Heads of State of the Group of Five
for the Sahel yesterday reiterated their call for stronger
alliances and support. They also emphasized that the
trio of the Government, the population and the security
and defence forces should not yield. Relentless attacks
on civilian and military targets have shaken public
confidence, while international forces in the region
have also endured significant losses. We must salute
the courage and the unbroken spirit of the defence
and security forces working across West Africa and
the Sahel.
Incidents in the region show how terrorism,
organized crime and intercommunal violence can
easily intertwine, yet it is essential to avoid confusion
2/20

16/12/2019

and distinguish among the drivers of the violence.
Indigenous factors of local conflicts have been
documented, including governance deficits, the poor
management of natural resources, inequalities and
marginalization, corruption and the broader failure of
Governments to deliver their regalian functions, notably
security and justice, especially in peripheral areas.
Concerning violent extremism, the strategy and
objectives of armed groups in the region are in the
public domain. The use of local dynamics to spread
extremism was explicit in Al-Qaida’s instructions to its
militants in Timbuktu as early as 2012. Among their
tactics was the leveraging of local grievances and of the
domestic movements of persons. State weaknesses have
been thoroughly exploited. Extremists provide safety,
protection, social services and justice in the areas that
they control. According to their perspective, longstanding grievances serve their purposes.
Conflicts related to transhumance constitute some
of the most violent local conflicts in the region, and
extremist groups have managed to implicate themselves
in in their resolution. An economic and Islamic tribunal
near Gao rules on compensation and sanctions in
such conflicts. Arrangements between herders and
extremists have led to deep societal divides across
the region. Yet we need to avoid generalities. Their
relationship differs greatly from one country or region
to the next. Man-made factors and the prevalence of
weapons combined with a harsh natural environment,
as well as expanding desert areas and climate change,
are significant issues related to transhumance. But let
us bear in mind that close to 70 per cent of people in
West Africa remain dependent on agriculture and the
rearing livestock for their existence. Finding ways
to ensure peaceful coexistence between herders and
farmers is therefore imperative.
Other forms of communal violence are triggered by
the nature of the fight against terrorism itself in many
of the countries of the region. Furthermore, they do not
have the sufficient security forces to provide adequate
geographical coverage. Resorting to sub-contracting
local defence forces or vigilantes is a double-edged
sword. The United Nations Office for West Africa and
the Sahel (UNOWAS) has been advocating for improved
legal frameworks and longer-term approaches with a
number of Governments that are aware of the risks.
With regard to religious violence across the region,
this year has been particularly brutal. Burkina Faso
19-40921

16/12/2019

Peace and security in Africa

especially has seen unprecedented anti-Christian
attacks. The perpetrators, together with other violent
extremists, and through the use of internal communal
violence have driven hundreds of thousands of
people away from their homes in the northern and
central-north regions. That exodus has caused the
flow of internally displaced persons to reach 500,000
people, as compared to about 50,000 during the same
period last year. This year we have observed similar
patterns of targeted religious violence around Tillbéri
and Diffa. Ideologically motivated violence can feed on
conflicts, tearing apart communities over land or water
disputes. That violence, however, has its own causes
and rationale, and therefore needs to be addressed
differently. Governments, local actors, regional
organizations and the international community have
mobilized to address that multidimensional violence.
I would like to summarize some of the concerted
responses and the existing strategic framework.
The United Nations response in the Sahel has,
under the Secretary-General, increased its cross-pillar
focus. Across West Africa and the Sahel, multi-agency
initiatives bring together security, development, rule
of law and human rights interventions. Our approach
is anchored on supporting national Governments in
their implementation of the Sustainable Development
Goals and on building partnerships towards greater
synergies. We now have useful instruments in place,
including the compliance framework for the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) Joint Force and a renewed
focus by United Nations country teams on governance
issues. Weak justice systems remain some of the
critical deficiencies with regard to national responses.
National Governments fully welcome the efforts to
strengthen justice and police institutions under the
various initiatives by the Group of Seven and the Sahel
Alliance. The United Nations system should also be
mobilized in that regard.
Regional
organizations
remain
our
first
counterparts for conflict resolution in the region. The
recent African Union conference on access to natural
resources and conflict between communities held with
the assistance of United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Bamako in
November provided a framework for the prevention and
resolution of local conflicts. Ahead of Commissioner
Chergui’s recommendations, I would like to call on
the Council to support the implementation of the
Bamako declaration. The Council should also extend

S/PV. 8685

support to local initiatives. We have seen progress in
recent months in curbing violence between herders and
farmers as a result of grass-roots dialogue initiated in
Mali, the Niger and Nigeria. The Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) is also gathering
best practices from the region, drawing on traditional
dispute resolution mechanisms. Remedies to violent
extremism in particular are being put in place in many
West African countries. They consist of common
denominators, political will, courageous local actors
and the involvement of women and young people.
As Security Council resolution 2250 (2015)
emphasizes, youth are at the heart of such responses.
Social and traditional media have a key role to play in
curbing violent ideologies and religious intolerance,
as a means to address hateful narratives. There are
many grass-roots initiatives in that regard, such as the
interfaith coalitions in the Borno, Adamawa and Yobe
states in Nigeria that actively work to curtail Boko
Haram from recruiting members. Local peacemakers
also benefit from the support of the Finland-based
Network for Religious and Traditional Peacemakers,
launched in 2013. Bilateral assistance at the country
level throughout the region is also increasingly looking
into grass-roots reconciliation initiatives.
The Council can play a decisive role in supporting all
those efforts. In addition to donor and technical support,
assistance on security-related and law enforcement
matters remains vital. Curbing the financial and
support corridors used by armed groups and their links
with illegal trade requires international cooperation.
Targeted sanctions and other measures recommended
by panels of experts are relevant for leverage in this
case. Illegal trafficking in gold in particular has been
increasingly documented and exposed. The ECOWAS
summit held in Ouagadougou in September and
yesterday’s G-5 Summit in Niamey, as well as the
discussions planned for the ECOWAS summit to held
on 21 December in Abuja, highlight the undeterred
regional solidarity and the commitment to bring this
violence to an end.
The Security Council’s support for the region
cannot falter at this juncture. The presentation of
the Secretary-General’s report and consultations on
UNOWAS’s mandate in January will provide us with
more opportunities to review the complexity of the
security dynamics in the region and pathways to peace
and security.

19-409213/20

S/PV.8685

Peace and security in Africa

The President: I thank Special Representative
Chambas for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Chergui.
Mr. Chergui: At the outset, let me congratulate you,
Madam President, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of December and
express my gratitude for the invitation extended to me,
which reflects the growing and excellent partnership
between our two organizations.
I also wish to commend the Council for
discussing for the first time the interlinkage between
intercommunal violence and terrorism in West Africa.
This issue is indeed a bitter reality that concerns us
all and that we should all responsibly and collectively
address. I want to thank my brother Mr. Chambas for
his briefing and the pertinent proposals that he made.
The situation is alarming. The resurgence of violent
armed attacks by terrorist and extremist groups in West
Africa and the Sahel, as demonstrated by the recent
attack in Inates, the Niger, and Mali, and the almost
daily attacks in Burkina Faso indicate a worsening
human security situation in the region. This is despite
efforts by States, indigenous civil-society organizations
and the international community to restore security.
The interlinkages between armed groups in the
region are becoming increasingly sophisticated in a
constantly changing environment. The armed groups
are involved in illicit activities to fund their operations,
including weapons trafficking, artisanal gold mining,
motorcycle and fuel sales, cattle rustling and poaching.
They are also involved in local conflicts, not only
fuelling them but also serving as mediators in some
cases or as an interposition force between warring
communities. The armed groups are also using the
neighbours of Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger as
transit zones for their illegal activities, such as the sale
or purchase of motorcycles, spare parts and fertilizers.
They also fund their activities by selling stolen livestock
for consumption in Nigeria, Benin, Togo, Ghana and
Côte d’Ivoire.
The security situation is further exactly
exacerbated by the region’s vulnerability to climate
change, which worsens rapid- and slow-onset disasters,
food insecurity, water scarcity and transhumance
conflicts. The threat of food insecurity will challenge
the resilience of citizens in the region in the coming
years and has the potential to render vulnerable young
4/20

16/12/2019

people susceptible to the narrative and propaganda of
criminal and extremist groups.
This devastating situation has further created
a grave humanitarian situation that requires our
attention. I have in mind the 2,850 schools that have
been shut down in Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger
due to the operations of violent extremist groups.
Hundreds of boys and girls have been conscripted,
abducted, raped and killed by extremist groups, with
a consequent psychosocial impact on their families
and communities. The State’s limited presence in the
peripheries has also hampered its efforts to provide
protection to communities. Even in places where there
is a Government presence, Government authorities
remain perplexed and challenged. Trust and confidence
in traditional mechanisms of conflict management have
also eroded considerably. We must pool our efforts to
assist the Governments of the region to strengthen the
authority of the States in the peripheries.
We in the African Union (AU) have been seized of
this issue from the beginning by supporting the efforts of
the region to address the crisis. We recognize the gains
made through multilateral international partnerships,
including the activities and initiatives launched and
sustained through the Nouakchott Process, the Group
of Five for the Sahel and the Multinational Joint
Task Force.
I wish also to seize this opportunity to note
the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali. The African Union Peace and Security Council,
concerned about this issue, requested the Commission,
during its 838th meeting, on 9 April, to develop a
credible framework for the effective prevention and
management, as well as the resolution, of local conflicts,
including intercommunal violence and transhumance
and land disputes, in collaboration with other relevant
organizations and mechanisms.
The African Union, in collaboration with the
Government of Mali and the support of the United
Nations, convened a ministerial conference on the
theme “Access to natural resources and conflict
between communities” on 28 and 29 November in
Bamako, at which the Bamako Declaration was adopted.
The Declaration consists of a set of recommendations
articulated around seven key objectives.
First, it encourages the member States to sign,
ratify and domesticate the relevant legal instruments
19-40921

16/12/2019

Peace and security in Africa

S/PV. 8685

with a view to facilitating the implementation of the
actions agreed on in the Declaration.

economic communities and mechanisms to implement
those recommendations.

Second, it urges the African Union Commission,
in cooperation with the appropriate regional economic
communities and regional mechanisms, to develop
a policy framework for local conflict prevention,
management and resolution, accompanied by a plan
of action.

The reality is that, despite all our efforts, we
are collectively failing to reverse this trend. On the
contrary, the situation is worsening. Beyond calling
on the Council to support the Bamako declaration,
I therefore want to say that we need to reset. Let me
repeat — we need a reset. Allow me to make four key
suggestions on the way forward.

Third, the Bamako Declaration calls for a plan
of action that should support local, national and
international efforts in the prevention and management
of conflicts between communities through adaptive
and innovative approaches.
Fourth, it also calls for the deployment, as
necessary, of African Union tools, in particular the
African Union Border Programme, to assist member
States in their efforts to strengthen social cohesion and
community safety. I am pleased to report that in this
regard, through the African Union Border Programme,
work has already begun in countries such as Mali, the
Niger, Burkina Faso, Benin, Zimbabwe and Botswana,
to name but a few.
Fifth, it urges the African Union Commission to
work with member States to mobilize financial resources
for investment in local community development and
security projects.
Sixth, it requires the identification, development
and standardization of good practices and policies as
well as their popularization.
Seventh, it recommends the initiation of a common
process of reflection with respect to ownership of all
data specific to this conflict and to promote an African
solution with respect for local traditions and values.
Lastly, it calls for the coordination of interventions
promoting social cohesion between communities,
in particular the restoration of trust between States
and peoples, and to ensure that judicial mechanisms,
traditional and State-led, are able to respond promptly
and equitably to the need for transparency and proximity
to win the confidence of the populations concerned.
More recently, on 13 December, the African Union
Peace and Security Council welcomed the Bamako
declaration, recognizing that it provides us with a road
map to curb those local conflicts, which are paralysing
our efforts to silence the guns by 2020. We look forward
to working with the United Nations and our regional

First, we need to creatively rethink the military
support that we are providing to the countries of the
region. The challenges encountered are beyond the
capacity of the States concerned. Certainly, addressing
this issue will require a holistic approach that must
involve political and socioeconomic actions, such as
strengthening the presence of the State in the periphery
and ramp up States’ capacities to deliver basic services,
including as it pertains to the rule of the law, education,
infrastructure and strong environmental policies to
address climate change.
Secondly, the African Union and the United
Nations, guided by the Bamako declaration, in an
integrated manner can work to develop mechanisms to
support our States members in various areas.
Thirdly, the African Union and the United Nations
should jointly co-chair a coordinating mechanism to
bring some coherence to the more than 16 strategies
concerning the Sahel.
Fourthly, we should all condemn the stigmatization
of certain groups in the region, as it creates a dangerous
attitude of “us versus them”.
Let me conclude by stressing that we need to
redouble our efforts. The lack of solidarity with the
countries of the region at the regional and international
levels has been troubling. We are facing threats that do
not respect boundaries and have the potential of rapidly
spreading across the continent and beyond. The African
Union joint partnership has come a long way. Nowhere
is it needed more than ever than in the Sahel and the
region of West Africa. It is our hope that the spirit of
cooperation that we have developed over the years will
characterize our efforts to address the numerous and
complex issues that lie ahead for the region.
The President: I thank Mr. Chergui for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the United States.

19-409215/20

S/PV.8685

Peace and security in Africa

16/12/2019

I want to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Chambas and Ambassador Chergui
for their briefings. I also thank Côte d’Ivoire for
co-hosting this meeting with us. Today’s meeting is
a strong finish to that country’s efforts over the past
two years to highlight challenges in West Africa.
Côte d’Ivoire has been a distinguished partner in this
Chamber, and its voice will be truly missed.

from community-led efforts. Secondly, all communities
in West Africa and the Sahel should enjoy inclusive
representative governance. That includes access to
essential services and resources and accountability for
leaders who fail to meet those needs. Thirdly, in order
to maintain accountability, civil leaders at every level
must have an active role in upholding the social contract
between citizens and their Governments.

Let me also begin with words of condolence to our
friends in the Niger who will join the Security Council
in January. The deepest sympathies of the United States
are with the families of the more than 70 soldiers of
the Niger who were killed in the 10 December terrorist
attack. It is with that latest attack in mind that we
meet today to better understand how the international
community can prevent violent extremism in West
Africa and the Sahel.

This is not just talk. The United States administers
numerous programmes to support those solutions. In
2017 and 2018 we provided more than $5.5 billion in
support of long-term stability and security in West
Africa. In the Lake Chad region we provided nearly
$470 million in assistance to address underlying
drivers of conflict and counter terrorist threats. Our
United States Young African Leaders Initiative invests
in capacity-building to equip young leaders with the
skills to build bridges in conflict and lead democratic
societies. Our Prosper Africa Initiative supports
trade, investments and livelihoods in urban and rural
areas. And the State Department’s Sahel Development
Partnership offers a holistic approach to bolster
resilience and counter violent extremism.

In West Africa there has been an explosion in
violent extremism and intercommunal conflict as
jihadist cells attempt to take root. Those groups fuel
violence by exploiting local grievances, a lack of State
presence and existing intercommunal tensions. We have
seen a dramatic uptick in the tempo and complexity of
attacks against security forces in Mali and the Sahel,
especially by the Islamic State in the Greater Sahara.
Boko Haram and Islamic State’s West African Province
also continue to terrorize the Lake Chad region.
Meanwhile, the protracted conflict in Libya threatens
to further destabilize an already-fragile Sahel.
That violence has most acutely affected civilians,
reducing food security and displacing more than
900,000 people. When communities feel that they must
compete for limited resources, or that they cannot rely
on their Governments to provide basic infrastructure,
economic opportunity and protection, they are more
likely to become aggrieved. Citizens must have the
confidence that their Governments can and will
protect them. If not, they will seek out other means of
protection, including joining violent or criminal groups.
Good governance and capable and accountable security
forces are critical to violence prevention.
What should we do to reverse that trend and create
the necessary conditions for peace and stability? The
solutions are many, although I would like to highlight
a few today.
First, a military response alone often fails to
address the root causes of violent conflict. Societal
resilience to the threat of violent extremism is born
6/20

Those are just a few examples of how the United
States partners with West Africa to foster a more
prosperous, democratic and stable region. But, in order
to combat regional violence and enhance stability, we
need greater commitment from Governments of the
region. The United States supports Nigeria’s efforts to
end violence, facilitate the swift and voluntary return
of displaced communities and bring those responsible
for abuses to justice. But I must reiterate the need for
unhindered life-saving humanitarian access for relief
organizations to serve the people of Nigeria, including
the areas most affected by Boko Haram.
We look forward to the advancement of cornerstone
political objectives such as the implementation of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
emanating from the Algiers process. But we remain
concerned that the Government of Mali and the signatory
armed groups have made little progress implementing
the Agreement. The United States is optimistic about
our collective ability to make progress in this vital
region. We believe that, working together both in the
Council and with Governments of the region, there is
no limit to the potential of West Africa and its people
that can be unleashed.
19-40921

16/12/2019

Peace and security in Africa

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I will now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): I thank
the United States presidency of the Security Council
for convening this public meeting on intercommunal
violence and preventing violent extremism in West
Africa, a region severely affected by evolving security
challenges that affect the stability and the very existence
of the States in the region.
I commend His Excellency Mr. Smaïl Chergui,
African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security,
and Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS), for
their excellent briefings and the relevance of their
recommendations. Their analyses expose the extreme
seriousness of intercommunal violence and violent
extremism — two scourges that unfortunately push
vulnerable populations, including young people and
entire communities, towards terrorist armed groups
and cross-border criminal networks.
At this point I would like to pay a well-deserved
tribute to the brave Malian, Nigerien and Burkinabé
soldiers who made the ultimate sacrifice for the noble
cause of peace and security in their countries and our
region. Once again 71 Nigerien soldiers were taken
from their countries, families and friends yesterday.
They died for their country, and we hope the blood they
shed will fertilize the seeds of a peace that we all want
to see as soon as possible and that their sacrifice will
not be in vain.
I am very pleased to be following our eminent briefers
in taking the floor on behalf of the African countries
elected to the Security Council — Equatorial Guinea,
South Africa and my own country, Côte d’Ivoire — in
order to share our common vision of peace and security
issues which, though they may be particularly acute in
West Africa, are just as much a common denominator
in many parts of Africa. Our vision resonates perfectly
with the Bamako declaration on access to natural
resources and conflict between communities, adopted
at the ministerial meeting held in Bamako on 28 and
29 November at the initiative of the African Union and
with the support of the United Nations and the regional
African economic communities.

S/PV. 8685

From a security and humanitarian point of view,
2019 will undoubtedly remain one of the darkest years
that West Africa and the Sahel have experienced, due to
the intercommunal violence and terrorist attacks, which
have resulted in several hundred deaths and the internal
displacement of thousands more. They have also led to
the closure of many schools, depriving thousands of
children of their fundamental right to education. In
addition, terrorist groups and transnational criminal
networks are gradually getting a foothold in many
regions that suffer from weak or virtually absent
State institutions. In areas where the State’s sovereign
authority should prevail, such deleterious groups
provide security and social alternatives by exploiting
intercommunal tensions to their advantage. Among
many other things, the feelings in some communities
of marginalization, their desire for protection, tensions
over the control of water resources, arable land and
pastures, the lack of basic social infrastructure and the
endemic unemployment of young people are all reasons
for the intercommunal violence and violent extremism.
In the face of these threats to security in the entire
region and far beyond, we have a duty to act urgently
and decisively, while supporting current initiatives
through responses that take into account the internal,
transnational and external causes of intercommunal
violence and violent extremism. To that end, the African
countries elected to the Security Council endorse the
briefers’ recommendations and believe that responses to
the current security and humanitarian issues should be
developed within the framework of a multidimensional
approach based on the promotion of a constructive and
inclusive national dialogue.
Because they have a sovereign responsibility
to provide for the security and social needs of their
peoples, the States of the region need the necessary
capacities to respond to their people’s concerns. It is
therefore important for States to address their current
weaknesses in the areas of security and defence, the early
warning and management of intercommunal violence
and the fight against poverty and unemployment, which
fuel violent extremism. In that regard, the three African
members of the Security Council would like to take the
opportunity offered by this debate to reiterate their call
for increased support to the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel) and the Lake Chad Basin Commission,
in order to further operationalize the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force and the Multinational Joint Task Force, and also
to support development initiatives, which will promote

19-409217/20

S/PV.8685

Peace and security in Africa

the economic and social recovery of the areas affected
by intercommunal violence.
However, we must keep in mind that strengthening
States’ capacities on the security and social fronts
will not be productive unless it is accompanied by
initiatives that can counter community mistrust of
the public authorities and security and defence forces.
That is why we firmly believe that promoting bold and
inclusive dialogue with marginalized communities
would help to ensure that their needs are taken into
account when public policies are formulated, and would
eliminate the spiral of intercommunal violence that
reflects a deep need for dialogue. In that process, civil
society and the media should also play a decisive role
in preventing intercommunal violence and extremism.
It is civil society’s multifaceted nature that enables it to
bring together community leaders, women and young
people as well as civil-society organizations, and that
can make it a crucible in which to develop consensus
solutions to the security and social challenges facing
States and local communities.
For their part, the media, including social networks
and community radio, are essential for educating and
raising awareness about all forms of violence, as well
as spreading messages of peace, tolerance and social
cohesion. They are also communication tools that
make it possible to demolish the radical ideology and
rhetoric of terrorist groups. In short, through dialogue
and concerted initiatives to alleviate community
tensions, the public authorities, civil society and local
communities can work for strong local ownership
in the fight against intercommunal violence and
violent extremism.
The African countries of the Security Council also
believe that the transnational and transregional nature
of intercommunal violence and violent extremism
requires enhanced cooperation in security, defence
and economic and social development. It is essential
to ensure the coherence and coordination of initiatives
at the regional and transregional levels, promote
the sharing of experiences and good practices and
strengthen cooperation in the areas of intelligence and
legal assistance.
We salute the heroic efforts of Mali and Burkina
Faso to combat intercommunal violence and violent
extremism, despite particularly difficult economic
circumstances. They are the last defence against the
spread of jihadi groups to the coastal countries of West
8/20

16/12/2019

Africa. If that defence were breached it would provide
the terrorist surge with a perfect opportunity to realize
its dreadful ambitions of controlling the subregion’s
ports and enormous economic potential and installing
an Islamic caliphate. West Africa and the Sahel would
then become the centre of a terrorist cancer that could
metastasize to other parts of the world.
The challenges of combating intercommunal
violence and extremism therefore extend well beyond
the geographic area of West Africa and the Sahel.
We are facing a regional and international security
emergency that is more acute than ever and deserves our
full attention. The three African countries elected to
the Council therefore urge the international community
and development partners to increase their various
contributions to the ongoing development initiatives in
the region.
Finally, we reiterate our plea for the Security
Council’s decisive involvement in the quest for a
lasting solution to the conflict in Libya, which is a
true Pandora’s box whose opening has exacerbated
insecurity and instability in West Africa and the Sahel
and created conditions conducive to the establishment
of terrorist groups. Despite the current grave security
threats, the willingness of States of the region to engage
in a relentless fight against intercommunal violence,
violent extremism and terrorism has never been
stronger, as evidenced by the commitments undertaken
on 14 September in Ouagadougou by the Heads of State
and Government of the Economic Community of West
African States and by the West African Economic and
Monetary Union in Dakar on 1 December. They very
much hope that the Security Council will do its part in
this key period, when regional and international peace
and stability are at stake.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
We listened carefully to the briefings by Special
Representative Chambas and Mr. Smaїl Chergui, the
African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security.
Their opinions and suggestions deserve the Security
Council’s full attention.
China strongly condemns last week’s terrorist
attack in the Niger. We would like to express our sorrow
for the victims and our deep condolences and sympathy
to the bereaved families and the injured, to whom we
wish a speedy recovery from their pain and injuries.
The current situation in West Africa is generally
stable. The economy continues to develop, and
19-40921

16/12/2019

Peace and security in Africa

the efforts to achieve strength and unity have had
remarkable results. There have been many success
stories for the good offices, mediation and peacekeeping
operations of the United Nations in West Africa. For
example, Sierra Leone, Liberia and Cote d’Ivoire
have graduated, as we say, from the Security Council
agenda and have embarked on a path of sustainable
development. However, the region is also facing threats
and challenges, traditional and non-traditional, that call
for the international community’s attention and support.
One of those challenges is intercommunal violence.
Transhumance has led to increased competition for
resources such as land and water, resulting in frequent
conflicts between farmers and herders. Among other
factors, ethnic and religious differences, climate change
and the prevalence of weapons have exacerbated the
region’s problems. What is even more worrying is that
in the past few years terrorism and extremism have
taken advantage of those problems as opportunities.
Boko Haram and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
have continued to grow in West Africa, and extremist
militants have returned and used these conflicts
to launch attacks, posing unprecedented threats to
regional peace and stability. At the same time, the links
between intercommunal violence and terrorism have
increased and demand a holistic approach on the part of
the international community.
We must accelerate development in West Africa
with a view to eliminating this breeding ground
for intercommunal violence and conflicts, which in
essence are a struggle for development resources.
Extreme poverty and a lack of development are the root
causes. We should put our full weight behind economic
and social development in order to increase investment
and trade in Africa with a view to eradicating poverty.
Education and employment opportunities should be
provided, especially for young people. All communities
should be guaranteed the right to development and
the equal provision of public services. Economic
development should also help to enhance the capacity
of the countries of the region to adapt to climate change
and give them the resources they need to improve
governance and protect their various communities.
China is actively helping countries of the region to
work on infrastructure and development in order to
strengthen connectivity. It has also provided education
and vocational training opportunities to young people
in Africa through scholarships for their study in China

S/PV. 8685

and the establishment of education and training centres,
among other things.
We should also adopt integrated policies to
eradicate the root causes of terrorism. The international
community should promote the political settlement
of hotspot issues in West Africa and the settlement
of disputes through peaceful means. Dialogue on
an equal footing among different civilizations and
religions should be encouraged in order to promote
their harmonious coexistence. The countries of the
region should be helped to enhance their counterterrorism and deradicalization capacities. There should
be a major focus on settling ongoing issues such as the
flow of foreign terrorist fighters, the diversification
of financing channels for terrorist organizations
and the convergence of terrorist organizations and
organized crime. The countries of West Africa should
be supported in strengthening their border control and
law-enforcement coordination, intelligence-sharing
and other practical cooperation measures.
We have established the China-Africa Peace and
Security Fund to boost our cooperation with Africa
in the areas of peace, security, peacekeeping and law
and order. The first batch of assistance materials,
worth ¥200 million, has already arrived in Africa to
support the African Standby Force and its capacity to
respond immediately to crises. We have also provided
¥300 million in aid for the counter-terrorism operation in
the Sahel and the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the
Sahel (G-5 Sahel). We should ramp up our cooperation
to jointly address the challenges in this area. China
supports African countries in finding African solutions
to African problems, and commends the special
summit of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) held in September for coming up
with new ideas and measures to combat terrorism. We
also support ECOWAS and the Economic Community
of Central African States in jointly exploring solutions
to intercommunal conflicts and terrorism.
The G-5 Sahel Joint Force and the Multinational
Joint Task Force for combating Boko Haram are
examples of proactive initiatives that West African
countries are taking to jointly respond to the terrorist
threat in the region, and they constitute important
contributions to international and regional peace
and security. The international community should
support the United Nations in providing the financial
support that these relevant regional efforts need. Since
the China-United Nations Peace and Development

19-409219/20

S/PV.8685

Peace and security in Africa

Trust Fund was established it has provided financial
support to various peacekeeping and counter-terrorism
capacity-building projects in Africa.
We should also strengthen coordination, and
the various United Nations entities should forge
synergies. The United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel (UNOWAS) should continue to work in
accordance with its mandate to strengthen cooperation
with all parties to promote regional peace and stability.
The United Nations country teams, the United Nations
Development Programme and other entities should
fully leverage their respective advantages, strengthen
coordination and cooperation with UNOWAS and
work together to play a constructive role in achieving
regional peace and stability. China will continue to
support the work of Special Representative Chambas
and UNOWAS.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to begin, Madam President,
by drawing attention to the fact that the theme of the
briefing as it was designated in the Security Council’s
December programme of work is somewhat different
from what you have proposed for our discussion today,
according to the explanatory note. We assume that you
no doubt realized that replacing the topic of terrorism
issues with the politicized concept of the prevention of
violent extremism could meet with a negative reception.
However, my statement will focus on the meeting’s
original concept, which proposed a discussion of the
sources of terrorist threats in West Africa, an exchange of
views with the countries concerned and a consideration
of ways to end the crisis with the participation of key
international bodies. In that connection, I would like to
thank Mr. Chambas and Mr. Chergui for their detailed
briefings on the experience they have accumulated and
the evaluations of the situation that they have developed
based on the policies of the bodies that they head.
The Russian Federation would like to express its
sincere condolences to the people and the Government
of the Niger for the deaths on 10 December of more than
70 Nigerien soldiers as a result of a terrorist attack on a
military camp near the border with Mali. We hope that
the perpetrators of this heinous crime will be found and
duly punished. We affirm our full support to Niamey in
its fight against the threat of terrorism.
The terrible events that took place in the Niger
unfortunately confirm the further deterioration of the
security situation in that part of the continent. Almost
10/20

16/12/2019

weekly we receive tragic reports about the deaths of
dozens of military personnel or civilians at the hands
of criminal gangs in a country of the region. The States
of the Gulf of Guinea are also at risk of destabilization.
We share the concerns of other members of the
Security Council that Al-Qaida, Boko Haram and the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham have strengthened
their presence on the African continent. Of particular
concern is the establishment of the Islamic State in
West Africa, which has consistently proclaimed the
goal of building a global caliphate in the countries of
the region and is actively engaged in terrorist activities
at the junction of the borders of Cameroon, Nigeria, the
Niger and Chad.
Unrestricted migration flows, which allow terrorists
to capitalize on economic difficulties and recruit new
members, the collapse of arms control systems, and
in some cases even the failure to establish them, and
the ongoing cross-border smuggling, including of
narcotics, have enabled terrorist groups to have a robust
resource base.
Today some countries are seeking to prove to us
that conflicts between farmers and nomadic herders
have become the primary reason for the upsurge in
violence in the region, as we have seen in the concept
note for today’s meeting. It is not the reason for but the
consequence of what is happening. In general, we do not
agree that the real root causes of terrorism in Africa are
linked only to domestic economic and political issues.
It is important to adopt a balanced approach that
takes into account the full range of issues that give
rise to terrorism, including external interference, as
clearly demonstrated in Syria and Libya, for example.
West African States are compelled to reap the fruits of
the collapse of Libya’s statehood as a result of NATO’s
intervention. We believe that, without the normalization
of the situation in that country, namely, Libya, and we
are told this by Africans themselves, it is virtually
impossible to bring about lasting stability in the region.
Instead of honestly answering the question as
to why a power vacuum has developed in certain
countries of the region and from where terrorists
receive such weapon stockpiles, our Western partners
seek to indulge West African States with all kinds
of programmes based on their one-sided approach to
preventing violent extremism.
19-40921

16/12/2019

Peace and security in Africa

In the absence of a universally recognized definition
of violent extremism enshrined in international law,
we call on our partners to avoid language that has not
been agreed, including new terms such as “homegrown
violent extremist organizations”.
Working directly with civil society and
circumventing the Government, which lies at the heart
of the approach to preventing violent extremism, in
our view sets the stage for interference in internal
affairs, including in order to provoke so-called colour
revolutions or their like. Let me stress that we do not
dispute the idea in itself of harnessing civil society in
conjunction with strengthening the law enforcement
counter-terrorism component. However, that capacity
should be used in line with the characteristics and
traditions of the State without undermining its leading
role in counter-terrorist activities based on international
legal norms rather than certain rules of the world order.
If the sponsors of such an approach to preventing
violent extremism really want to demonstrate its
effectiveness, let them first try to delegate law
enforcement functions to non-State actors on their
territories. We doubt that this will enable them to
resolve the pressing issues of the proliferation of
xenophobic and neo-Nazi ideas and the resurgence of
right-wing extremist organizations calling for violence
against those of other races, ethnicities and religions. In
the meantime, selective activities for the prevention of
violent extremism with a focus on developing countries
appear to be a tool for political manipulation. We believe
that the only way to effectively counter the threat of
terrorism is by avoiding double standards based on a
comprehensive approach, combining both robust law
enforcement and multifaceted preventive activities.
We are convinced of the need to further coordinate
the efforts of both Africans and the international
community to combat terrorism in the Sahara-Sahel
region. To that end, we support the efforts of the
States of the Group of Five for the Sahel and the Lake
Chad basin to deploy forces to combat terrorism and
organized crime. It is necessary to effectively counter
the expansion of extremist ideology, to tackle head on
pressing socioeconomic problems, to strengthen State
institutions and to foster a culture of respect for human
rights. In that regard, we attach great importance to
the implementation of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel and the activities of the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel in the
region. In addition, we support the decision adopted at

S/PV. 8685

the Niamey summit by States members of the Economic
Community of West African States to invest up to
$1 billion in improving the situation in the region.
Russia is closely monitoring the situation in
West Africa and the Sahel. We are already providing
a number of countries with relevant military and
technical assistance and training for military and
police personnel. We call on all States to strengthen
multifaceted counter-terrorism cooperation with
the countries of the region that is not limited just to
resolving intercommunal disputes or substituting such
efforts with abstract speculation about the threat of
violent extremism.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Let me thank today’s
briefers for their very informative interventions. Allow
me also to express our sincere condolences to the
families of the soldiers of the Niger killed in a barbaric
attack last week. That tragic event clearly shows us the
importance and timeliness of today’s briefing.
West Africa remains plagued by severe
transnational challenges, from climate change, poverty
and worsening youth unemployment to irregular
migration and human, weapon and drug trafficking, as
well as a wave of violent extremism and terrorism. It is
necessary to reinforce the resilience of those countries
to emerging threats, including those on ethnic and
religious grounds.
To that end, at the community level, several formal
and informal institutions play critical roles. Religious
institutions are of particular importance. Religious
leaders, traditionally involved in the life of their
communities, may however be unable to play their part,
especially when internal governance mechanisms are
weak or not in place.
It is equally important to support and strengthen
the capacity of local governments in preventing
inter-tribal conflicts and fighting against disseminated
stereotypes, whose aim may be to marginalize certain
social and political groups and to destabilize the
situation in the region.
Communities that are marginalized from
political processes and suffer from the effects of
underdevelopment, poor service delivery and high
levels of unemployment are extremely vulnerable to
the influence of violent extremist groups. Empowering
them can be a vital part of the solution and a force
for change.

19-4092111/20

S/PV.8685

Peace and security in Africa

Gender inequality is another worrisome issue.
There is a need to invest in women’s capacity to prevent
violent extremism in their communities. Radicalization
and the dynamics of violent extremism affect men and
women in different ways. While young men appear
to be more prone to joining such groups, women, as
mothers, wives and friends of those radicalized are
more often either targeted or chosen to serve as direct
and indirect sources of support for those violent groups.
In conclusion, addressing all of the aforementioned
challenges requires a sustained and holistic approach
on the part of all stakeholders, including through
the implementation of the stabilization strategy for
countries affected by Boko Haram, the Group of Five
for the Sahel priority investment plan, the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and the
United Nations Support Plan for the Sahel. Therefore,
we call on national, regional and international partners
to intensify efforts to address the root causes of
insecurity and instability in the region, including
poverty and inequality, exclusion and marginalization,
the lack of access to social services and economic
opportunities, human rights violations and the impact
of climate change.
It goes without saying that responsibility for
combating terrorism cannot be entrusted to national,
subregional and regional stakeholders only. Terrorist
attacks are a global problem, which is why violence
in West Africa and the Sahel should be combated with
joint efforts, and Poland stands ready to pay its share in
the global combat against terrorism.
Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
appreciate the convening of this timely meeting and the
valuable briefings of the guest speakers.
Peru notes with concern the serious threats
looming over the West African subregion, which
contrast with its vast resources, the resilience of its
population and its geostrategic potential to drive its
sustainable development. In particular, we refer to
the expansion of terrorism and violent extremism and
their close connection with organized crime, as well as
their roles as an aggravating factor of intercommunal
violence. In that regard, we would like to address three
central aspects of that problem from the perspective of
seeking effective actions to address it, and we firmly
condemn the recent attacks that have taken place in
the region, particularly that which occurred in the
12/20

16/12/2019

Niger, to whose people and Government we extend our
sincerest condolences.
First, it is necessary to attack the link between
terrorism and organized crime. Resolution 2482 (2019),
adopted by the Council in July, specifically seeks to
promote actions aimed at deepening understanding
of the links between the two phenomena in order
to identify, prevent and dismantle them. That can
done by strengthening the capacities of States and
promoting more effective coordination at the national
and international levels; action at those levels must
be consistent with international human rights law and
international humanitarian law, in order to provide
legitimacy to the State’s response. We welcome the
meeting of the Heads of State and Government of the
Economic Community of West African States on that
issue, held in Ouagadougou in September. We believe
it necessary, in particular, to identify and dismantle
the chain of logistical support, including especially in
the drug trafficking that has turned West Africa into a
subregion of both production and transit to European
markets and where terrorist groups exchange money or
weapons for their protection at various stages of that
criminal process. That situation is compounded by
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons and
natural resources. Such activity corrupts institutions
and erodes social fabric. To that end, it is necessary
to strengthen neighbourhood cooperation by
strengthening intelligence work and border control to
deal with those crimes.
Secondly, it is also essential to combat the negative
influences between terrorism and intercommunal
violence, the root causes of which are climate change,
demographic pressure and the absence of an effective
State presence, among others. The situation is
exacerbated by terrorist groups that destroy systems
capable of providing peaceful solutions to tensions
between pastoral and farming groups in a context of
degraded farmland and erratic rainfall, or that, by
favouring some groups over others or exacerbating
inter-ethnic or inter-religious tensions, increase conflict
in order to exploit it as a source of human resources
for their indiscriminate attacks. It will be necessary
for regional organizations, such as the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel, to provide spaces
for dialogue on those conflicts, while promoting
appropriate legislation, the adaptation of new crops
and the creation of impact projects that would generate
19-40921

16/12/2019

Peace and security in Africa

income and employment, especially for young people in
rural communities.
A third element, which defines the entire context,
lies in the need to complement the counter-terrorism
response by addressing the root causes of the conflict
from a multidimensional perspective that offers a
better quality of life to vulnerable populations and
strengthens capacities to promote human rights and the
rule of law, in line with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. To that end, the international community
must contribute effectively to promoting development
from its own regional perspectives, particularly in that
subregion, where various transition processes are being
developed. Along those lines, we believe that there is
no better preventive activity for those conflicts than
sustainable peacebuilding. That will necessarily require
the establishment of societies that are more open and
inclusive of all strata of the population, particularly
women and young people.
Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): We offer our thanks
first to you, Madam President, and to Cote d’Ivoire for
convening today’s important debate, and to our briefers
for giving us their time and their insights.
The deteriorating situation in West Africa is
a source of major concern, as we have heard from
everyone in the Council today. That was underlined
again by this past week’s terrorist attack in western
Niger, in which many Nigerien soldiers lost their lives.
Our condolences go to the families of those troops
and of all those civilians, national forces and United
Nations peacekeepers who have suffered at the hands
of violent extremists in West Africa
As we have heard, the Organization also has a vital
role to play in supporting national and regional efforts
to address the drivers of violence. But that instability
cannot be solved by the United Nations alone, nor can
it be solved through purely military or counterterrorist
initiatives. We need to address the underlying drivers
of the conflict. Strengthening stability and security
across West Africa requires a comprehensive approach
to the interconnected drivers. In too many parts of the
region, corruption, failure to provide basic services
and the lack of economic prospects for young people
combine to provide fertile grounds for extremist
groups. The impacts of climate change cause shocks
and stresses that exacerbate the risks of intercommunal
violence, including by contributing to competition over
scarce resources, and serious organized crime networks

S/PV. 8685

often operating across national boundaries exacerbate
instability and prey on local communities in the absence
of State authority.
Tackling those challenges requires a comprehensive
approach across all three pillars of the United Nations
system — peace and security, development and human
rights — and it requires coordinated work on the part of
all partners. We recognize the important role of regional
efforts to tackle terrorist groups, including through
the task force deployed to help the Group of Five for
the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) and the Multinational Joint Task
Force (MNJTF), just as we commend the efforts of
regional organizations, including the African Union
and the Economic Community of West African States.
For our part, the United Kingdom is set to
deploy 250 personnel to Mali in 2020 in order to
provide vital long-range reconnaissance capabilities
to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali. We have contributed
over $6.6 million in bilateral funding to support the
operationalization of the MNJTF and $2.4 million
to the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. We are working closely
with West African partners to support nationally and
locally led conflict prevention efforts to prevent both
extremism and intercommunal violence, for example,
in northern Nigeria. United Kingdom development
funding, worth nearly $50 million over five years, is
currently supporting initiatives to increase economic
opportunities for marginalized youth. In Borno state,
we are providing a further $28 million in funding for
projects to reduce young people’s vulnerability to
recruitment by violent extremist groups.
However, while individual initiatives like this
matter, we know that long-term solutions to instability
are grounded in prosperous and inclusive economies.
To that end, the United Kingdom is proud to be hosting
the United Kingdom-Africa Investment Summit, on
20 January in London, in order to mobilize high-quality
international investment for the region.
We need to also deliver long-term solutions
because there are no quick fixes to such complex
issues. While States must, of course, take the lead
in delivering for their citizens and finding political
solutions to conflicts, there is more the United Nations
can do to support them. A coherent whole-of-United
Nations approach is required. That should include work
by United Nations country teams to support national
efforts to prevent violent extremism from taking hold,

19-4092113/20

S/PV.8685

Peace and security in Africa

following a proper assessment of national capacities,
capabilities and resources.
We are keen to see more coherent coordination
among the United Nations Office for West Africa and
the Sahel and the United Nations development actors
in the region. We should continue our work through
the counterterrorism and sanctions committees to
deny terrorists access to arms and funding and to
bring them to justice, as well as supporting Member
States in strengthening their own counter-terrorism
frameworks and capacities. We should also scale up
efforts to address the root causes of instability in the
region through focused and coordinated peacebuilding
programmes. In that regard, we are very pleased that
the Secretary-General has recently reapproved Mali’s
eligibility for access to peacebuilding funds. The United
Kingdom remains one of the biggest supporters of the
Peacebuilding Fund, having doubled our contribution to
$43 million in 2018, and we look forward to continuing
to work with the Peacebuilding Support Office and the
Peacebuilding Commission to leverage those resources
to the benefit of communities facing the challenges of
intercommunal violence and terrorism.
I have had the privilege to serve in West Africa
and to travel extensively around the countries of the
region. This is an issue that is very close to my heart.
I think we need to focus on three particular areas,
and the United Nations needs to come together to
focus more fundamentally on them. Essentially, the
three ingredients are security, good governance and
economic growth and development. We have already
talked about security. Progress will not be made unless
States can provide security within their territory and
can work together across boundaries and borders to
deliver security within the region. We need to work
together to help them build that capacity. Security will
be sustained only if Governments work to deliver good
governance and the rule of law. Many of us have spoken
about that, and we set it out very clearly in Sustainable
Development Goal 16. Good governance is the key
precursor to investment and growth. Investment and
growth, when they come, can help deliver the third
ingredient, which is economic growth and development.
It lifts people out of poverty and stops them from being
tempted down the routes and path of violence.
We have heard everyone talk about those things
today; the challenge is how we deliver them. I think,
in that regard, that it was very interesting to hear the
African Union Commissioner talk about the concept
14/20

16/12/2019

of a reset in order to look again at all the multiple
initiatives that we have across the region — there were
15 or so mentioned — and see how we can bring greater
coherence to them so that the United Nations and the
region can work better together to deliver them.
For our part, the United Kingdom will continue to
play our role in partnership with the United Nations and
with all our friends across the West African region.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I thank the United States
presidency for putting this topic on the agenda. I would
have liked to discuss it even more with the curtains open,
as was the case at the very beginning of this presidency.
Let me start by expressing Germany’s condolences
to the Government and the people of the Niger after the
horrendous attack that we witnessed last week.
I would like to thank the briefers. I was very happy
to hear that they had the same analysis and conclusions
on the situation. They both described the gravity of
the situation. Mr. Chambas said that the violence we
are witnessing is unprecedented and Mr. Chergui said
that the situation is worsening. When it comes to the
analysis, I think almost everybody around the table
can see that the root cause, as we mentioned by our
United Kingdom colleague, is the deficit in governance
and the State’s inability to provide basic services and
security to its population. The numbers are just terrible.
Some 2,800 schools are closed in the region, the justice
system does not work, and we see corruption in most of
the countries, the marginalization of the population and
disadvantaged youth, among other issues.
My analysis of the situation differs from that of our
Russian colleague and I would only suggest that, over
the Christmas break, we look into a study conducted in
2017 by the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP), entitled Journey to Extremism in Africa,
which contains very good statistics and examples of the
situation in the area. It was already bad in 2017 and
since then it has worsened. I think that the analysis in
the UNDP study remains absolutely true. It highlights
governance deficit as linked with gender inequality,
which is still a nightmare, and I am also happy that
almost everybody finally recognizes the security
implications of climate change.
Now, when it comes to consequences to be drawn,
individual States must be primarily responsible for
resolving their own problems, and they can only be
supported to that end. I was very encouraged by what
19-40921

16/12/2019

Peace and security in Africa

we heard from the briefers with regard to the support
of the Economic Community of West African States
and the African Union. Everyone is concentrating
on the issue and I think it must go hand in hand with
cooperation between the African Union and the United
Nations. Within the United Nations, we must have a
one United Nations approach. When we visited some of
the countries earlier this year, my impression was that
there was good cooperation among the different United
Nations agencies.
I would also like to highlight what Mr. Chergui and
others said with regard to taking a holistic approach.
There is no military solution to this problem if we do
not resolve the basic political issues and if we do not get
back to or really achieve good governance. Governments
have to respect human rights. Governments have to
respect international humanitarian law. We have to
re-establish trust and confidence in the Governments
of the region. If there is no justice system, people will
have no trust in their Government. We have to fight
corruption; the income disparities in Africa are also too
high, and we must do more to protect schools. I think
one of the main issues for the military and security
forces is to make sure that children can go to school.
One must also listen to civil society. Governments have
to include women in decision-making in all bodies that
make decisions and look after young people. Military
security efforts have a chance to succeed only if good
governance is provided.
Germany is engaged in all of this. We have spent
millions and millions of euros. The Chancellor has
visited the region several times and the Foreign Minister
has done so too. We really emphasize the importance of
stabilizing the region. We are therefore doing all we
can to strengthen confidence in the rule of law and
the security forces, fight transborder organized crime,
improve migration management, prevent and fight
against radicalization and extremism and establish
social coherence at the local level.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by thanking you, Madam President, for
convening this meeting. We also extend our sincere
thanks to Mr. Chambas and Mr. Chergui for their
valuable briefings. We appreciate the role played by the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS), under the leadership of Mr. Chambas, who
is working to achieve progress in many areas, including
the reduction of political tensions, governance and

S/PV. 8685

the implementation of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel.
I join my fellow speakers in extending my sincere
condolences to the Government of the Niger and the
families of the victims of the terrorist attack that took
place last Tuesday in that country, killing 71 of its
soldiers. We wish a speedy recovery to those injured.
The attack demonstrates the magnitude of the security
challenges facing the region as a whole.
West Africa and the Sahel are dealing with many
challenges, including the spread of terrorist activities
and weapons, climate change and the illegal drug
trade, all of which contribute to destabilization in the
region. Discussions on those challenges must address
the root causes, and progress must be made in the
areas of development, creating economic opportunities
for people and strengthening governance. There are a
number of regional, international and United Nations
initiatives aimed at achieving development, and it is
important to coordinate all of those efforts to ensure
their success, as that will contribute to building
confidence between the Governments and the peoples
of the region and to fighting the phenomenon of violent
extremism, building on the military gains achieved
by the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
and the Multinational Joint Task Force. For its part,
Kuwait has contributed to supporting development
in West Africa by providing financing for various
development projects — almost $640 million over the
past five years — through the Kuwait Fund for Arab
Economic Development.
There are also challenges that contribute directly
to increasing violence within societies in West Africa,
such as conflicts between farmers and herders, climate
change and the lack of State authorities in remote
areas — a phenomenon that has spread to a number of
West African countries. Therefore, our focus should
be on issues related to social welfare and development
efforts. There is also an urgent need for social
reconciliation between the various communities and
for initiatives aimed at ensuring peaceful coexistence
between communities for the sake of stability in the
region. We have seen such measures taken in Mali, with
the signing of reconciliation agreements between the
Government and representatives of a number of Mali’s
central communities.
The United Nations has many offices and missions
in West Africa. The most prominent among them is

19-4092115/20

S/PV.8685

Peace and security in Africa

UNOWAS, which plays a pivotal role in the region as a
whole and needs our support to strengthen its mandate
and mobilize the resources necessary to enable it to
fulfil its responsibilities as effectively as possible. It
also provides support for the countries of the region
in their quest to counter the challenges they face and
builds their capacities to combat terrorism, organized
crime and illegal trafficking.
United Nations peacekeeping missions play an
important role in the protection of civilians and support
for Governments in the preparation of plans to prevent
intercommunity violence and achieve stability. We also
welcome the efforts made by the countries of the region
within the framework of the Economic Community
of West African States, which issued a pledge in
September to commit to its decision to strengthen the
role of dialogue in the reduction of tensions among
societies and to ensure the involvement of women,
young people and religious leaders in that process,
given that, together with civil society organizations,
they play a fundamental role in achieving tolerance,
moderation and coexistence.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize the fact
that the role of the United Nations is not limited to those
countries suffering from conflict, but is also crucial
to preventing conflict, the deterioration of situations
and relapse into conflict. UNOWAS is dedicated to
that area and we have seen how effective its role has
been in Burkina Faso in response to the deteriorating
situation there, and in the Gambia after the presidential
elections in 2017. We invite UNOWAS to continue
working along those lines and reiterate our full support
for its endeavours.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Madam President, for choosing to address the
issue of intercommunal violence and violent extremism
in West Africa. I also thank our two briefers for
their statements.
The situation in the Sahel and the Lake Chad basin
is extremely alarming. Grave intercommunal violence
is reported almost every day and the threat of terrorism
continues to spread. In that regard, I extend France’s
condolences following the 11 December attack on
the Nigerien army. Civilians are the first to suffer in
such situations, especially women and children. The
humanitarian situation is deteriorating, particularly in
Burkina Faso, with the threat extending to the States of
the Gulf of Guinea.
16/20

16/12/2019

We are all aware of the root causes of the
instability. Economic fragility, weak States, the growth
of trafficking and even the effects of climate change
exacerbate antagonisms between sometimes ancient
communities. But criminal and terrorist groups are
also weaponizing and profiting from the tensions, in
a context of mass distribution of light weapons. The
situation continues to deteriorate, despite the support
that has been extended. There is therefore an urgent
need to act. France calls for collective activation
and mobilization.
Within the Security Council and the United Nations
as a whole, we must continue to encourage the States
concerned to improve their governance and promote
social cohesion. It is imperative that the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali be implemented.
There has been too much delay and now serious progress
needs to be made. Resolution 2480 (2019) identifies
clear objectives and we reiterate that all those who may
stymie the implementation of the peace agreement will
be at risk of sanctions.
The solution lies first and foremost with the States
concerned. It is up to them to develop political strategies
that combine security measures, a humanitarian
response and development initiatives. No one else
can do it in their place. However, their resources are
limited. We must therefore continue to help them.
It is imperative that we step up our efforts to
counter terrorism. France remains committed to those
efforts through Operation Barkhane. Following the
summit of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel)
held yesterday in Niamey, President Macron will meet
with the Presidents of the five countries of the region
in early 2020 to redefine the political and operational
framework of our joint action. The Partnership for
Security and Stability in the Sahel, a Franco-German
initiative, should help to strengthen the capacities of the
countries in the region. It will be officially launched by
the end of the first quarter of 2020.
We must support regional initiatives, particularly
the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel, which has recently
seen the pace and effectiveness of its operations
increase, but which cannot sustain its action over time
without adequate international support, especially in
terms of logistics and finance. The United Nations
must contribute to that support. France encourages
donors that have not yet met their commitments to
that Force to do so as soon as possible. Those efforts
19-40921

16/12/2019

Peace and security in Africa

are essential, but military struggle is only part of the
answer. If it is carried out in isolation of prevention,
reconciliation, justice and development measures, it is
doomed to failure.
In the face of intercommunity violence, it
is important to prevent antagonisms and violent
radicalization and to deal with such feelings as soon as
they take root. Certain traditional conflict resolution
mechanisms have proven to be effective, and it is
important to support them. There is a need to deal with
the problems of transhumance and conflicts between
herders and farmers. Communication is vital. To this
end, France has for several years been supporting
community radio stations in Mali and has funded
training programmes for journalists.
It is also critical to give new legitimacy to the
presence of the State. The population is often angry with
the central authorities, whose actions do not benefit
them. It would therefore be appropriate for States to
assist in the provision of public services in remote
areas and conduct sustainable development projects
there. There also exists under-exploited agricultural
potential in the Sahel and around the Lake Chad basin.
In Burkina Faso, the French Development Agency
has been providing support to the rural sector and the
education system for several years. There has been
tangible progress there — primary school enrolment
rates have risen from 46 per cent in 2001 to 86 per cent
in 2016. We must therefore take this opportunity for
success and tackle root causes.
It is also necessary that we undertake a massive
financial effort in line with the objectives of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change. France is actively
contributing in this regard, with a donation of
€1.6 billion to the Sahel Alliance projects portfolio. We
have witnessed laudable efforts on the part of the United
Nations and other partners, in particular the European
Union, which I commend for being the leading donor in
the Sahel. Nevertheless, we must do more, and we must
act more effectively and efficiently.
I wish to conclude by underscoring, once again, the
urgent need to assist the Sahel and West Africa as a
whole. The situation is deteriorating unrelentingly and
constitutes a threat to international peace and security.
We can no longer afford to allow such developments
to continue.

S/PV. 8685

Mr. Djani (Indonesia): First of all, I would
like to thank the United States and Côte d’Ivoire for
calling this meeting, as well as Special Representative
Chambas and African Union Commissioner Chergui
for their briefings. We would also like to extend our
condolences and prayers to the families of the fallen
soldiers of the Niger.
We have heard the briefers and read the report of
the Secretary-General earlier this year (S/2019/549),
which highlighted, inter alia, the volatile security
situation in West Africa, which is characterized by
intercommunal violence and fuelled by the activities
of violent extremist groups. Terrorist and violent
extremist groups have also expanded their areas of
influence, taking advantage of local grievances and the
lack of effective State presence, which has already been
mentioned by a number of speakers today.
Despite the efforts of national Governments and
regional organizations, the security situation continues
to deteriorate, resulting in dire humanitarian conditions,
including displacement. In addition, climate change
and environmental pressures in the region further
exacerbate the situation, which increases the pressure
on Governments and perpetuates the cycle of insecurity
in the region. Both briefers and Council members have
reiterated today that it is imperative to address the root
causes of instability. In this regard, I should like to
highlight three points.
First, with regard to support for national and regional
efforts, Indonesia welcomes the initiatives undertaken
by countries in West Africa and the Sahel to combat
terrorism through collective security efforts, such as the
Multinational Joint Task Force and the Group of Five for
the Sahel Joint Force. Such initiatives should continue
to be supported. However, in addition to international
support, it is important to ensure that such initiatives
also enjoy the greater support of the population. One
important aspect of what we used to refer to as “winning
the hearts and minds of the population” is, of course,
ensuring due judicial process in bringing perpetrators
to justice. Security forces must also be held accountable
for their actions. National Governments should also be
supported through capacity-building in the provision
of security and protection for their citizens, including
through early-warning and early-response mechanisms.
Secondly, we must invest in community engagement
and reconciliation. Indonesia considers it the most
necessary course of action to reconcile communities

19-4092117/20

S/PV.8685

Peace and security in Africa

and divided groups in order to prevent further violence.
National, regional and international actors must invest
in community engagement and reconciliation efforts,
thereby bringing together all affected communities.
This can be achieved, inter alia, through mediation
and dialogue across communal lines to ensure that
social and economic grievances are heard. Issues such
as land tenure, economic inequality and livelihood
must be addressed and discussed, including through
the empowerment and reinforcement of cultural and
traditional mechanisms of conflict resolution.
My third point concerns the need for sector- and
region-wide strategies coupled with international
collaboration. Commissioner Chergui alluded to a
holistic approach, which I think is an important point.
The security response must be part of a greater strategy
to counter violent extremism, and I am in favour of the
soft approach we have been carrying out in many other
parts of the world. Poverty eradication should also be
represented within the greater strategy, which should
also encompass the enhancement of State presence
and capacity, the alleviation of the humanitarian
situation, reconstruction, and economic and social
development. In addition, the proximity of countries,
the cross-border activity of violent extremist groups
and other factors increase the possibility of a spillover
of insecurity in the region. When we visited the region,
we were briefed on the matter of porous borders and the
need for international collaboration and assistance for
regional organizations.
To conclude, I wish to recall that Council members
visited the region earlier this year. We were in various
countries in the region and met with local leaders,
stakeholders and officials and heard their problems.
What is now needed is action in support of the countries
of the region, the various United Nations missions on
the ground and, of course, regional organizations. I
shall never forget when, during our visit to Mali, we
heard the plea from a women’s non-governmental
organization that we translate all the statements we
make in this Chamber into concrete actions. Now is
the time, and we should make it clear, as many before
us have, that we must take decisive action in order to
address the situation in a concrete manner. Let us not
forget the plea of the people on the ground.
Mr. Trullols Yabra (Dominican Republic) (spoke
in Spanish): We thank Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas and
Mr. Smaïl Chergui for their briefings.
18/20

16/12/2019

Before I start, we wish to express our sincere
condolences to the authorities and the people of the
Niger, as well as the families of the victims, in the
wake of Wednesday’s atrocious terrorist attack against
a military camp, which claimed the lives of 71 people.
We also wish to convey our condolences to Nigeria
following the execution on Friday of four humanitarian
workers who had previously been abducted. We
condemn those acts in the strongest possible terms.
As we witness, once again, deplorable acts such
as the foregoing, we underscore the urgent nature
of the issue that brings us together this morning.
Unfortunately, it is against a backdrop of pain, a sense
of powerlessness and collective insecurity that we must
stand ready and alert to try to resolve the situation
being endured by the peoples of West Africa and the
Sahel, who are the victims of violence in many forms,
as well as terrorism.
We are gravely concerned by the dramatic
deterioration in the security situation in the region as a
result of the spread of violent extremist groups. These
groups exacerbate tensions between communities,
including between farmers and herders, and are linked
to transnational organized-crime networks devoted to
trafficking in drugs and persons, maritime piracy and
the exploitation of resources, among other crimes. It is
clear that the issue of intercommunal violence and other
conflicts requires us to tackle the structural causes
thereof, including shortcomings in economic and social
governance, which in turn undermine the capacity of the
authorities to meet such basic needs of the population
as food, education, health, water, energy and limited
or unequal political representation. Consequently,
improving living conditions, particularly for the
region’s young people — who are estimated to make
up 65 per cent of the population and thus constitute a
growing majority — is a priority.
Another major issue whose consequences are
becoming increasingly palpable is the impact of climate
change as a security-risk factor. This impact is tangible
for a large part of the population of the region, which,
every day, is faced, inter alia, with water scarcity, the
decrease of cultivable areas, soil erosion and droughts.
All of that affects people’s food security, health and
livelihoods. It is therefore necessary to continue to
support the affected countries in assessing their risks,
designing strategies to mitigate them and constructing
their resilience.
19-40921

16/12/2019

Peace and security in Africa

Particular attention should be paid to the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons in the
region, which has changed the nature of intercommunal
violence, having made it increasingly deadly owing
to the increased migration of transhumance flows
of farmers and livestock, which, as I just said, is
recognized to have been triggered by climate change
and the challenges that exist with regard to providing
equitable and lasting solutions. When weighing
the lines of action to pursue in order to remedy the
situation, we encourage collaboration with regional
bodies that strengthens local mechanisms with a focus
on peacekeeping, consolidating social cohesion and
addressing structural causes through, for example, job
creation initiatives for rural youth aimed at reducing
inequalities and social divisions, as well as addressing
the governance deficit in some of those areas.

S/PV. 8685

violence in the Sahel, including the most recent violence
in the Niger.
I would like to begin by echoing the briefing of
Mr. Chambas and stress that we must avoid any confusion
between
terrorism,
extremism,
intercommunal
violence, inter-ethnic conflict, religious conflict and
violence of an insurrectional nature. We must not fall
into the trap of interpreting the realities that shake
the area in a simplistic manner. In particular, we must
refrain from stigmatizing any one community.

Given the context of the security crisis in West
Africa and the Sahel, particularly in areas where
people depend on agriculture and livestock for their
livelihoods, investment in rural areas is essential to
creating opportunities, especially for young people, as
a means to prevent and mitigate conflicts over natural
resources. From our own experience, our country
recognizes and promotes the positive and catalytic
impact that rural investment generates.

As many others before me have said, a security
response alone will not suffice, even if it is obviously
indispensable. The context in the region is well
known — climate change, high population growth,
social inequalities, insurgency, governance that is
weak or even sometimes non-existent, challenges to
the legitimacy of the State, increased competition
for natural resources, illegal trafficking and the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons. These
elements are well described in the 2018 study on
conflicts between herders and farmers released by the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel,
whose 20 concrete recommendations address the short,
medium and longer term. We know that the solutions
exist, and now we must implement them.

We commend the efforts of the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel and the Economic
Community of West African States to promote the
systematic participation of women in initiatives to
combat terrorism and prevent violent extremism. The
role of women as mediators in the prevention and
resolution of conflict, as well as in peacebuilding
and post-conflict situations, is essential, as is the
development of comprehensive strategies to address
the structural causes of crises. The Council must
continue to work in a unified manner to address the
threats, challenges and opportunities in a coordinated
and comprehensive manner in the light of their
multidimensional nature.

A feeling of injustice is a major factor in instability.
In West Africa, a very large proportion of what are
known as formal court judgments concern land
disputes. These judgments are regularly negatively
influenced by personal interests or even corruption.
The State is therefore not only perceived as biased
but, above all, it loses its legitimacy in the eyes of its
citizens. Accordingly, it is not insignificant to note that
among the flagship measures put in place in northern
Mali during the occupation of that country in 2012 by
jihadist insurgents, a particularly violent and abject
form of justice was applied. Nomadic communities also
experience the same sense of injustice, for example, in
the context of rising livestock theft.

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke
in French): I would first like to thank the United
States and Côte d’Ivoire for the initiative they have
taken in convening this meeting. I also thank Special
Representative Chambas and Commissioner Chergui
for their briefings.

For Belgium, the answer to this sentiment of injustice
and impunity lies in restoring and strengthening the
rule of law by stimulating, where useful, synergies
between formal and traditional justice so that they
complement each other. It is a concrete way to combat
the terrorist narrative, thereby tackling one of the deep
roots of the violence. The partnership for security and
stability in the Sahel initiative is consistent with idea of

I would also like to take the opportunity to pay
tribute to the memory of all the victims of the recent

19-4092119/20

S/PV.8685

Peace and security in Africa

16/12/2019

strengthening the legitimacy of the State and therefore
deserves our support.

be effective, but they also have to respect human rights
and international humanitarian law.

The lack of security for the civilian population
is another major vector of the spiralling violence in
the region. Militias are being formed to defend their
livelihoods, villages and families. This failure of the
State requires us — the international community — to
continue to strengthen our support for the security and
defence forces in West Africa. However, I would stress
that it is the primary responsibility of individual States
to ensure the safety of their citizens. In the medium
term, this involves winning — and sometimes winning
back — hearts and minds, as security forces need to
be accepted by the people. In order to achieve this end,
not only is it obvious that the security forces have to

The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.

20/20

Before I conclude the meeting, I would like to speak
in reference to the statement made by the representative
of the Russian Federation on today’s agenda item.
The Security Council presidency acknowledges the
incorrect title of the item on the agenda for today’s
meeting . It will therefore be corrected in the record
to reflect the correct title of the agenda item, as it
appears in the provisional monthly programme of work
of the Council, namely, “Peace and security in Africa:
Intercommunal violence and terrorism in West Africa”.
The meeting rose at noon.

19-40921
