S/2016/901

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 October 2016
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 1244
(1999), by which the Council decided to establish the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and requested me to report at regular
intervals on the implementation of its mandate. The report covers the activities of
UNMIK and developments relating thereto from 16 July to 15 October 2016.
2.
The priorities of the Mission remain to promote security, stabi lity and respect
for human rights in Kosovo and the region. In furtherance of its goals, UNMIK
continues its constructive engagement with Pristina and Belgrade, all communities
in Kosovo and regional and international actors. The Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the Kosovo Force (KFOR) continue to perform
their roles within the framework of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999). The
European Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX) continues its presence in Kosovo in
line with the presidential statement of the Security Council of 26 November 2008
(S/PRST/2008/44) and my report of 24 November 2008 (S/2008/692). The United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes work closely with the Mission.

II. Political and security developments
3.
During the reporting period, political tensions centred around the dispute over
the draft law ratifying the agreement on territorial delineation with Montenegro and
the adoption of a new law on the Trepca mining and industrial complex. The latter
issue created additional public tension between Pristina and Belgrade, while the
implementation of the agreements reached within the framework of the European
Union-facilitated dialogue continued only at a slow pace.
4.
On 4 August 2016, the government of Kosovo approved the draft law ratifying
the territorial delineation agreement, which had been reached on 26 August 2015,
and submitted it to the Assembly. On 9 August, the Assembly of Kosovo Committee
on Foreign Affairs voted in favour of the draft law during a session marked by the
release of tear gas by a member of the opposition party Vetëvendosje ( “Selfdetermination”), who was subsequently detained. The following day, the presidency

16-18356 (E)

281016

*1618356*

S/2016/901

of the Assembly met to schedule a meeting to vote on the draft law, with the session
once again marred by the release of tear gas in the chamber by a member of
Vetëvendosje. On 1 September, the scheduled date of the vote, the Prime Minister of
Kosovo, Isa Mustafa, requested the Assembly to withdraw the draft law from
consideration on the basis that the government needed to secure broader consensus
before proceeding.
5.
Public protests against the territorial delineation agreement were organized on
5, 26 and 27 August, in Pristina, South Mitrovica and in Pejë/Peć, respectively.
Vetëvendosje then held a demonstration in front of the Assembly during its session
on 1 September. That day, Kosovo police officers arrested two Vetëvendosje
members for attempting to bring pepper spray and tear gas into the Assembly and
detained two persons outside the Assembly building who were found to be carrying
22 home-made petrol bombs. In addition, a Vetëvendosje employee was arrested for
interfering with computer systems of the Assembly and the public broadcaster Radio
Television of Kosovo (RTK).
6.
Instances of political violence continued, several of which appeared to relate
directly to the disputed agreement on territorial delineation with Montenegro. On
4 August, a rocket-propelled grenade was fired at the Assembly building, causing
significant damage. In the ensuing investigation, which was continuing as at the
time of writing, the police identified Vetëvendosje activists as suspects. On
9 August, an explosive device was discovered and disarmed by police at the private
residence of the Chair of the Kosovo Commission for Border Demarcation. On
22 August, a hand grenade was detonated at the main RTK building in Pristina,
causing damage to the building and to some equipment. On 28 August, another hand
grenade was detonated near the house of the Director of RTK in Pristina, again
causing material damage. In addition, on 1 September, the Kosovo police
discovered and seized some 50 backpacks containing petrol bomb materials and
other explosives from a storage room in Pristina rented by Vetëvendosje.
7.
The ratification of the agreement with Montenegro remains among the
conditions set by the European Union in order to provide visa-free Schengen area
travel to the population of Kosovo. Accordingly, on 5 September, the Committee on
Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs of the European Parliament voted only to
extend the existing visa waiver for Kosovo but not to initiate any further steps,
citing the non-ratification of the agreement with Montenegro.
8.
On 8 October, the Assembly of Kosovo adopted a new law on the Trepca
industrial complex, which provoked immediate controversy because the ownership
and structure of the plant have been the subject of a long-standing dispute. The law
provides for the transformation of Trepca into a publicly owned Kosovo company,
with 80 per cent of shares held by the Kosovo authorities and 20 per cent by
employees. The Prime Minister stated at the Assembly that mineral resources were
the property of Kosovo and, with the law, Trepca’s assets were and would remain in
Kosovo. In Belgrade, the Government of Serbia held a Cabinet meeting on
11 October to discuss Trepca, along with the Pristina-Belgrade dialogue agreement
on telecommunications. The Prime Minister of Serbia, Aleksandar Vučić, announced
a government decision annulling all legal consequences of documents and actions of
the Pristina institutions concerning Trepca, and warned P ristina against unilateral
action or forceful seizure of property. Within the Assembly of Kosovo, the law was

2/18

16-18356

S/2016/901

opposed by the Kosovo-Serb party Civic Initiative Serbia, whose members also
boycotted the vote, and by Vetëvendosje. Both parties complained of a lack of prior
consultation and of insufficient time to review the text of the law before its passage
through the Assembly.
9.
Public protests, including some roadblocks, were organized in northern
Kosovo, where most of the Trepca mines and facilities are located. On 7 October,
Kosovo Serb representatives held a joint extraordinary session of the four northern
municipal assemblies, also attended by the three Kosovo Serb ministers, to register
their objection to the draft law on Trepca under consideration by the Assembly and
to call for its withdrawal. After the law was passed, Kosovo Serb members of the
Assembly and government announced a “freeze” of their participation in official
activities and stressed that they would not accept any decision on Trepca tha t had
not been agreed to by Kosovo Serb representatives.
10. On 11 August, a new Government of Serbia was sworn in, with the head of the
Serbian Progressive Party, Aleksandar Vučić, continuing as Prime Minister. The
Government continues as a coalition of the Serbian Progressive Party and the
Socialist Party of Serbia, headed by Ivica Dačić, who continues to serve as First
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs. The new Government
reiterated its commitment to intensifying dialogue with Pristina, supporting the
establishment of the Association/Community of Serb -majority municipalities and
continuing to provide social and other support and services to Kosovo Serbs through
the Serbian institutions in Serb-majority areas.
11. On 21 September, in the Serb-majority community of Gračanica/Graçanicë,
Kosovo police attempted to cut short a visit to Kosovo by the Director of the
Government of Serbia Office for Kosovo and Metohija, Marko Djurić, alleging that
he had breached an agreement not to politicize his visits. Some 200 local Kosovo
Serbs mobilized to prevent the police from executing their orders, with the result
that Mr. Djurić proceeded with the visit. Subsequently, the Kosovo authorities
rejected a request for Mr. Djurić to visit Kosovo on 24 S eptember.
12. On 26 September, the director of the Kosovo police for the Mitrovica South
region, Nehat Thaçi, was arrested by Serbian authorities at the Gate 5 crossing point
on the basis of a warrant issued in 2010 by the Higher Court in Niš. According to
the Ministry of the Interior of Serbia, his alleged crimes included acts of terrorism
and genocide committed in Kosovo in July 1999. Following the arrest, Ms. Tahiri
requested the European Union to facilitate Mr. Thaçi’s release, while also requesting
Serbia to respect the spirit of dialogue and normalization of relations.
13. As part of its operational mandate to provide reserve capacity for the European
Union Force Althea in Bosnia and Herzegovina, KFOR participated in the military
training exercise “Quick Response 2016” from 28 September to 6 October. KFOR
elements, comprising a reinforced company, for the first time practised a rapid
redeployment from Kosovo to Bosnia and Herzegovina.
14. The protracted political crisis in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
continued to have some indirect effects on Kosovo. The ongoing trial of 37
members and accomplices of an ethnic Albanian group who were alleged to have
been involved in an exchange of fire with former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia

16-18356

3/18

S/2016/901

police in Kumanovo in May 2015, of whom 17 are from Kosovo, remains a
potential inducer of inter-ethnic tension on both sides of the border.
15. During the reporting period, migrants and refugees from the Middle East,
Africa and Central Asia continued to use routes through the Balkan region, a
phenomenon that continued to pose significant humanitarian and security
challenges. In Kosovo, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) recorded a year-to-date total of 170 asylum requests submitted,
with 15 applicants remaining in Kosovo as at the end of September.

III. Northern Kosovo
16. On 30 August, the Kosovo minister in charge of the technical dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina, Edita Tahiri, accompanied by the mayor of South
Mitrovica, inspected construction work at the Mitrovica main bridge then continued
across to North Mitrovica, where she visited a cafe. The following night, the cafe
was set on fire by unknown persons, resulting in significant material damage.
17. Compared with the previous reporting period, cooperation improved between
the municipalities in northern Kosovo and Pristina-based ministries, in particular
concerning municipal finance. An amendment to the Law on Local Government
Finance, which established contingency grants for municipalities with a population
under 22,000, provided increased funding for the municipalities of Leposavić/
Leposaviq, Zubin Potok and Zvečan/Zveçan. Northern Kosovo was increasingly
able to draw benefit from the development fund made up from duties collected at
the Jarinje/Rudnica and Brnjak/Tabalije crossing points. In total, more than
€7 million has been allocated from the fund, including over €1 million in July and
August for infrastructure projects.

IV. Normalization of relations between Belgrade and Pristina
18. The implementation of the agreements reached within the framework of the
European Union-facilitated dialogue continued to be relatively slow. Both parties,
however, gave signals of a commitment to move forward, includin g on creating the
Association/Community of Serb-majority municipalities in Kosovo. Two new
members were appointed to the management team tasked with drafting the statute of
the Association/Community. Tangible progress was achieved under the 2011
agreement on freedom of movement, with the rationalization of vehicle registration
plates being further negotiated ahead of the expiration in November 2016 of the
initial agreement. The office of the European Union High Representative for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy announced on 14 September that the technical
teams had agreed on a reciprocity mechanism to enable vehicles to move more
easily in both directions.
19. Concerning the implementation of the agreement on integration of the Kosovo
judiciary, formal selections had been completed for the remaining six prosecutors
and 14 judges moving from the Serbian to the Kosovo judicial system. As at the end
of the reporting period, their appointments remained pending. A possible setback
emerged following reactions to the adoption by the Assembly of Kosovo of the law

4/18

16-18356

S/2016/901

on the Trepca complex (see paras. 8 and 9 above). On 9 October, the President of
the Mitrovica High Court announced that Serbian judges, prosecutors and judicial
staff, in protest against the action of the Assembly on Trepca, might suspend further
participation in the judicial integration process. Hiring processes for court and
prosecution support staff continued, along with the renovation of some court
premises. The independent commission established to verify diplomas issued by the
university in North Mitrovica issued 27 certificates of validity, making applicants
holding such degrees eligible for employment in the Kosovo institutions.
20. On 5 August, a new understanding was reached between the parties on
implementing the agreement of 25 August 2015 on the redevelopment of the main
bridge in Mitrovica, overcoming an impasse that had significantly delayed the start
of the work. The European Union contractor began rehabilitation work on
14 August, with the bridge now scheduled to open by January 2017. Associated
work on part of a main street in North Mitrovica adjacent to the bridge also began in
September.
21. Extensive technical-level discussions on implementation of the action plan for
telecommunications in Kosovo have not yet produced agreement on the final details
of implementation.

V. Returns, reconciliation, cultural heritage and
community relations
22. On 21 July, the President of Kosovo, Hashim Thaçi, paid his respects at the
memorial commemorating 14 Kosovo Serb civilians from Staro Gradsko who had
been murdered in that village on 23 July 1999, shortly after the end of the conflict.
A few days later, he visited another memorial to two teenagers who had been
murdered in the village of Gorazhdevac in 2003, in an unsolved crime against
Kosovo Serbs. Leading by example helps to change attitudes in wider context and
gives optimism for the potential for reconciliation to succeed at the social level.
23. I commend efforts made at the municipal level to employ members of
non-majority communities in local governance institutions. Furthermore, I welcome
the implementation by local authorities of more than 10 infrastructure projects in
multi-ethnic and minority community areas, including paving roads and u pgrading
drinking water supply and sewerage systems.
24. As at the end of September 2016, UNHCR had recorded a year -to-date total of
276 voluntary returns to Kosovo, including 156 Kosovo Serbs and 79 Kosovo
Roma, Ashkali and Egyptians. The total number of voluntary returns by members of
non-majority communities since 2000 stood at 25,772 individuals. UNHCR
estimates that, at the end of September 2016, the total number of internally
displaced persons living in Kosovo stood at 16,704. Of those, 468 resided in 29
collective shelters. The total number of internally displaced persons fell by 10
compared with the previous quarter.
25. A total of 69 security incidents affecting minorities were recorded, compared
with 94 during the previous reporting period. Reported incidents include physical
assault, verbal threats, robberies targeting returnees and vandalism of residential

16-18356

5/18

S/2016/901

properties. Incidents were reported throughout Kosovo, including in Istog/Istok,
Klinë/Klina, Lipjan/Lipljan, Mitrovica/Mitrovicë, Pejë/Peć, Ra hovec/Orahovac,
Suhareka/Suva Reka and Vushtrri/Vučitrn.
26. During August, the Deçan/Dečani municipality suspended all cooperation with
the Serbian Orthodox monastery Visoki Dečani after negotiations failed on the
potential use of a mineral water spring located within its special protective zone.
Meanwhile, the municipality had yet to implement the decision of the Kosovo
Constitutional Court of 20 May 2016 in favour of the monastery in the long standing dispute regarding land in the vicinity of the monastery.
27. Most visits to religious and cultural sites in Kosovo took place without
incident. On 28 August, however, 150 displaced Kosovo Serbs were prevented from
participating in a religious ceremony at the site of the destroyed Serbian Orthodox
church of the Holy Virgin near the village of Mushtishtë/Mušutište by some 150
Kosovo Albanian residents of the village. When Kosovo police officers attempted to
clear the road, protesters threw stones at them, resulting in three protesters and six
police officers sustaining injuries. Twenty-five protesters were arrested. It should be
recalled that, in June, the working group on the return of displaced persons to the
village had approved a list of 10 Kosovo Serbs as beneficiaries of the fourth phase
of the European Union Return and Reintegration in Kosovo housing project. In that
regard, the Kosovo Minister for Communities and Returns, Dalibor Jevtić,
expressed concern about the negative impact of the incident on the potential for
returns to Mushtishtë/Mušutište.
28. Following an arson attack inside the unfinished but consecrated Serbian
Orthodox church of Christ the Saviour located on the University of Pristina campus,
the Pristina parish organized the cleaning of the site, which was halted by order of
inspectors from Pristina municipality. On 16 September, around 50 university
students staged a protest and clashed with the Kosovo police at the site of the
church, resulting in four protesters being detained and one police officer injured.
The following day, students staged another peaceful protest, with support from the
university administration.

VI. Human rights and the rule of law
29. During a regular session of the Joint Working Group on Missing Persons, on
2 September, the Belgrade and Pristina delegations agreed to establish an analysis
team in support of the sub-working group on forensic issues. Meanwhile, the
International Committee of the Red Cross continued to facilitate meetings of the
working groups for victims’ families. Nonetheless, the number of unreso lved cases
of missing persons stagnated at 1,664. UNMIK, as a member of the Pristina
delegation, attended the excavation on 27 July in the vicinity of the Serbian
Orthodox church of Christ the Saviour located on the University of Pristina campus.
The excavation yielded no findings.
30. On 4 August, the Assembly of Kosovo approved the 10 recommendations on
protection against domestic violence made by the Commission on Human Rights,
Gender Equality, Missing Persons and Petitions, including the establishment o f a
regular budget line for the provision of services to victims of domestic violence and

6/18

16-18356

S/2016/901

the appointment of a special judge to treat cases of domestic violence. In a related
development on 10 August, the government of Kosovo established a committee for
crime victim compensation, with responsibility for reviewing and deciding on
claims for compensation submitted by victims of crimes.
31. Witness protection in trials for crimes committed in Kosovo during the 1998 1999 conflict remains a source of concern. On 5 September, the Belgrade Special
Court postponed for a second time the retrial of former members of the Yugoslav
Army 177th Intervention Squad for murders committed near Pejë/Peć in April and
May 1999, because witnesses from Kosovo declined to travel to Serbia. The
defendants had been initially convicted and sentenced to 106 years in jail, but the
Appellate Court had reversed the verdict in February and ordered a retrial.
32. The Special Prosecution Office in Kosovo filed indictments for a range of
terrorism-related offences, including an attempt to join Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic, involvement in activities with the
Nusrah Front in the Syrian Arab Republic and money-laundering and financing of
terrorism. On 15 September, indictments were filed against four imams and the
leader of a small political party for inciting national, racial, religious or ethnic
hatred, discord or intolerance. On 23 September, the Basic Court of
Ferizaj/Uroševac sentenced an individual to five years’ imprisonment for
recruitment to terrorism.
33. A number of investigations and prosecutions of officials accused of abuse of
position have been undertaken. In one high-profile criminal case, a former
parliamentarian of the Democratic Party of Kosovo and General Commander of the
Kosovo Liberation Army headquarters, Azem Syla, was initially arrested on
30 April on suspicion of leading a criminal group responsible for money -laundering,
bribery and illegal expropriation of public property. He was released from custody
on 25 August upon the expiry of the remand period, but rearrested under a EULEX
judicial order on 23 September for allegedly tampering with a protected witness.
34. In another high-profile case, on 2 August the Chief State Prosecutor opened an
investigation against the former caucus leader of the Democratic Party of Kosovo,
Adem Grabovci, for abusing his official position. The move was prompted by the
publication of wiretapped telephone conversations in which he appeared to be
peddling influence. On 12 August, the Pristina Basic Court rejected his request to
prevent the continued publication of the conversations. On 4 October, the
investigation was extended to include another seven public officials.
35. On 8 August, a EULEX judicial panel at Mitrovica Basic Court convicted a
former high-ranking member of the Kosovo Liberation Army, Xhemshit Krasniqi, of
war crimes against civilians for offences committed in 1999, including illegal
detention and torture. He was sentenced to eight years’ i mprisonment.
36. A team from the global focal point for police, justice and corrections in the
rule of law in post-conflict and other crisis situations deployed to Kosovo from
15 to 23 September. The team comprised experts from the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and
the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women).

16-18356

7/18

S/2016/901

37. The Special Rapporteur on the human rights of internally displaced persons,
Chaloka Beyani, visited Kosovo from 13 to 16 September to assess progress made
on his recommendations of 2014. He visited displaced persons in Pristina, North
Mitrovica, Zvečan/Zveçan, Obiliq/Obilić and Gračanica/Graçanicë and called for
bold efforts to unlock protracted displacement. He expressed concern that many
displaced persons were still living in substandard conditions and about the illegal
occupation of properties.
38. From 3 to 14 October, the Special Rapporteur in the field of cultural rights,
Karima Bennoune, conducted her first visit to Serbia and Kosovo to assess efforts to
implement the right of all persons to participate in cultural life without
discrimination and to access and enjoy cultural heritage. At the end of her visit to
Kosovo, she expressed concern about the high level of politicization of cultural
heritage in Kosovo and invited all sides to stop denying or minimizing the value of
cultural heritage of the other communities.
39. The UNMIK Human Rights Advisory Panel closed its operation and published
its final report. My Special Representative, and Head of UNMIK, Zahir Tanin,
welcomed the publication of the report and expressed appreciation for the work of
the Panel. The focus of effort now shifts towards the drawing of lessons learned
from the Panel’s important work.

VII. Partnerships and cooperation
40. As part of efforts to ensure continued United Nations engagement, my Special
Representative held a series of substantive meetings in Pristina with the President,
the Prime Minister and the Kosovo Minister for Foreign Affairs, Enver Hoxhaj, and
in Belgrade with the President of Serbia, Tomislav Nikolić, the Prime Minister and
the First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, Ivica Dačić.
Those meetings included exploration of various means to channel United Nations
support in furtherance of the mandate of UNMIK.
41. UNMIK continued to provide document certification services. A total of 407
documents were processed during the reporting period, comprising 135 civil status
documents, 212 pension documents, 20 school attendance documents, 12 transcripts
of records and 28 high school diplomas. The Mission also continued to facili tate
communications between the Kosovo authorities and the International Criminal
Police Organization (INTERPOL) and its member States. UNMIK received 11
requests seeking the issuance of international wanted notices. In addition, it
processed nine new requests from the Kosovo police and the Serbian Ministry of the
Interior regarding verification of documents and assistance in criminal
investigations.
42. In July, UN-Women issued a report 1 advocating that comprehensive
reparations be made for conflict-related sexual violence in Kosovo. By focusing in
the report on the need to bring survivors’ voices and perspectives to the forefront of
future policy and development programme design, UN -Women aims to complement
__________________
1

8/18

Available from www.unwomen.org/en/digital-library/publications/2016/8/the-conflict-did-notbring-us-flowers#view.

16-18356

S/2016/901

existing initiatives upholding the right to reparation for survivors of conflict-related
sexual violence.
43. The World Bank issued its second biannual Southeast Europe Regular
Economic Report, entitled “Resilient growth amid rising risks”. 2 It predicts that
Kosovo will have a 3.6 per cent growth in gross domestic product in 2016, slightly
down from 3.9 per cent in 2015, which nonetheless compares favourably with other
economies in the region. The unemployment rate remains the highest in the region,
at 33 per cent, with long-term unemployment making up two thirds of that figure.

VIII. Observations
44. The many remaining challenges notwithstanding, I remain impressed by the
overall economic and political progress that has been achieved since the end of the
conflict and by the far-sightedness of those from each side who have moved beyond
the conflict in order to focus on building a more prosperous future. In this, they
have worked closely with the international community, and I am especially proud of
the contributions made by the United Nations. Further more, I welcome the recent
more constructive engagement with my Special Representative by political leaders
in Kosovo, which directly contributes to the wider goals shared by all.
45. Naturally, disagreement and divisions persist in Kosovo, and voices of g enuine
dissent and dissatisfaction need to be heard. I am concerned that, too often,
legitimate public concerns are being exploited by politicians for their own interests.
The protracted political stalemate over the agreement on territorial delineation wit h
Montenegro has obscured the real issues and may also prove to be a damaging
distraction from more urgent challenges and opportunities. With regard to the
adoption of laws on issues that are sensitive to important stakeholders, I urge more
careful consultation and dialogue, with special focus on ensuring that minority
communities are involved in decisions that affect their lives and livelihoods. I also
urge the Kosovo authorities to refrain from taking any steps or decisions that could
hinder progress in the European Union-facilitated dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina.
46. While I have welcomed the impressive progress achieved in the normalization
of relations between Pristina and Belgrade through the European Union -facilitated
dialogue, I am disconcerted by the delayed rate of implementation of some
important agreements. As has been expressed by leaders on both sides, there is no
practical alternative to dialogue in order to achieve the normalization of relations. I
call upon those engaged at all levels to resist the temptation of public posturing and
provocation, but instead engage with one another in a responsible manner, seeking
fair and lasting compromises. I also remind political leaders in Belgrade and
Pristina of their own responsibility to resume the high-level dialogue without delay
and with the courage and political will that are needed to overcome remaining
obstacles and ensure full implementation of all agreements reached thus far.

__________________
2

16-18356

Available from www.worldbank.org/en/region/eca/publication/south-east-europe-regulareconomic-report.

9/18

S/2016/901

47. I regret the continuing low rate of returns to many part s of Kosovo. Stronger
efforts are required to build confidence and trust between returning and receiving
communities and to provide credible guarantees of physical security,
non-discrimination and educational and economic opportunities for returnees.
Religious tolerance and respect for the traditions of others are also important
prerequisites for reconciliation and for sustainable returns. Kosovo has a long standing tradition of diversity and religious tolerance that needs to be recovered
after the scars of the war.
48. As part of Europe, the western Balkans are facing emerging challenges, and
close regional cooperation is a decisive prerequisite to successfully meeting them.
Divisive rhetoric undermines regional progress at a time when those in the region
can least afford it. In particular, I call upon those in the highest positions of
leadership to focus on uniting efforts to meet shared challenges rather than looking
to apportion blame and inflame tendencies to division.
49. I once again express my sincere gratitude to my Special Representative, Zahir
Tanin, for his leadership of the Mission and his efforts to strengthen cooperation
among all sides and to promote overall security and stability. Furthermore, I
commend the staff of UNMIK for their commitmen t and efforts, especially in
facilitating effective engagement among and between key stakeholders.
50. I conclude by extending my gratitude to the long -standing partners of the
United Nations in Kosovo, including KFOR, the North Atlantic Treaty Organizati on,
the European Union and OSCE, and to the United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes for their support for and cooperation with UNMIK.

10/18

16-18356

S/2016/901

Annex I
Report of the European Union High Representative for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy to the Secretary-General
on the activities of the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo from 16 July to 15 October 2016
1.

Summary
The European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) continued its
monitoring, mentoring and advising activities, and to implement its executive
functions in line with its rule of law mandate. The reconfiguration process of the
Mission continued throughout the reporting period.
A number of verdicts were pronounced in cases concerning war crimes,
organized crime, corruption and other serious crimes. The Mitrovica Basic Court
sentenced one defendant for war crimes against the civilian population and other
charges. The Ferizaj/Uroševac Basic Court sentenced one defendant for trading in
influence, extortion and unlawful possession of a firearm. The Pristina Basic Court
acquitted seven defendants in the 2007 case relating to an explosion on Bill Clinton
Boulevard in Pristina (the “Clinton Bombing 2”). The Court of Appeals acquitted
three defendants in a case relating to the Ministry of Trade and Industry. The
Mitrovica Basic Court reopened the main trial against two defendants who had been
indicted for charges relating to the murder of a Kosovo police officer in 2011,
following a judgment by the Court of Appeals.
The Mission monitored and advised the Kosovo police in relation to several
events, including the commencement of the reconstruction of the main bridge in
Mitrovica. EULEX facilitated a regional conference of police directors general in
Skopje with the aim of intensifying cooperation and harmonizing actions against
terrorism and organized crime. The Mission continued to advise the Kosovo
Correctional Service against preferential treatment of high -profile prisoners.
EULEX maintained its support for the Kosovo Judicial and Prosecutorial Councils,
which achieved only limited progress regarding the amended package of laws on the
judiciary.
There was progress in the implementation of the agreements from the
European Union-facilitated dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina. The parties
agreed on further modalities for the implementation of the agreement on freedom of
movement regarding vehicle licence plates. The integration of former administrative
staff from the Serbian Ministry of Interior into Kosovo structures proceeded. T he
selection of all judges, prosecutors and support staff within the framework of justice
integration was concluded, while the appointments were yet to be made.
The Mission commemorated the anniversary of the death of the EULEX
customs officer, Audrius Šenavičius, who was killed in the line of duty in northern
Kosovo in September 2013.

16-18356

11/18

S/2016/901

2.

EULEX activities

2.1

Executive
War crimes
On 8 August, a panel of EULEX judges at the Mitrovica Basic Court sentenced
a defendant to an aggregate punishment of eight years’ imprisonment and a fine of
€1,500 for war crimes against the civilian population and unauthorized ownership,
control and possession or use of weapons. The defendant had been found guilty of
illegal detention, violation of bodily integrity and health and torture of several
witnesses and unknown civilians in the Kosovo Liberation Army camps in Kukës
and Cahan, Albania, and in Prizren, Kosovo, in 1999. The accused had carried out
his actions together with other Kosovo Liberation Army members.
Organized crime and corruption
In July, a panel of one local judge and two EULEX judges at the Court of
Appeals granted the appeals of three defendants against the judgment of the Pristina
Basic Court of 21 September 2015 in a case relating to the Ministry of Trade and
Industry. The panel acquitted the defendants of all charges, namely abuse of official
position or authority committed in co-perpetration. It also partially granted the
appeal of the fourth defendant and modified the judgment by sentencing h im to a
suspended prison sentence of 18 months for abuse of official position or authority,
while the remainder of the judgment was confirmed.
On 4 August, a panel of one local judge and two EULEX judges at the
Ferizaj/Uroševac Basic Court sentenced a defendant to an aggregate sentence of
four years’ imprisonment and a fine of €1,500 for trading in influence, extortion and
unlawful possession of a firearm. The defendant was ordered to make restitution of
the extorted sum of €25,000 euros by 31 December 201 7.
On 26 August, a EULEX prosecutor at the Kosovo Special Prosecution Office
filed an indictment against three defendants accused of accepting and giving bribes
and trading in influence from 2011 to 2013 with the aim of obtaining the release
from prison of convicted persons or a reduction in their sentence for criminal
offences for which they had been convicted.
On 1 September, a panel of EULEX judges at the Mitrovica Basic Court
opened the main trial against a defendant charged with the unauthorized purc hase,
possession, distribution and sale of dangerous narcotics.
On 29 September, a pretrial panel of one local judge and three EULEX judges
at the Pristina Basic Court concluded the special investigative opportunity hearings
in a case relating to the usurpation of socially owned land involving nine defendants
thus far.
Other serious crimes
On 29 July, a panel of one local judge and two EULEX judges at the Pristina
Basic Court acquitted seven defendants who had been charged with aggravated murder,
attempted aggravated murder and causing general danger. The charges were related to

12/18

16-18356

S/2016/901

an explosion on Bill Clinton Boulevard in Pristina in September 2007 in which two
people had been killed and several others injured (the “Clinton Bombing 2”).
On 4 August, a panel of one local judge and two EULEX judges at the Court
of Appeals partially granted the prosecutor’s appeal against the judgment of the
Mitrovica Basic Court of 10 December 2015 relating to a defendant in the “Zymberi
2” case. The case was related to an attack on a police convoy in Zubin Potok in
2011, in which a Kosovo police officer had been killed. The suspended prison
sentence was extended from six months to one year, and the underlining offence of
“obstructing official persons in performing official duties” was changed to
“participation in a group obstructing official persons in performing official duties ”.
On 7 September, a panel of EULEX judges at the Mitrovica Basic Court opened the
main trial against two other defendants who had b een indicted on charges relating to
the same case (the “Zymberi 1” case). On 29 April, the Court of Appeals had
granted the prosecutor’s appeal against the acquittal of the defendants in 2015 and
had returned the case for retrial at the basic court level.
On 19 September, EULEX commemorated the anniversary of the death of the
EULEX customs officer, Audrius Šenavičius, who was killed in the line of duty in
northern Kosovo in September 2013. At a press conference in Mitrovica North,
EULEX announced an increased reward of €82,000 for any information leading to
the arrest and prosecution of the perpetrator or perpetrators.
Specialist Chambers and Specialist Prosecutor’s Office
On 1 September, the Chief Prosecutor of the newly created Kosovo Specialist
Prosecutor’s Office was appointed, marking the formal transition from the European
Union Special Investigative Task Force. The Host State Agreement, allowing for
judicial activity by the Specialist Chambers, had passed through the House of
Representatives of the Netherlands and was pending the approval of the Senate. The
Chambers continue to press forward on all other activities in The Hague under the
authority of the Interim Host State Agreement signed with the Netherlands.
Significant steps have been taken to make the Specialist Chambers fully
operational. A call for contributions for Registry and Specialist Prosecutor’s Office
staff closed on 9 September. Moreover, a call for nominations for the position of
President of the Specialist Chambers and for the roster of international judges also
closed on the same date.
In furtherance of transparent communication with the media and the public,
the Specialist Chambers and Specialist Prosecutor’s Office held their first press
conferences on 15 September. Their official websites were launched on the same
day.
The Registrar of the Specialist Chambers visited Kosovo in September where
she met the Kosovo Minister of Justice.
Institute of Forensic Medicine
EULEX forensic experts at the Kosovo Institute of Forensic Medicine handed
over 12 sets of remains, conducted four exhumations and identified the remains of
one missing person. Furthermore, they carried out site assessments at the P ristina

16-18356

13/18

S/2016/901

University campus in Zubin Potok and Prizren and continued the site assessment at
Kiževak in the Rudnica mining complex in Serbia. A working group tasked with
drafting a strategy and an action plan in forensic medicine was set up within the
Institute of Forensic Medicine.
Property rights
The Kosovo Property Agency Appeals Panel received 6 new appeals and
adjudicated 41 appeals, while 278 appeals were pending a decision of the Panel.
The Special Chamber of the Supreme Court for privatization m atters rendered
395 decisions in first-instance trial panel cases and finalized 45 cases at the
appellate panel level.
Integration of the judiciary
Within the framework of the implementation of the European Union -facilitated
dialogue, the integration of the judiciary progressed as the Kosovo Judicial Council
and the Kosovo Prosecutorial Council together with EULEX finalized all interviews
of candidates for judges, prosecutors and support staff. Judges and prosecutors had
yet to be appointed. Construction work at the Basic Prosecution Office building had
been completed.
Executive police
On 10 August, the first joint Kosovo police-EULEX foot patrol to enhance
community policing was conducted in the town of Zubin Potok and was well
received by the local population. Joint foot patrols were to be conducted in parallel
with the joint green-border patrols carried out by EULEX and Kosovo border police
in northern Kosovo.
On 30 September, EULEX provided joint training on crowd and riot control to
the quick response teams of Regional Police Directorates Mitrovica North and
Mitrovica South, which included training in mixed units and the use of gas masks.
The training showed the capability of both regional directorates to work together to
respond to crowd and riot control incidents.
2.2

Strengthening
EULEX held various meetings with the Prime Minister, the Minister of
Finance and the Director General of Kosovo Customs regarding the forthcoming
merger of Kosovo customs with the tax administration of Kosovo.
The Kosovo Judicial Council and the Kosovo Prosecutorial Council needed to
achieve further progress in adopting and implementing regulations that had been
included in the amended package of laws on the judiciary. Of the 38 sublegal acts to
be completed and adopted, only 21 regulations had been adopted by both Councils
as at the end of September.
EULEX began its monitoring through the chain of criminal justice of cases
that were to be handed over to the Kosovo authorities as a result of the change of
the EULEX mandate. Cooperation with Kosovo officials had been satisfactory. In
the context of its work with the Police Inspectorate of Kosovo, EULEX also began

14/18

16-18356

S/2016/901

to monitor criminal cases filed against police officers in 2014 to analyse process
performance since the initial indictment.
There was progress in the implementation of the agreements from the
European Union-facilitated dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina. In September,
an agreement on the further implementation of the Freedom of Movement
Agreement was reached between Belgrade and Pristina regarding the use of vehicle
licence plates.
To deal with licence-plate registration, the remaining administrative staff of
the former Serbian Ministry of the Interior needed to take up their new positions in
the municipal civil status offices in northern Kosovo. As at 1 September, the first
batch of 32 former Serbian Ministry of Interior administrative staff members had
begun work at the Civil Registration Agency, receiving on-the-job training at the
premises of the former Mitrovica North Administrative Office.
Cooperation between Pristina and Belgrade through their regular meetings on
integrated border management was very constructive. Veterinary and phytosanitary
issues were discussed in addition to the ordinary day-to-day cooperation.
EULEX continued to advise the Kosovo Correctional Service on adequate
treatment of high-profile prisoners. Progress was achieved, given that in August the
Ministry of Justice revoked all cases of suspension of sentence on medical grounds;
all inmates returned to prison. Remedies included proper categorization of inmates
and preparation of case files for inmates who had overstayed their temporary
suspensions of sentence for medical reasons. The Mission monitored all Kosovo
Correctional Service escorts of high-profile prisoners to the University Clinical
Center of Kosovo and made several recommendations on how to improve the
efficiency of escorts. EULEX advised the Kosovo Correctional Service to conduct
large-scale searches of prison facilities on a more regular basis.
In August, EULEX monitored and advised the Kosovo police on the planning
and operations concerning the Prizren Dokufest and a charity concert by Dua Lipa.
The Mission also monitored the work of the Kosovo police during the beginning of
the revitalization work at the Mitrovica main bridge, encouraging cooperation
between the Mitrovica North and Mitrovica South regional police departments in
developing a joint preventive response plan. The central Kosovo police specialize d
unit proved once again its ability to adequately police major events. However,
regional-level police units still needed the support of the Mission to improve their
planning ahead of and during such major police operations. In relation to Kosovo
joining the Fédération internationale de football association and the Union of
European Football Associations, the Mission produced guidelines for the Kosovo
police in its relations with the Kosovo Football Federation regarding the policing of
international football matches. The Mission continued to advise the Kosovo police
on appropriate minority and gender representation.
From 8 to 10 September, EULEX facilitated a regional conference in Skopje of
directors general of police services. Representatives of Kosovo, t he former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Albania and Serbia discussed how to intensify cooperation
and the exchange of information and how to harmonize actions against terrorism
and organized crime.

16-18356

15/18

S/2016/901

As one of the main stakeholders in a capacity-building project funded by the
United Nations Development Programme and the European Union Office in
Kosovo, EULEX supported the Religious and Cultural Heritage Unit of the Kosovo
police in its efforts to increase capacities and capabilities in the protection of
cultural heritage sites in selected municipalities. Cooperation with the stakeholders
progressed well. In September, an assessment was conducted on the issue of
improved closed-circuit television monitoring of certain religious sites.

16/18

16-18356

S/2016/901

Annex II
Composition and strength of the police component of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(as at 15 October 2016)
Country

Number

Austria

1

Bulgaria

1

Germany

1

Hungary

1

Italy

1

Russian Federation

1

Total

6

Composition and strength of the military liaison component
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo
(as at 15 October 2016)

16-18356

Country

Number

Czechia

2

Poland

1

Republic of Moldova

1

Romania

1

Turkey

1

Ukraine

2

Total

8

17/18

S/2016/901

18/18

16-18356
