A/64/PV.59

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fourth session

59

th plenary meeting
Monday, 7 December 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ali Abdussalam Treki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Agenda item 53
Sustainable development
(d) Protection of global climate for present and
future generations
Report of the Second Committee
(A/64/420/Add.4)
The President (spoke in Arabic): If there is no
proposal under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, may I
take it that the General Assembly decides not to discuss
the report of the Second Committee that is before the
Assembly today?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): Statements will
therefore be limited to explanations of vote. The
positions
of
delegations
regarding
the
recommendations of the Second Committee have been
made clear in the Committee and are reflected in the
relevant official records.
May I remind members that, in accordance with
General Assembly decision 34/401, a delegation
should, as far as possible, explain its vote only once,
that is, either in the Committee or in plenary meeting,
unless that delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is
different from its vote in the Committee. Also,
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.

Before we begin to take action on the
recommendation contained in the report of the Second
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take a decision in the same
manner as was done in the Second Committee.
The Assembly has before it a draft resolution
recommended by the Second Committee in paragraph
10 of its report.
We will now take action on the draft resolution,
entitled “Protection of global climate for present and
future generations of humankind”.
I give the floor to the Rapporteur of the Second
Committee.
Ms. McQuade (Ireland), Rapporteur of the
Second Committee: This statement is to correct an
error in operative paragraph 6 of the draft resolution
recommended
for
adoption
in
document
A/64/420/Add.4. The word “Copenhagen” should be
deleted from the title of the Climate Change
Conference, so that the paragraph ends “with a view to
making the United Nations Climate Change
Conference a success;”.
The President (spoke in Arabic): May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to adopt the draft resolution
recommended by the Second Committee in paragraph
10 of its report, as orally corrected?
The draft resolution, as orally corrected, was
adopted (resolution 64/73).

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

09-63607 (E)

*0963607*

A/64/PV.59

The President (spoke in Arabic): The Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
sub-item (d) of agenda item 53.
Agenda items 70 and 71
Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian
and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations,
including special economic assistance
Report of the Secretary-General (A/64/336)
(a) Strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/64/84,
A/64/327 and A/64/331)
Draft resolutions (A/64/L.19*, A/64/L.31,
A/64/L.32 and A/64/L.33)
(b) Assistance to the Palestinian people
Report of the Secretary-General (A/64/78)
Assistance to the survivors of the 1994 genocide in
Rwanda, particularly orphans, widows and victims
of sexual violence
Report of the Secretary-General (A/64/313)
The President (spoke in Arabic): Before we
proceed, I should like to make a brief statement.
It is an honour for me to open today’s plenary
debate on strengthening the coordination of
humanitarian and disaster relief assistance of the
United Nations, including special economic assistance.
The world continues to face complex emergencies that
leave whole communities devastated. Without much
warning, lives are shattered and families uprooted.
Climate change, the dangerous spread of pandemics
and the global food and financial crises affect
populations across the world and have created new
emergencies. The work of the United Nations in
responding to humanitarian crises remains as important
as ever.
Every year, Member States have reaffirmed their
support for the humanitarian work of the United
Nations by adopting by consensus draft resolutions
such as the ones before us today. This year, I would
like to express my appreciation to the Permanent
Representative of Luxembourg for coordinating the
work on the agenda items under consideration.

2

The draft resolutions before us reflect new global
challenges such as the continued food crisis and the
global economic and financial crisis, which have
increased the vulnerability of populations across the
world. Climate change threatens to exacerbate natural
disasters. Once again, the most vulnerable populations
will be affected disproportionately, and there is a risk
that gains in development achieved over the years
could be reversed. An estimated 36 million people
were displaced by sudden-onset natural disasters in
2008. Of those, around 20 million were displaced by
climate-related disasters.
In addition, internal displacement owing to
conflict continues to be of serious humanitarian
concern. There are some 26 million displaced persons
today, many of them having lived that way for many
years. Most draft resolutions emphasize the urgent
need to reduce the risk of disaster and to prepare for
emergencies through capacity building and other
mechanisms.
I look forward to a constructive and forwardlooking debate and to the adoption of decisions by the
General Assembly that further enhance the capacity of
the international community to effectively respond to
humanitarian crises around the world. I call on
Member States to provide the necessary financial
resources in order to enable the United Nations and
other international and regional organizations working
in the area of humanitarian assistance to effectively
undertake their crucial tasks.
Ms. Larsen (Norway): Why are humanitarian
workers being killed, when all they want to do is to
help? Why are they denied access to people in
desperate need, when all they want to do is to relieve
suffering? And why are we, the international
community and national Governments, unable or
unwilling to invest in disaster preparedness and
prevention, when we know that such investment will
save both lives and money?
The international humanitarian system is under
intense and growing pressure, and the questions I have
raised all indicate what the problems are. I believe that
the United Nations is, and will remain, indispensable to
solving all three sets of humanitarian challenges.
Natural hazards are perhaps fewer in number, but
their severity and impact have dramatically increased.
In 2008, the number of deaths caused by natural
disasters was three times the average for the period

09-63607

A/64/PV.59

from 2000 to 2007. Complex emergencies have
escalated over the past few years, with severe impacts
on people’s lives and well-being. Those impacts are
often coupled with the effects of natural hazards and
global challenges such as the food, fuel and financial
crises. And we have only seen the beginning.
We, the representatives of the international
humanitarian community, have to ask ourselves
whether the people affected by the increased severity
of natural disasters and escalating conflicts experience
that humanitarian assistance in a more adequate, timely
and efficient manner. I am not sure that they do. There
are several reasons for that.
I would like to focus on three specific areas of
concern, namely, the lack of humanitarian space and
lack of access for humanitarian assistance, the lack of
protection for civilians and the increased occurrence of
sexual and gender-based violence in armed conflicts,
and the lack of early recovery and disaster
preparedness.
Time and again, we see that the humanitarian
space is being limited and not respected. We still see
that the lack of safe, unimpeded and timely access to
many victims continues to be one of the key obstacles
to the effective protection of civilians. All parties
concerned,
including
non-State
actors
and
neighbouring States, must cooperate in ensuring access
to civilian populations and in protecting aid workers in
armed conflict. Norway will continue to promote
respect for fundamental humanitarian principles and a
clear division of roles between humanitarian
organizations and military forces. Humanitarian space
must be understood and protected in all emergencies.

operational guidance for peacekeeping personnel.
Norway welcomes the study and intends to make sure
that it does not end up on a shelf, but that it is used as a
tool for improvement.
Women and children are particularly vulnerable
in humanitarian crises. Nowhere in the world is that
more obvious today than in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The widespread
and systematic sexual violence in that country has
devastating consequences, not only for each and every
victim but also for future peace and reconciliation in
the country.
Internationally, sexual violence is considered to
be a savage weapon of war. In fact, it is a war crime
and a threat to international peace. It can be stopped if
we take it seriously enough. The incredible truth is that
the world has too often looked away.
Norway welcomes the increased coordination in
the area of women, peace and security. We look
forward to the Secretary General’s appointment of a
Special Representative to address sexual violence. We
call upon all relevant United Nations and humanitarian
organizations to strengthen capacity, including for
supporting victims, to find effective means of
combating impunity and to establish more effective
preventive measures.

The core principles of international humanitarian
law are as valid as ever. Yet, the complexity of modern
armed conflict demands renewed reflection on the
interpretation and implementation of those principles
in order to ensure adequate protection for civilians.
Accountability is essential.

Today, the international humanitarian system is
better coordinated and more robust than ever. But early
recovery following natural disasters is still lagging
behind on the reform agenda and is in urgent need of
renewed attention. With the increasing number of
natural disasters, the link between reconstruction and
prevention needs to be strengthened. The establishment
of the Central Emergency Response Fund gave the
United Nations a rapid-response capacity. The
humanitarian community must now place prevention
and preparedness much higher on the reform agenda.
We all know that it is less expensive to anticipate and
prevent than to react and repair.

Warfare conducted in violation of international
humanitarian law should carry a strong political
stigma, and perpetrators should be brought to justice.
The recently published study on protecting civilians in
the context of United Nations peacekeeping operations
reveals many of the existing gaps and provides clear
recommendations. Overall, it is evident that mandates
to protect civilians have yet to be matched by political
resolve and resources, or by doctrine and clear

We need a robust international humanitarian
system that is supported by all member countries. We
need a genuine global alliance for humanitarian
principles and values. We all share responsibility and
we all share the same world. For those reasons,
Norway continues to be a predictable supporter of
United Nations humanitarian efforts. Today, I will sign
a four-year framework agreement with the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs that will

09-63607

3

A/64/PV.59

provide a total of more than $40 million in
un-earmarked funding. Later this week, we will pledge
NKr 325 million to the Central Emergency Response
Fund, which amounts to more than $58 million and is
an increase of 10 per cent over this year.
Finally, before I conclude, let me underscore that
we should not be thought of as either donors or
recipients. As the Secretary-General has underlined,
States that have turned to their friends in past disasters
are today in a position to offer help and to provide
international aid in its many forms. Such a broadening
of substantive support for relief efforts is crucial if the
world is to respond to growing humanitarian needs. It
is my hope and vision that we will be able to move
forward together in a renewed partnership, with the
strong and sound leadership of the United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sweden to introduce draft resolution
A/64/L.32.
Mr. Skau (Sweden): I have the honour to
introduce the draft resolution on the strengthening of
the coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance
of the United Nations, document A/64/L.32.
I would like to thank all delegations for the
constructive spirit of partnership in which the
consultations were held, which allowed us to reach
consensus on this important resolution once again. The
draft resolution is a statement to the world of our
shared humanitarian concerns and our commonality of
purpose. It is also a reaffirmation of the importance of
humanitarian action and confirmation of the fact that
humanitarian assistance is a priority and a
responsibility for all.
The draft resolution reaffirms the unique and
leading role that the United Nations plays in
humanitarian emergencies. Since the origin of the
resolution 18 years ago, during the Assembly’s fortysixth session, national and international emergency
response
capacities
have
been
strengthened
considerably. At the same time, humanitarian action
stands at a dangerous crossroads. It is confronted with
rising difficulties of access, insecurity and increasing
needs, as well as global trends that are driving chronic
vulnerability on an unprecedented scale. The
multilateralism of the United Nations has never been
more needed.

Tensions between international humanitarian
assistance and the notion of State sovereignty are
always present in our deliberations on this resolution,
which at times are difficult. There have been many
advances in support for international humanitarian law
and the humanitarian principles of humanity, neutrality,
impartiality and independence. But there are obstacles
when combining such universal norms with the
sovereignty of nations.
The primary role of affected States in providing
humanitarian assistance and protecting civilians must
always be respected. But we must also ensure that the
international community takes collective responsibility
for dealing with challenges that affect us all.
Sovereignty means, above all, responsibility. Respect
for human life and the protection of vulnerable people
are universal concepts that are supported by all the
religious traditions and accepted in all cultures.
There is too often a perception that humanitarian
assistance is not genuinely neutral or independent, but
is rather a Western affair reflecting a Western agenda.
While recognizing remarkable humanitarian efforts at
the national and local levels in many developing
countries, traditional international humanitarian
assistance has indeed for many years been a Westerndominated affair. We should pay tribute to all
humanitarian workers, wherever they come from, for
their unselfish efforts — often in dangerous
situations — to save lives and alleviate suffering.
As we move forward, there should be less
emphasis on the international fire-brigade side of
humanitarian business, even if well-coordinated
international responses will always be needed, and
more focus on building local, national and regional
capacity. We need a new approach, with full respect for
the people and the societies who are being helped and
for the countries from which they come: a genuinely
shared global humanitarian partnership.
The world faces a series of interconnected global
trends, which will transform the humanitarian
landscape in the years to come. Climate change, the
global food crisis, population growth, rapidly
increasing urbanization, land, water and energy
scarcities, the risks of pandemics and the current global
economic and financial crisis are challenges that go
well beyond the ability of any State to deal with alone.
We cannot tackle those challenges successfully
without
greater
cooperation,
coherence
and

4

09-63607

A/64/PV.59

coordination within the international community. We
must reshape our understanding of humanitarian aid
versus development aid to deal with situations where
there are humanitarian needs in developmental
contexts. We must favour prevention rather than
response, and reinforce social protection programmes
in
developing
countries.
Strategies,
whether
developmental or humanitarian, must be aimed at
supporting resilience in the face of those global
challenges.
This draft resolution should ensure that the fruits
of our collective thinking are put into action for the
benefit of all people in need. What counts at the end of
the day are not how many paragraphs we agree upon,
but how many lives we can save and how much
suffering we can alleviate. My delegation and the other
sponsors look forward to the adoption by consensus
once again of this important draft resolution.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina to introduce draft
resolution A/64/L.31.
Mr. Fuks (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): Since
the Assembly adopted resolution 49/139 B in 1994,
during its forty-ninth session, the White Helmets
Initiative is this month finishing its fifteenth year. as
part of the United Nations system. I should like to
express our satisfaction with the work that has been
done in the United Nations during that time. That work
has taken us from Rwanda to Paraguay and to Pisco,
Peru; from Palestine to Hurricane Katrina in New
Orleans; and from India and Lebanon to the hurricanes
in Central America and the Caribbean, such as in Cuba,
Guatemala, Grenada and the always stricken Haiti.
This year also marks the tenth anniversary of Hurricane
Mitch, when White Helmets were also involved.
In those 15 years, we have built up an Argentine
initiative that operates in the Latin American and
Caribbean region but has a clear global and multilateral
character. Our initiative began at a time when the
debate was focused on the coordination of
humanitarian assistance. In the intervening years, we
have participated in discussions concerning integrated
risk management, community participation, targeted
assistance,
capacity-building
for
volunteers,
vulnerability and many other issues that have served to
enrich and democratize the debate.
Looking to the future, we would like to move
towards closer coordination with the Office for the

09-63607

Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) in
expanding priority 5 of the Hyogo Framework for
Action 2005-2015 and in universalizing the role of
voluntary service in the management of risk, together
with United Nations Volunteers. We would like that to
be reflected in the debate on the White Helmets
Initiative during the Assembly’s sixty-fourth session.
To that end, we count on the express recognition on the
part of the Secretary-General, who in his report
(A/64/84) tells the Assembly that the White Helmets
can provide an interesting model for volunteer
organizations, both regional and local.
In that regard, through the White Helmets, in
2010 Argentina will host OCHA’s third regional
meeting to promote relationships in the area of
international humanitarian assistance. In addition, it is
also worth mentioning the great level of interest shown
by Argentina, in the context of the White Helmets, in
new United Nations endeavours, such as our
contribution to the Central Emergency Response Fund,
our work with the International Strategy for Disaster
Reduction (ISDR), and our participation in the ISDR
Global Platform and support group. To those activities
we can add the renewed work with the World Food
Programme and the Food and Agriculture Organization
initiative this year, among others.
Our well-known commitment to voluntary service
is also demonstrated in the annual observance in
Argentina of a day to honour it, which involves the
White Helmets, and by our active support for the
follow-up in 2011 of the International Year for
Volunteers, coordinated by the United Nations
Volunteers.
To conclude, I wish to note that this initiative
comes from a developing country. It should be assessed
in its two dimensions: the effort that it represents for a
country such as ours, and the possibility of replication
by other developing countries.
Further, at a time when disasters are less and less
natural and of an ever greater magnitude, the efforts of
developing countries in the area of humanitarian
assistance deserve special support, because they bring
together technical, professional, volunteer and even
financial resources and supplies, which are highly
valued by peoples in need.
We trust that in the Assembly’s sixty-fourth
session, the member countries will support the White

5

A/64/PV.59

Helmets Initiative, thus facilitating better day-to-day
coordination in the United Nations system.

impunity for acts of violence against humanitarian and
United Nations personnel.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sweden to introduce draft resolution
A/64/L.33.

The draft resolution requests the Department of
Safety and Security to continue to improve and
implement an effective, modern and flexible
information management capacity, in order to reduce
the risks arising in the context of United Nationsrelated operations. It also takes note of the ongoing
efforts by the Secretary-General in addressing the
recommendations of the Independent Panel on Safety
and Security of United Nations Personnel and Premises
Worldwide.

Mr. Örnéus (Sweden): I have the honour to
deliver in one sequence three different statements, so I
ask members to please bear with me and be patient.
On behalf of the European Union (EU) and the
sponsors, I have the pleasure of introducing two draft
resolutions: A/64/L.33, entitled “Safety and security of
humanitarian personnel and protection of United
entitled
Nations
personnel”,
and
A/64/L.35,
“Assistance to the Palestinian People”. I will begin by
introducing the former.
I would like to thank all delegations for their
active participation throughout the negotiations on
draft resolution L.33. Delegations’ constructive
engagement allowed for consensus to be reached once
more on this important issue. The safety and security
of humanitarian personnel is increasingly challenged
and requires full attention and strong support from all
Member States. We thank delegations for their
constructive approach in the negotiations this year.
That allowed for an unprecedented, timely agreement,
sending a strong message of unity in support of the
safety and security of humanitarian and United Nations
personnel.
Mr. Hackett (Barbados), Vice President, took the
Chair.
Over the last few years, there has been a dramatic
escalation of threats to and deliberate attacks on
humanitarian and United Nations personnel. Locally
recruited personnel are often most severely affected.
For the first time, we have alarming reports of
politically motivated attacks. That development cannot
be accepted and calls for concerted action.
The
draft
resolution
recognizes
those
developments and suggests ways to address them. It
urges States to ensure the full and effective
implementation of the relevant principles and rules of
international law and to take the necessary measures to
ensure the safety and security of humanitarian
personnel. It emphasizes the need to pay particular
attention to the safety and security of locally recruited
humanitarian personnel. States are urged to end

6

We look forward to further reports on measures to
follow up on those important recommendations.
Finally, the draft underlines the urgent need to
allocate adequate and predictable resources with a view
to reinforcing the efforts of the Department of Safety
and Security to meet its mandate and responsibilities.
There can be no programme without security, and no
security without adequate resources. The deteriorating
conditions under which both international and national
humanitarian staff carry out their work require
increased efforts to reinforce safety and security. We
hope that the consensus resolution will provide a
foundation for wider efforts in ensuring the safety and
security for humanitarian and United Nations
personnel.
We look forward to draft resolution A/64/L.33
being adopted by consensus.
Let me now turn to draft resolution A/64/L.35,
entitled, “Assistance to the Palestinian people”, under
agenda item 70 (b). The draft resolution has been
shared with Member States and will be considered on
Friday, 11 December. As in previous years, we expect
the draft resolution to be adopted by consensus.
The European Union reaffirms its commitment to
providing assistance to the Palestinian people. The
sustained support from the donors of the international
community is essential in order to support Statebuilding efforts, to strengthen the Palestinian economy
and to meet the humanitarian needs of the Palestinian
people.
The EU stands ready to further develop and
enhance its bilateral relations with the Palestinian
Authority. The European Union will promote
Palestinian State-building and intensify work in
partnership with the Palestinian Authority towards

09-63607

A/64/PV.59

further implementation of the Palestinian Reform and
Development Plan. That will involve a broad range of
areas, including health, education, governance,
customs, public financial management and the rule of
law.
The European Union fully supports the
Palestinian Authority’s Government Plan entitled
“Palestine: Ending the Occupation, Establishing the
State” and will work for enhanced international support
for that plan.
The European Union welcomes the Palestinian
Authority’s efforts to develop an effective and
reformed security sector and will cooperate with the
Palestinian Authority towards additional improvement
in restoring law and order, countering terrorism,
implementing a more comprehensive security strategy,
and developing an effective and reformed security
sector and criminal justice system. Civil police and
justice will continue to be a focus of EU support
through the assistance provided by EUPOL COPPS —
the European Union Police Mission for the Palestinian
Territories — the European Commission and member
States, and in close coordination with the United States
and other partners.
The EU remains gravely concerned at the
humanitarian situation in Gaza and calls for the
immediate and unconditional opening of crossings for
the flow of humanitarian aid in accordance with
international humanitarian law, and of commercial
goods and persons to and from Gaza. Reconstruction
and economic recovery have to be allowed and the
current humanitarian crisis must be solved.
Let me reaffirm the European Union’s gratitude
to and solidarity with humanitarian actors whose safe,
unhindered and timely access to civilian populations,
in particular in times of armed conflict, is a
fundamental condition for the fulfilment of their
mandates and mission. We applaud the work of
humanitarian personnel on the ground and call on all
actors to respect the principles of humanity,
impartiality, neutrality and independence.
The European Union welcomes Israel’s steps to
ease restrictions of movement in the West Bank, which
have made a contribution to economic growth. We look
forward to further and sustained improvements of
movement and access, noting that many checkpoints
and roadblocks remain in place.

09-63607

We call on all partners to contribute actively to
the achievement of a comprehensive settlement of the
Arab-Israeli conflict. The European Union urges Arab
countries and other partners to be forthcoming, both
politically and financially, in assisting the Palestinian
Authority, in accordance with Road Map provisions.
A comprehensive settlement requires a regional
approach covering the political, security and economic
dimensions. Encouraged by enhanced United States
engagement and convinced that tangible benefits
regarding economic development and security would
facilitate achieving agreement on the various political
tracks, the European Union stands ready to use all
instruments at its disposal, such as the European
Neighbourhood Policy and the Union for the
Mediterranean. Through numerous agreements with
partners in the region, the European Union is uniquely
placed to work with the parties on key issues of
regional development.
In the light of further developments at the
political level and on the ground, the European Union
will carefully assess how its policies and programmes
can promote concrete and early results on the path
towards a comprehensive settlement of the conflict.
I would like to express our gratitude to the
delegations that have thus far requested to be included
in the list of sponsors of this draft resolution. We
would also like to thank the Palestinian and Israeli
delegations for their cooperation during the
negotiations.
Finally, I will now turn to the statement of the
European Union on the reports of the SecretaryGeneral (A/64/84, A/64/327 and A/64/331) under
agenda item 70, entitled “Strengthening of the
coordination of humanitarian and disaster relief
assistance, including special economic assistance”.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. Croatia, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Montenegro, Serbia,
Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Armenia align
themselves with this European Union statement.
The coordination and delivery of humanitarian
assistance are among the core activities carried out by
the United Nations. The European Union thanks the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,
Mr. John Holmes, for his tireless leadership and
acknowledges his key role and that of the Office for

7

A/64/PV.59

the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
coordinating international humanitarian action.

in

The world is currently facing interconnected
mega-trends such as climate change, population
growth, urbanization and the scarcity of energy and
water. Continued high food prices and the impacts of
the financial crisis further add to the vulnerability of
already fragile populations. The various challenges
may also lead to destabilization and new dynamics in
conflicts. Together, these factors put increasing
pressure on the humanitarian system. Together, we all
need to ensure that the humanitarian response is
strengthened and fits the purpose.
More efforts are needed to strengthen disaster
preparedness at the local, regional and national levels.
The International Strategy for Disaster Reduction has,
indeed, a central role in coordinating international
efforts to enhance disaster risk reduction. These efforts
go beyond the scope of humanitarian aid. Disaster risk
reduction must be integrated into planning and policies
in the field of development cooperation and in climate
change adaptation. Humanitarian and development
actors must join in partnership, applying the principles
of partnership to ensure integrated support for national
and
local
authorities
and
non-governmental
organizations. Support should also be provided to
strengthen
capacities
to
effectively
receive
international assistance.
Further efforts are needed to strengthen the
international humanitarian response to ensure the
timely and effective delivery of humanitarian
assistance. We welcome the positive effects of the
humanitarian reforms to date. The cluster approach has
contributed to improving capacity in the field and
enhancing accountability towards stakeholders and the
inclusiveness of all actors involved. Humanitarian
coordinators have, indeed, a key role in ensuring the
coordination of and leadership for international
humanitarian assistance. Enhanced efforts to further
empower and strengthen the capacity of humanitarian
coordinators are imperative.
In times of increasing global humanitarian needs,
we have a responsibility to ensure that scarce resources
are allocated in proportion to actual humanitarian
needs. A framework for common needs assessments is
absolutely crucial to bringing about a shared
understanding of humanitarian needs. This would
contribute to a more optimal allocation of resources

8

and a more effective and targeted response. The Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs plays a
central role in taking this process forward and the
European Union strongly encourages all relevant
humanitarian actors to cooperate in this important
endeavour.
Effective humanitarian response is also
dependent on adequate, predictable, equitable and
timely funding. We urge all donors to apply the
principles of good humanitarian donorship. The Central
Emergency Response Fund (CERF) has proven to be an
efficient and valuable financing mechanism, and we
welcome the large number of Member States that have
contributed to this Fund. Looking forward to the CERF
high-level meeting this week, we hope for renewed
commitments and contributions from new donors to
this important Fund. Adequate and predictable funding
to humanitarian organizations is key to an effective and
timely
response,
including
through
pooled
humanitarian funds and support to humanitarian
agencies’ individual emergency reserves.
Effective humanitarian response addresses the
needs and concerns of all groups in an affected
population. Understanding how conflicts and disasters
affect women, men, boys and girls differently and
basing programming on their different needs and
capacities is indeed crucial. This includes specific
attention in needs assessment processes, including
gender balance in the deployment of personnel and the
allocation of resources. Gender inequalities also
undermine the ability of women and girls to be active
partners in emergency response and rehabilitation.
Displacement
is
the
most
significant
humanitarian challenge that we face. The estimated
number of people displaced by armed conflicts and
violence is over 26 million. It is also estimated that,
each year, approximately 50 million people are
displaced due to natural disasters. The displaced are
left destitute, with little or no access to basic services,
food, water, adequate shelter or livelihoods. Despite
these recognized facts, the protection of and assistance
to internally displaced persons remains the greatest gap
in humanitarian response. The European Union
welcomes the recent adoption of the African Union
Convention for the Protection and Assistance of
Internally Displaced Persons in Africa. This is an
important step.

09-63607

A/64/PV.59

The European Union is deeply concerned that, in
situations of complex emergencies, the preservation of
humanitarian space continues to be a challenge. As a
result, millions of vulnerable people are deprived of
assistance and protection. We urge all Member States
and all parties to conflict to ensure the timely, safe and
unimpeded access of humanitarian personnel and
humanitarian supplies to affected populations in
accordance with international humanitarian law. The
European Union will continue to strongly advocate for
international humanitarian law and respect for and
adherence to the humanitarian principles of humanity,
neutrality, impartiality and independence. These
principles constitute the core of humanitarian
assistance and must be respected by all parties at all
times.
The European Union calls for urgent efforts to
strengthen the protection of civilians. Action on the
ground has not yet matched the development of
international norms and standards. We welcome the
adoption of resolution 1894 (2009) by the Security
Council, with emphasis on clarifying the role of
peacekeeping missions in the protection of civilians.
Action is particularly needed for the effective
prevention, investigation and prosecution of sexual and
other forms of gender-based violence. We call for the
full implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions and look forward to the Secretary-General’s
appointment of a special representative to lead
concerted international action against sexual violence.
Threats and deliberate attacks against United
Nations and other humanitarian personnel are
unacceptable. Reports of a dramatic escalation in
incidents, including politically motivated attacks, are
of grave concern. We need concerted international
action now. We must acknowledge that the safety and
security of humanitarian workers is an issue of interest
to all stakeholders — humanitarian organizations,
affected populations, host Governments and donors
alike. All States and all actors must take the necessary
steps to ensure the safety and security of all
humanitarian personnel. We must also promote
understanding of and support for independent, neutral
and impartial humanitarian action.
The European Union is concerned by the
increased involvement of military actors in
humanitarian assistance. Humanitarian assistance must
be civilian by nature. While there must be situations

09-63607

where military capabilities have an added value, this
should only be an option of last resort. The distinct
roles of military and humanitarian actors must be
respected. Adequate civil-military coordination is
essential, and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs plays a central role in this regard.
We emphasize the need to use existing guidelines in
this field: the Oslo Guidelines and the Guidelines on
the Use of Military and Civil Defence Assets to
Support United Nations Humanitarian Activities in
Complex Emergencies.
More frequent and severe humanitarian
emergencies are a reality. The interconnected megachallenges will hit already vulnerable populations the
hardest and can hamper poverty reduction and the
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals.
By forging a deeper and more engaged humanitarian
partnership, we enhance the legitimacy of international
humanitarian assistance and allow for a more effective
response to these challenges.
The European Union is committed to continuing
to engage with all Member States in strengthening this
humanitarian partnership as we head towards important
milestones in the next few years. In 2011, 20 years will
have passed since the General Assembly adopted
resolution 46/182, which founded the international
humanitarian system as we now know it. Next year we
celebrate the fifth anniversary of the establishment of
CERF. These events, we believe, will provide the
opportunity to take stock and, even more importantly,
to look to the future.
Mr. Srivali (Thailand): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the 10 States members of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN):
Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Myanmar,
the Philippines, Singapore, Viet Nam and Thailand.
ASEAN would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive reports (A/64/84,
A/64/327 and A/64/331) on issues related to agenda
item 70.
Humanitarian and disaster relief assistance is an
issue to which all ASEAN member States attach great
importance. Many global challenges mentioned in the
Secretary-General’s reports are also challenges faced
by ASEAN member States. In this context, I would like
to share the views of ASEAN on some key points, as
follows.

9

A/64/PV.59

First, ASEAN is gravely concerned about the
changes in the pattern of natural hazards, specifically
climate-related hazards. As mentioned in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, climate-related hazards are more than
90 per cent likely to have caused disasters in 2008 (see
A/64/84, para. 3), which is consistent with the trend of
increasing climate-related disasters in recent years. It is
alarming that, on average, some 70 per cent of disasters
are now climate-related, compared to 50 per cent two
decades ago. This worrisome trend should make clear
what is at stake for all of us at the Copenhagen
Conference on Climate Change. ASEAN Member
States are committed to participating actively and
constructively in the deliberations to ensure a
satisfactory outcome, which is vital in mitigating the
impacts of increasing climate-related hazards.
Secondly, ASEAN believes that enhancing
capacity at the local and national levels must be a
priority. Only thus can we mitigate the risks to
populations and ensure the effectiveness of disaster
preparedness, risk reduction and response operations.
To achieve this, leadership at both the local and
national levels is vital.
Thirdly, ASEAN believes that regional leadership
is crucial in order to complement local and national
leadership. When national capacity proves to be
insufficient in responding to an emergency situation, a
regional response mechanism must be promptly
activated to provide needed emergency assistance to
shore up national response capacities.
With this in mind, in October ASEAN leaders
pledged at the recent ASEAN summit held in Thailand
to enhance regional cooperation in disaster
management. They instructed the ASEAN Disaster
Management Committee to ensure effective and timely
implementation of the ASEAN Standby Arrangements
and Standard Operating Procedures and a fully
operational ASEAN Coordinating Centre for
Humanitarian Assistance. ASEAN leaders also
encouraged closer cooperation among military, civilian
and civil society organizations.
At the same time, ASEAN is enhancing
cooperation with our partners across East Asia. During
the East Asia Summit in Thailand in October, leaders
from 16 East Asian countries — the 10 ASEAN
member States together with Australia, China, India,
Japan, the Republic of Korea and New Zealand —
adopted the Statement on East Asia Summit Disaster

10

Management. In the Statement, East Asian countries
expressed their determination to strengthen cooperation
in developing integrated preparedness and disaster risk
reduction capacities for transboundary, multi-hazard
disasters, end-to-end early warning systems and
response capacities in the region.
East Asian leaders envisaged enhanced linkages
and networks among local, national and regional
disaster management agencies across East Asia, in
cooperation with relevant international organizations.
All 16 East Asian countries would work together to
promote networking and sharing of best practices,
experiences and operational manuals through the
ASEAN Regional Disaster Emergency Response
Simulation Exercise and other relevant simulation
exercises, including with the United Nations system.
Fourthly, ASEAN believes in the synergy of
partnership between the United Nations and regional
organizations. In many emergency cases, while the
United Nations can mobilize resources and expertise
from the whole system to assist affected countries,
regional organizations can provide critical advantages,
such as offering a diplomatic umbrella to facilitate
smooth delivery of humanitarian assistance and
disaster relief. This is possible because the regional
organizations have better knowledge of the sensitivities
and specificities of local situations, closer contacts
with local actors and, above all, a foundation of trust
and confidence established over time with the affected
countries.
Here, the role played by ASEAN, in partnership
with the Government of Myanmar and the international
community acting through the United Nations in
response to cyclone Nargis in May 2008, offers a good
example of such partnership. In the wake of the
cyclone, a Tripartite Core Group (TCG) comprised of
the Government of Myanmar, ASEAN and the United
Nations was established with the aim of promoting the
coordination and facilitation of delivery of
humanitarian assistance on the ground. Today, the TCG
is still active and is conducting joint planning for longterm recovery and preparedness in the affected areas
through its prioritized action plan. On 25 November
this year, a Post-Nargis and Regional Partnership
Conference was organized in Bangkok by ASEAN, in
partnership with the United Nations. We welcome the
fact that over $88 million were mobilized during the
Conference to assist in recovery activities.

09-63607

A/64/PV.59

Fifthly, ASEAN agrees with the SecretaryGeneral that well-targeted, timely and needs-based
humanitarian response plans provide the best basis for
a properly functioning humanitarian financing system.
We fully agree that adequate, predictable and timely
funding is critical to an effective humanitarian
response. We are of the view that greater efforts should
be made to improve the quantity and quality of
humanitarian funding, ensure greater coherence among
funding streams, and strengthen coordination on
humanitarian financing tools with cluster leads and
resident and humanitarian coordinators.
In this connection, ASAN strongly supports the
Central Emergency Response Fund. We see the Fund as
an essential part of the multilateral humanitarian
financial architecture that has enabled United Nations
agencies to jumpstart relief operations following
sudden-onset disasters and to fill gaps during
emergencies. We welcome efforts to increase the
Fund’s
effectiveness
and
strengthen
its
complementarity with other humanitarian financing
mechanisms, including country-based pooled funds and
agency emergency funds. We join the call for all
Member States to provide greater political and
financial support to the Fund in order to maintain its
viability and ensure that it will be able to meet the
ever-increasing demands.
Finally, ASEAN would like to affirm our strong
support for the safety and security of United Nations
and other humanitarian personnel. We are saddened by
the rising number of casualties among United Nations
and humanitarian personnel due to violent attacks. We
fully support ongoing efforts to strengthen the United
Nations security management system to ensure better
protection for men and women around the world who
are working for the Organization.
Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): Today’s debate on the
emergency humanitarian assistance provided by and
through the United Nations and its partners allows us
to take stock of the major events that have drawn the
attention of the international community. As in
previous years, we are faced with the stark reality that
a great many people around the world are still affected
by disasters caused by natural hazards or human action.
This is even more distressing in the light of the fact
that the direst consequences of these disasters could be
avoided by putting in place effective prevention,
disaster risk and preparedness strategies that would
significantly reduce the number of casualties.

09-63607

There are well-documented cases in which we
were able to learn from past experiences and thus
mitigate disasters that could have reached catastrophic
proportions. The cases of Bangladesh, Mozambique
and Cuba, to name just a few, come to mind. These
countries established disaster response systems that
enabled them to stave off the worst effects of recent
floods or hurricanes that in the past would have taken a
heavy toll in human lives.
Fortunately, the hurricane season in the
Caribbean this year was not as severe as that of 2008.
Still, late in the season, Hurricane Ida struck El
Salvador and Nicaragua, causing hundreds of deaths.
The unpredictability of such events only reinforces the
conclusion that reducing disaster risk and vulnerability
and enhancing preparedness for natural hazards are
fundamental tasks, especially in disaster-prone
countries. The increased transfer of know-how and
funding for these areas should be a priority for these
countries and donors alike.
Even where there has been progress, developing
countries are still disproportionately affected by
disasters, and poor communities within them are
especially affected, as recognized at the second session
of the Global Platform for Disaster Risk Reduction
held in Geneva last June. In such conditions, the
allocation of funds for building developing countries’
resilience and capacity to respond to disasters must be
among donors’ priorities.
In post-disasters scenarios, there is a clear need
for an approach to assistance that incorporates
reconstruction and development concerns, which
entails providing funding for these phases. In this
sense, we welcome the increasing inclusion of early
recovery activities in the consolidated appeals process,
a trend that we encourage the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to enhance. We
also welcome the increasing recognition by the
members of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee that
the international humanitarian system must shift some
of its focus from response to addressing vulnerability.
We are particularly concerned at the worsening
global food crisis. Despite all the commitments made
since the beginning of 2008 to increasing international
cooperation in order to reduce food insecurity through
a series of short-, medium- and long-term measures,
the crisis has not abated. On the contrary, the number
of people who suffer from hunger and malnutrition has

11

A/64/PV.59

only increased and is now over 1 billion persons,
according to the Food and Agriculture Organization.
Brazil fully supports programmes like Purchase
for Progress of the World Food Programme, which, by
opting for local procurement, contributes to the
development of the agricultural sector in the affected
community. We have established, as a priority for our
contributions to humanitarian response efforts, the
procurement of relief supplies in the affected countries
whenever possible. We have also increased our
contributions to the entities of the United Nations
system present on the ground as a means of responding
quickly to emergency situations. Additionally, since the
beginning of the year, the humanitarian warehouse
inaugurated in Rio de Janeiro always stocks a certain
amount of food of high nutritional value that can be
sent anywhere in the world within 48 to 72 hours.
While we engage in this debate today, discussions
have started in Copenhagen aimed at making concrete
progress in tackling the challenges posed by climate
change. The impact of climate change on the increase
in the number and intensity of natural disasters is a
reality. International cooperation is necessary to
enhance adaptation to the adverse effects of climate
change, including through the provision of new and
additional financial resources, technology and support
for capacity-building in developing countries.
Furthermore, we must not shy away from addressing
the causes that compound the negative impact of
climate change, such as poverty and exclusion, which
make communities especially vulnerable to climaterelated disasters.
We are concerned that the number of violent and
deliberate attacks against humanitarian and United
Nations personnel is on the rise. Apart from
criminality, one reason is the misperception of the
nature of the activities carried out by humanitarian and
associated personnel. Special efforts to allay these
misperceptions are needed. In this sense, we
congratulate the Secretariat on its activities in the
celebration, for the first time, of World Humanitarian
Day on 19 August 2009. We expect this day to become
one of the main events of the United Nations in the
years to come, in recognition of the increasingly
important role played by this Organization and its
partners in alleviating human suffering worldwide.
Mr. Okuda (Japan): We thank the SecretaryGeneral for his reports (A/64/84, A/64/327 and

12

A/64/331) and commend the Emergency Relief
Coordinator and humanitarian organizations, including
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, for their efforts to strengthen the coordination
of humanitarian assistance. Because of the importance
it attaches to human security, Japan has a special
interest in the protection and empowerment of those
vulnerable people desperately in need of humanitarian
assistance. We therefore thank the humanitarian
community for its activities.
In recent years, the greater incidence and severity
of natural disasters resulting from climate change and
other factors, as well as protracted complex
emergencies, have produced a heightened need for
humanitarian assistance. We are concerned about the
impact that the current financial and economic crises
are having on the ability of the international
community to provide such assistance. As a major
donor country, however, Japan has continued to
provide assistance to the best of its ability and will
continue to do so in the future.
One example of Japan’s commitment is a new
programme that will provide Afghanistan with
humanitarian and reconstruction assistance of up to
$5 billion over an approximately five-year period
beginning this year, in accordance with its developing
needs. In concrete terms, Japan will extend its full
support to enhancing Afghanistan’s own capacity to
maintain security and provide assistance for the
reintegration of former Taliban soldiers and for
Afghanistan’s sustainable and self-reliant development
in areas including agriculture and rural development,
infrastructure development, education, health and other
basic human needs.
Another example of Japan’s commitment to
progress in this area is our continued close monitoring
of the deteriorating humanitarian situation in Africa, a
continent that faces the prospect of prolonged conflict
and natural disasters caused by climate change and
therefore continued poverty and food shortages. Some
of Japan’s initiatives to address this situation include
its decision to double its official development
assistance to Africa by 2012 in areas such as
agriculture, food, health and water, which it announced
at the fourth Tokyo International Conference on
African Development, and to lead a discussion on
humanitarian issues in Africa at the Group of Eight’s
Hokkaido Toyako Summit, which Japan chaired last
year.

09-63607

A/64/PV.59

Japan is also committed to addressing the
implications of climate change. Last year, it announced
that it would make contributions to the Cool Earth
Partnership amounting to $10 billion over the next five
years, and it is fulfilling that commitment. Japan also
pledges to work to make the fifteenth United Nations
Climate Change Conference, which opened in
Copenhagen today, a success.
This year again, particularly this fall, a series of
earthquakes, typhoons and other natural disasters have
struck Asia. In order to minimize the impact of
calamities, we must share our knowledge and the
technology we have developed. All countries should
also make every effort to implement the Hyogo
Framework for Action, and the United Nations should
continue to foster cooperation in this area.
In the area of disaster management, it is also vital
to facilitate regional cooperation. Japan has been
working to this end in several forums. On 24 October
2009, for example, the importance of regional
cooperation was taken up at the Third Informal
Meeting of Heads of State or Government of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations, China, Japan
and the Republic of Korea, at which Japan offered to
host an international conference next year focusing on
the enhancement of risk reduction in urban
communities. On 31 October 2009, the heads of
Government agencies concerned with disaster
management from Japan, the People’s Republic of
China and the Republic of Korea held the first
commemorative trilateral meeting on disaster
management in Kobe, Japan, and the three countries
agreed to strengthen their cooperation. For our part, we
want to put the know-how and technologies Japan has
developed at the service of the international
community and thereby contribute to disaster risk
reduction worldwide.
In this connection, I would like to announce that
Japan will host the first global meeting of International
Search and Rescue Advisory Group in Kobe, Japan, in
November 2010 to address policy matters, including
the capacity-building of international emergency
rescue teams in individual countries. We hope that it
will be a productive meeting and that Member States
will participate in it actively.
This year marks the sixtieth anniversary of the
1949 Geneva Conventions, and we welcome the
opening of the office of the International Committee of

09-63607

the Red Cross (ICRC), guardian of the Conventions, in
Tokyo in February 2009. We thank the ICRC for coorganizing the symposium on the theme “Humanitarian
assistance in armed conflict” at the end of October
2009, at which we discussed the nature of humanitarian
assistance in armed conflict and the challenges
involved. Many at the symposium emphasized the need
for all parties to comply with the Geneva Conventions
and other international humanitarian instruments.
We are extremely concerned about the increasing
attacks on humanitarian personnel and United Nations
premises worldwide, and we strongly deplore them.
Humanitarian access is a prerequisite for assistance to
affected populations, and all parties must act to ensure
that it is provided. On 19 August, we commemorated
the first World Humanitarian Day here in New York
with the participation of the Secretary-General and
ambassadors and other officials of Member States. We
sincerely hope that the commitment made in New York
to humanitarian assistance activities will result in
fewer victims in this field.
States have primary responsibility for ensuring
that international humanitarian law is honoured. At the
same time, grave violations by non-State groups, which
often operate outside the effective control of
Governments, pose an increasingly serious problem.
We need to address this through capacity-building at
the national level and by assigning legal responsibility,
including through the International Criminal Court.
Japan wishes to contribute to addressing this problem,
and will cooperate with Member States and the United
Nations in doing so.
As Japan has been calling for efficient and
effective humanitarian assistance, we welcome the
progress of such humanitarian reforms as the
improvement of the Central Emergency Response Fund
(CERF), the strengthening of the humanitarian
coordinator system and the implementation of the
cluster approach. We support all United Nations
efforts, particularly CERF, as a product of the United
Nations reform enacted in 2005.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India), Vice-President,
took the Chair.
In addressing the challenges posed by
humanitarian issues, Japan devotes particular attention
to the protection and empowerment of each individual
from the perspective of human security, which we have
made efforts to realize, for example, through the

13

A/64/PV.59

establishment in the United Nations of the Human
Security Trust Fund. Japan will continue to work to
protect and empower vulnerable individuals and
communities who, through no fault of their own, find
themselves caught up in humanitarian crises.
Ms. Blum (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation is pleased with the important role the United
Nations system plays in humanitarian assistance and
has taken note of the reports of the Secretary-General
on this issue (A/64/84, A/64/327 and A/64/331).
Humanitarian affairs receive special attention
from the Government of Colombia. The country has
experienced the consequences of natural disasters
related to risk factors associated with climatic, seismic
and volcanic phenomena in various regions. We have
also experienced internal displacement, which,
although it has been diminishing thanks to the
democratic security policy in effect since 2002,
continues to exist, due to the violence generated by
those armed terrorist groups that still remain.
In this context, Colombia has shouldered its
primary responsibility for initiating, coordinating,
organizing and delivering humanitarian assistance
within its territory. Among the mechanisms we have
established is the National System for Disaster
Prevention and Response, which coordinates the work
of national, departmental and municipal authorities,
private sector and other civil society organizations and
international cooperation bodies. For its part, the
National System for Comprehensive Assistance to
Displaced Persons implements a national assistance
programme to which the Government allocates some
$500 million a year.
International cooperation is especially important
for consolidating national action. Such cooperation is
more effective, coherent and efficient to the degree that
it is developed within a framework of appropriate
ongoing coordination with the relief and response
policies implemented by the authorities of the States
affected. To this end, Colombia has implemented a
coordination process, the National Humanitarian
Plenary. It is an inclusive model, result-oriented and
with a regional focus and a thematic approach; it also
aims to complement immediate emergency assistance
with medium- and long-term recovery activities. We
also have the technical panel on emergencies known as
UNETE, which under the leadership of the Resident
Coordinator, has helped organize cooperation between

14

United Nations agencies in support of the National
System for Disaster Prevention and Response. The
panel was particularly important during the heavy rains
that affected us in 2008 and 2009.
Colombia also recognizes the importance of
regional and subregional cooperation on humanitarian
issues. In the Andean Community we have participated
actively in developing the operational guidelines for
mutual assistance on disasters, aimed at strengthening
coordination and deployment of assistance where
efforts beyond the capacity of individual countries are
required.
Colombia considers it essential that United
Nations agencies strengthen their coordination, both
with one another and with States, in supporting the
transition from relief to development. Humanitarian
assistance should be framed in a sustainable process of
rebuilding the social fabric of affected communities. In
this regard, such assistance should, from its early
stages, contribute to rehabilitating and developing
structures that will ensure stability after the initial
emergency as well as lasting solutions. My delegation
agrees with the Secretary-General on the need for
greater support and funding for early recovery
programmes, which as has been remarked, do not
always receive enough attention from humanitarian
actors and development agencies.
Gender mainstreaming is also essential in every
humanitarian action in order to meet the specific needs
of women and girls, protect them against gender-based
violence, give them greater visibility and, beyond this,
to promote women’s inclusion in development efforts,
increase their empowerment, recognize them as key
components of stable social structures, and promote
gender equality. Building national and local capacity is
also a fundamental factor in improving the
effectiveness of humanitarian assistance. Such
capacity-building should include strengthening the
authorities’ operational coordination of humanitarian
assistance. The stronger such coordination capacity
becomes, the better Member States will fulfil their
primary role in this field.
With regard to humanitarian funding, Colombia
acknowledges the achievements of the Central
Emergency Response Fund. Since it was established
the Fund has supported a number of humanitarian
assistance operations in our country. In 2007 and 2009
our national Government also made or has planned

09-63607

A/64/PV.59

voluntary contributions to the Fund, in line with its
financial capability, as an expression of support for the
Fund’s objectives.
On a different note, we add our voice to others’
expressions of condemnation and concern over the
violent attacks against humanitarian personnel in
various regions of the world. Here again we stress the
need to strengthen coordination between the United
Nations and Governments, in order to identify risks
and define more effective protection measures against
potential criminal acts that can affect the
implementation of humanitarian action.
The guiding principles set out in General
Assembly resolution 46/182 define the fundamental
framework guiding humanitarian assistance. The
cooperation of the international community in support
of States’ national efforts and in line with those guiding
principles, is crucial to meeting the needs of
populations affected by humanitarian situations.
Colombia remains committed to implementing the
frameworks for action defined by the Assembly, and to
promoting, together with all States and the
international community, the recognition that
humanitarian personnel deserve for the vital work they
accomplish every day, all over the world.
Mr. Alimov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation is pleased to
participate in today’s dialogue on the strengthening of
the coordination of humanitarian and disaster relief
assistance of the United Nations. While wishing to
maintain the non-politicized nature of the discussion,
we support the further development and enhancement
of such assistance. Of particular importance in this
context is the international community’s commitment
to the guiding principles found in resolution 46/182 on
emergency humanitarian assistance. We are convinced
that a consistent and comprehensive incorporation of
these principles into humanitarian work can help to
optimize results when delivering assistance to affected
populations.
A results-based approach to humanitarian and
disaster response, which seeks in particular to avoid
additional loss of life, especially in the first hours and
days following a natural disaster, is an important way
of ensuring the effectiveness of the work of the entire
humanitarian and disaster relief machinery. We have
consistently advocated for strengthening coordination
in this area and developing cooperation between

09-63607

affected States, the United Nations system, donor
countries and transit countries, as well as border States.
The aim here is to ensure timely unhindered access for
humanitarian relief assistance to affected populations
throughout the whole period of humanitarian relief
operations.
When considering the issue of disasters as part of
climate change, we wish to stress the importance of a
balanced approach, both to climate change mitigation
measures and to adaptation measures. In the global
financial economic crisis, there has been a sharp
increase in the vulnerability, primarily of developing
countries, to natural disasters, and thus their
dependence on humanitarian assistance. In our opinion,
it is important not to lose sight of humanitarian
assistance delivery and to strive to maintain the current
pace of development of cooperation in this area.
We would like to underline that the Governments
of States receiving humanitarian assistance have the
exclusive prerogative in terms of assistance
coordination, which includes deciding on the means of
and routes for transferring assistance supplies,
choosing its partners and establishing parameters for
the stay and actions of humanitarian organizations in
the disaster zone based on national legislation.
An important role in this context is played by
so-called humanitarian access, which should be based
first and foremost on timely and appropriate
humanitarian assistance delivery to the populations in
need by providing necessary goods and services.
Granting access to foreign humanitarian personnel to
disaster-struck areas, in our opinion, is just one part of
this important task. We concur with the SecretaryGeneral’s idea that the key to improving the
effectiveness of humanitarian assistance is to build
capacity at the national and local levels, which
includes preparedness and response to disasters,
mitigating the consequences and developing an early
warning system, including improving evaluation and
forecasting mechanisms. In this regard, it is important
to enhance scientific and applied research in these
areas.
An important part of improving response
mechanisms on the ground is the so-called cluster
approach. We consider that this approach should be
used thoughtfully, bearing in mind local particularities
and situations. Moreover, a decisive role in
determining the priorities of the sectors and clusters for

15

A/64/PV.59

foreign humanitarian response teams should be played
by the Government of the beneficiary State. We
consider that particular attention should be paid to the
efficiency of disaster response of national and
international humanitarian agencies. We advocate
constructive and coordinated cooperation between
humanitarian
assistance
organizations
and
non-governmental organizations, with the United
Nations playing the leading role.
One of the most significant results of the overall
efforts to improve humanitarian response mechanisms
has been the effective operation of the Central
Emergency Response Fund (CERF). The high-level
CERF conference, which will take place tomorrow and
the day after, will doubtless be an important event in
terms of further improving the effectiveness and
productivity of that entity. Russia is prepared to work
constructively to strengthen that humanitarian
financing mechanism.
Ms. Ellis (Australia): As we near the fifth
anniversary of the Indian Ocean tsunami of
26 December 2004, it is timely for us to consider the
role of the United Nations in responding to natural
disasters and complex emergencies.
Regrettably, the past year’s events have continued
to demonstrate the vital need for international
humanitarian assistance. Large numbers of people
continue to be affected by natural disasters. Continuing
high food prices in many regions, escalating conflicts
and the impact of the global financial crisis on
vulnerable communities all demonstrate the need for a
coordinated, effective and accountable international
response.
Australia recognizes the link between climate
change and the increased frequency and intensity of
natural disasters. We have in recent months, in the
Philippines, Viet Nam and El Salvador, seen clearly the
devastating impact climate-related hazards can have on
lives, livelihoods and developing countries. As we
approach the five-year anniversary of the Hyogo
Framework for Action, we urge all Member States and
the greater international community to build on the
existing knowledge and momentum in favour of
disaster risk reduction, in order to help meet the
challenges of climate change.
The potential for disasters to recur in hazardprone regions that are made vulnerable by factors such
as rapid urbanization, poverty or environmental

16

degradation means that disaster risk reduction must be
incorporated into humanitarian action and early
recovery efforts. That approach will build the
resilience and preparedness of communities and
countries for the long term, and most vitally, support
the realization of the Millennium Development Goals.
We are concerned at the increasing number of
persons displaced as a result of conflict and natural
hazards. We are staunch advocates of the Guiding
Principles on Internal Displacement and welcome the
recent adoption of the African Union Convention for
the Protection and Assistance of Internally Displaced
Persons in Africa. We consider that Convention to be a
landmark agreement, as it demonstrates the leadership
role regional organizations can play in addressing
humanitarian issues.
Australia gives high priority to ensuring that the
needs of all persons affected by conflict and natural
disaster are taken into account, including the needs of
people with disability. With over 650 million people in
the world living with a disability, we must ensure the
world’s largest and most disadvantaged minority is
included in all aspects of humanitarian policy, planning
and implementation.
We also know that women, girls, boys and men
are affected differently by conflict and natural
disasters. For a humanitarian response to be effective,
it is imperative that a gender perspective be integrated
into all aspects of the response. We also call for special
attention to be given to ensuring that women have
access to reproductive health services in emergency
situations.
We further stress the importance of integrated
measures, as part of humanitarian action, to prevent
and respond to gender-based violence. The Gender
Standby Capacity Project is an excellent example of
such measures, and we encourage continued efforts to
ensure that well-trained professionals with gender and
gender-based violence expertise are deployed to
humanitarian operations. We emphasize that protection
activities are a critical and vital element of
humanitarian response. Australia continues to advocate
for the full and effective implementation of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000), which, in addition to
women’s protection, provides for women’s full and
active participation in peace processes and
peacebuilding. In that regard, we welcome the Security

09-63607

A/64/PV.59

Council’s adoption of resolutions 1880 (2009) and
1889 (2009).

should also try to specifically improve upon the
following.

Australia is deeply troubled by the increasing
number of threats and violent attacks against
humanitarian workers and their facilities. Such attacks
have a devastating impact on the delivery of
humanitarian assistance, ultimately preventing people
from receiving the life-saving assistance they so
critically need. This trend must be reversed. The need
for all actors to respect the humanitarian principles of
humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence has
never been greater.

First, we should improve the coordination
mechanism of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, which remains pivotal in
providing humanitarian assistance and presenting the
situation on the ground to the world. Coordination is of
the essence in times of constrained resources to avoid
overlapping work by relevant humanitarian agencies.
Second, we need to avoid the varying focus on whether
the humanitarian challenges resulting from complex
emergencies are more compounded than those caused
by natural disasters, or vice versa, as the subject of
humanitarian assistance should be kept above-board
and need not be wrapped in political nuances and
expediencies.

In closing, Australia would like to acknowledge
Under-Secretary-General Holmes, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
operational agencies of the United Nations for the vital
role they play in humanitarian relief, and we express
our appreciation for their unrelenting efforts to save
lives and alleviate human suffering.
Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): It is my privilege to
participate in this important debate on strengthening
the coordination of humanitarian and disaster relief
assistance of the United Nations. Today, natural
disasters aggravated by climate change affect more
people than humanitarian emergencies caused by
conflicts or internal strife. The number of people
requiring humanitarian assistance as a result of natural
disasters continues to increase. While the number of
people in need will grow owing to diverse challenges,
there is a parallel need to improve the level of
coordination with the affected State and the provision
of resources in a more effective, accountable and
need-based manner.
The diversity of challenges faced by the world of
humanitarian assistance has been compounded by the
ongoing multiple crises of finance, energy and food.
While the financial and economic crisis has hit the
sources of funds necessary for humanitarian assistance
throughout the world, the food and energy insecurity
has increased the vulnerabilities of the population in
need.
There are no easy fixes to the challenges that we
face. Those challenges must be matched with a
concerted and effective response through innovative
thinking and reinvigorated efforts to anticipate and
overcome humanitarian emergencies. While we must
continue to explore solutions to those new and
emerging challenges to humanitarian assistance, we

09-63607

Third, the complex nature of humanitarian work
requires sensitivity with regard to specific situations
and in responding to their needs. We cannot have a
one-size–fits-all approach to humanitarian assistance.
Fourth, we must tap alternative means such as
increased local procurement of material resources and
hiring local expertise to save funds. Fifth, there must
be a continuous effort to build trust between donors,
international humanitarian actors and affected States.
Sixth, capacity-building in countries that are most
likely to be affected by humanitarian emergencies
remains an important element of domestic
preparedness.
Seventh, accountability of all humanitarian actors
will inspire others to follow. Furthermore, any
reporting mechanism should follow facts and remain
cognizant of different situations that are not
comparable. Undue politicizing of humanitarian relief
work has negative implications for the affected
population.
Unfortunately, we have witnessed acts of
increased violence against humanitarian workers.
Pakistan
condemns
terrorist
attacks
against
humanitarian actors, who render invaluable services to
people in dire need of their assistance. While the
Member States should continue to take all possible
measures for their safety and security, the United
Nations system should also provide necessary training
and capacity-building for the humanitarian actors so
that they may remain aware of their operating
environment, including through enhanced coordination
with Member States.

17

A/64/PV.59

Of late Pakistan has suffered from the varying
nature of humanitarian emergencies, including natural
disasters, which have caused dislocation and loss of
life and infrastructure. The devastating earthquake of
2005, heavy rains and floods in 2007 and 2008, and the
recent dislocation of the people in the north-west of the
country have added to the challenges faced by our
country and also provide us with the valuable
experience in dealing with humanitarian situations. We
have gained such experience especially in the 2005
earthquake rehabilitation phase and the process of
helping dislocated people in the north-western part of
the country.
Based on our earthquake experience, we
envisaged a devolved and decentralized mechanism for
preparedness and management. That helped create
necessary institutional, infrastructural and legislative
framework, including the establishment of an
Earthquake
Reconstruction
and
Rehabilitation
Authority to be the focal point for all reconstruction
and rehabilitation activity, a National Disaster
Management Commission and Authority under the
guidance of the Prime Minister, a Provincial Disaster
Management Commissions and Authorities, and a
National Disaster Risk Management Framework.
Those institutions and the infrastructure and
legislative framework have helped us in managing the
current dislocation and subsequent rehabilitation of
returnees in the north-west of the country. Disaster
preparedness and capacity-building is an ongoing
process; the measures being taken by our Government
are a work in progress that needs help and support
from the international community.
Building
on
existing
mechanisms,
the
Government of Pakistan has taken the following
important steps for assistance and rehabilitation of the
dislocated people and returnees. First, there is a
Special Support Group to provide for relief and
coordination efforts at the federal level. Secondly, an
Emergency Response Unit has been established at all
provincial levels. Thirdly, cash grants are being
provided to affected families under the Bedazir Income
Support Programme, which also includes provision of
relief on gas consumption and electricity free of cost
for a limited number of units. Fourthly, a return policy
for dislocated people has been formulated to ensure
safe, secure and sustainable returns. Finally, a relief
package to write off farm and non-farm agriculture
loans owed by small farmers has been introduced.

18

At all times, the primary role of the concerned
State in the initiation, identification, coordination and
delivery of humanitarian assistance remains central.
Respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
national unity of States must remain the overarching
parameter in all coordination, as enshrined in General
Assembly resolution 46/182.
The Acting President: I call on the observer of
Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): For decades,
international assistance to the Palestinian people has
been indispensable and has been one of the main
factors of Palestinians’ perseverance in their struggle to
end Israel’s oppressive military occupation, which has
dragged them deeper into poverty and dependence on
aid. That assistance has been the only source of
survival and sustenance for thousands of Palestinian
families through endless periods of instability, crisis
and uncertainty, and has helped alleviate their
hardships and suffering.
The Palestinian people and their leadership are
deeply grateful for that invaluable assistance. But
today, as we convene to discuss this matter, we believe
it is imperative to ask important questions. How much
have we helped this assistance reach its full potential?
How much sabotage to its sustained assistance efforts
has the international community endured? How many
more internationally funded projects and efforts are we
willing to allow the occupying Power to undermine and
decimate as it continues to pursue its illegal policies
and practices, deepening the humanitarian crisis and
thus forcing the diversion of assistance from
development and State-building to relief and crisis
management? How much longer will the international
community be willing to pay for the illegal actions of
the occupying Power by alleviating the consequences
of those actions rather than bringing them to an end?
The Israeli figures on the humanitarian and
economic situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, are astounding and
tragic. In fact, all recent reports have documented the
enormous burden that international agencies are
carrying in trying to address the continually emerging
needs of the Palestinian civilian population and to
alleviate the entrenched crisis. That is because Israel’s
illegal actions and measures have turned back the clock
on Palestinian development. So, despite the Palestinian
people’s desire to pursue development with a view to

09-63607

A/64/PV.59

the birth of their future State, Israeli policies and
practices have continued to mire a sizeable portion of
the Palestinian civilian population in abject poverty.
The latest report by the Economic and Social
Commission for Western Asia (ESCWA) sums up the
bleak situation as follows:
“The occupation of Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, the use of arbitrary
detention, the disproportionate use of force,
house demolitions, severe mobility restrictions,
lack of building permits and closure policies
continue to intensify the economic and social
hardship of the Palestinian residents of the
occupied
Palestinian
territory.”
(A/64/77,
Summary)
Moreover, ESCWA concludes that “The Israeli
closure system remains a primary cause of poverty and
humanitarian crisis in the occupied Palestinian
territory” (ibid.) and is contrary to the Geneva
Conventions and other norms of international law.
The recent report on assistance to Palestinians by
the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development (UNCTAD) concludes that
“Of the twenty-five years that UNCTAD
monitored and investigated the performance of
the economy of the occupied Palestinian territory
and the policy environment affecting it, 2009
represents without a doubt an all-time low. … the
Palestinian economy today faces a real challenge
to its integrity, solvency and indeed the very
viability that it must enjoy for the two-State
solution to become a reality.” (TD/B/56/3*,
Executive Summary)
The picture is, of course, most bleak in the Gaza
Strip, where Israel’s illegal and inhumane siege has
managed to bring the area to the verge of collapse in all
aspects of life. That most brutal form of collective
punishment of the Palestinian civilian population by
the occupying Power, which constitutes a war crime,
has not been ended, despite ongoing international
expressions of concern and calls for its cessation
Instead, in addition to its illegal blockade, Israel
launched a brutal military aggression against the
population that has wreaked death, destruction and
possibly permanent damage on the environment there.
The onslaught left Gaza’s infrastructure and electricity,
sewage and water systems utterly devastated. It

09-63607

destroyed hundreds of thousands of homes and
economic, agricultural and business properties,
including food production facilities and other
industries, as well as hundreds of public institutions,
including hospitals, schools and even United Nations
facilities aiding the population. The efforts to repair the
destroyed homes, infrastructure and institutions have
been totally obstructed by the Israelis’ continued
intransigence.
Israel’s blockade has also severely restricted and
reduced the amount and quality of goods allowed into
Gaza and has completely prevented all exports from
Gaza. That has put Gaza’s once-thriving agricultural
exports at the top of its most endangered economic
sectors. And the noose Israel is tying around Gaza’s
socio-economic life is only getting tighter. Most
industries and economic sectors are on the verge of
collapse, forcing the vast majority of the Palestinian
population in the Gaza Strip into utter dependence on
international aid.
And as if siege, death and destruction were not
enough, the occupying Power also obstructs relief and
assistance. International donors pledged $5.2 billion in
aid to war-torn Gaza at a conference in Sharm
el-Sheikh, Egypt, in March, but these funds have yet to
reach Gaza for its reconstruction. Israel continues to
brazenly defy Security Council resolution 1860 (2009)
and General Assembly resolution ES-10/18, which call
for the immediate opening of Gaza’s border crossings.
As for the situation in the West Bank and East
Jerusalem, Israel continues to flagrantly breach
international law and the United Nations resolutions
that call on the occupying Power to cease its illegal
settlement activities, confiscation of Palestinian land
and collective punishment of the civilian population.
Israel continues to pursue those illegal policies and
practices by continuing to construct and expand its
illegal settlements at an unprecedented rate, especially
in and around occupied East Jerusalem, as well as
ordering the demolition of the homes of thousands of
Palestinians in the city. That is in addition to the
ongoing illegal construction of the wall, which is
severely obstructing Palestinians’ access to jobs,
schools, agricultural land and health care and is
causing grave damage to their socio-economic life.
That colonial regime is guarded and maintained
by a multilayered matrix of roadblocks and movement

19

A/64/PV.59

restrictions, with more than 550 checkpoints and
roadblocks firmly in place.
That is why, despite the Palestinian Authority’s
remarkable achievements in law enforcement, financial
transparency and development efforts, socio-economic
indicators have continued to show significant decline.
In five years the Palestinian economy has lost
$8.4 billion in potential income — twice the value of
the Palestinian economy today. That should alarm all,
as the loss of that potential income, combined with the
losses incurred by the destruction or sabotage of
internationally funded projects and efforts, shows the
grave trap Palestinian development efforts and
international assistance have fallen into.
Over the past few years, international aid to the
Palestinian people has increased significantly. Yet this
increase has had little effect on the grim reality on the
ground because of the incessant military aggression,
siege, and colonial expansion that Israel continues to
inflict on the population. That is an unacceptable trend
that the international community must seriously
address and bring to a halt. In order for international
assistance to the Palestinian people to achieve its
intended results, the international community should
focus on helping the Palestinian Authority to
implement its State programme. Funding is crucial, but
it is not enough. There must be serious efforts and
action to remove the tremendous obstacles Israel is
placing on the ground to undermine the programme.
Without that, international assistance and the crucial
role it plays will end up only covering the cost of the
Israeli occupation rather than achieving development
and building the institutions of the independent
Palestinian State, which is the only guarantee of peace
in the Middle East.
On 25 August 2009, the Palestinian Authority,
headed by Dr. Salam Fayyad, presented a programme
entitled
“Palestine:
Ending
the
Occupation,
Establishing the State”, which envisions the
establishment of an independent State within two
years. The donor group for the Palestinian Authority —
the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
International Assistance to Palestinians, or AHLC —
welcomed that programme, which has received wide
international support.
We thus reiterate our call on all United Nations
Member States to join us in our efforts to build our
independent State, to establish justice and peace in our

20

homeland and to uphold the principles that this
Assembly stands for. This is undoubtedly a test of our
resilience as an oppressed people and equally a test of
international credibility. Indeed, the international
community must shoulder its moral and legal
responsibilities by compelling the occupying Power to
cease its violations and put an end to its crippling siege
of all of the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem.
The cause of the utter destitution Palestinians
now suffer is known to all of us. It is the 42-year
Israeli military occupation. Thus, as numerous
international organizations agree, full economic
recovery and rehabilitation in the occupied Palestinian
territory, which are the goals driving international
assistance, will be possible only when that occupation
ends.
The Palestinian people will not allow Israel’s
insistence on pursuit of hegemony, colonization, wall
construction, wanton violence and destruction and
discrimination to stand in their way. They will continue
to rebuild that which the occupation destroys, to
preserve the life and society the occupation attempts to
shatter and to replant what the occupation razes and
uproots. Our commitment to exercise our inalienable
rights, including the right to self-determination and full
sovereignty over our natural resources is unwavering.
Our empowerment to establish a sovereign, contiguous
and viable Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, is the only option, the only way to achieve
peace in the region.
Our goal is to stand before the Assembly, soon, to
announce that through sovereignty we have overcome
dependence, and that any international assistance we
might seek would be to complete our recovery from the
occupation, rather than to continue coping with its
devastation. But to do that, we need the assistance of
the international community, to protect its investment
in peace. Make sure that it is not in vain.
Mr. Pérez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): As a
country that periodically suffers from the impact of
natural disasters, Peru is aware of the need to be
prepared to confront the unpredictable consequences.
Clearly our efforts, channelled through the national
civil defense system, have been fundamental in
confronting any adversity of that type. However, when
we have faced serious natural disasters, the immediate
national response and subsequent recovery would not

09-63607

A/64/PV.59

have had the same results without the effective
response of the international community, which
included humanitarian action by many States, the
United Nations system, the Red Cross and other
international
organizations,
non-governmental
organizations and civil society.
Given that our territory has suffered many
humanitarian emergencies caused by natural disasters,
Peru can testify to the great importance and value of
international humanitarian cooperation in support of
national efforts and to the role of that assistance in
saving human lives when any natural or complex
emergency strikes.
In his report on the strengthening of the
coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance of
the United Nations (A/64/84), the Secretary-General
has underscored the growing scientific consensus that
the increase in the severity and frequency of natural
disasters not caused by earthquakes or volcanic
eruptions is more than 90 per cent likely to be a result
of climate change. That statement is particularly
relevant to Peru, which for some years has been
experiencing reoccurring severe frosts in the higher
altitudes of the country. That phenomenon, which
every year overburdens the natural-disaster efforts
developed by the Peruvian Government, affects the
national economy and the quality of life of the
communities that suffer from the ravages of nature. But
above all, it causes loss of human life. What is
happening in Peru is yet another example of how
climate change is increasing the demands on
international humanitarian cooperation.
We also agree with the Secretary-General that the
effects of both natural disasters and complex
emergencies generate much greater risk in the areas of
the food crisis, shortages of water and energy, extreme
poverty, population growth, unplanned urbanization,
pandemics and migration. Those situations can
generate new types of emergencies and cyclical crises
and can aggravate the humanitarian emergencies we
already have. Therefore we believe that the SecretaryGeneral has made a correct assessment, that
humanitarian assistance should address emergency
situations from a new perspective that links it with
non-traditional actors in this field, such as the
development, financial, legal, scientific and private
sectors, among others, in the search for long-term
solutions to prevent and deal with disasters.

09-63607

One of the most valuable elements in
humanitarian work and dealing with disasters is early
warning capacity and, above all, preparedness systems
for disaster risk and reduction at the national,
international, local and regional levels. For this reason
we believe it important that Member States speed up
implementation of the Hyogo Framework for Action,
putting an emphasis on exchanging knowledge,
expertise and best practices, as well as transferring
technology and providing financial assistance, so that
we can avoid new risks and reduce current ones.
In the area of early warning systems and
humanitarian assistance, it is important that there be
appropriate coordination between the actors working
on those tasks, at the national, regional and
international levels. The work of national and
humanitarian coordinators is extremely useful. At the
national level, it is the State’s job take charge of the
humanitarian coordination process and at the same
time to shoulder the responsibilities that that implies:
ensuring fast, safe and unhindered access for
humanitarian personnel and their equipment and
supplies, so that they can carry out their work of
providing humanitarian assistance to the people
affected in the most efficient way possible.
Unfortunately, as the Secretary-General’s report points
out, the worst obstacle to effective delivery of
humanitarian aid, whether goods, equipment or
workers, continues to be the existence of excessive red
tape aimed at controlling such aid, which only
exacerbates victims’ suffering, distancing the State
even further from what should be its principal aim.
My delegation would also like to express its
concern over the increase in threats to the personal
safety of United Nations personnel and humanitarian
assistance in general, including some who have been
the object of speeches inciting violence and deliberate
physical attacks on them. It is essential that States take
the necessary measures to prevent such acts. It is also
important to underscore that disaster situations also
require that greater attention be paid to promoting and
protecting human rights. Within this focus, emphasis
must be placed on women, children and elderly people,
who are among the most vulnerable groups.
At a time when the international community faces
an increase in the severity of natural disasters and in
the intensity of conflicts — as well as in the negative
effects of the world economic crisis and other global
trends that drive the increase in world demand for

21

A/64/PV.59

humanitarian assistance — the work of the Central
Emergency Response Fund is even more necessary,
along with other funds aimed at rapid response for
disaster relief. These contributions continue to be one
of the most concrete demonstrations of political will in
aiding disaster victims. Without such political will,
little can be done to produce the humanitarian
assistance that our peoples need.
We should not lose sight of the fact that the
central goal of effective humanitarian assistance should
be to help human beings. To this end, States should
focus their efforts on alleviating and improving the
situation of affected populations in a timely manner,
and the international community should be prepared to
support them in that task.
Mr. Al-Barout (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): The Secretary-General’s reports (A/64/84,
A/64/327 and A/64/331) indicate that the challenges
facing the United Nations in the field of humanitarian
assistance have doubled in the past few years, owing to
an increase in natural disasters caused by climate
change, as well as the growing numbers of persons
displaced as a result of armed conflict, which in turn
has increased the numbers of those needing
humanitarian relief assistance, particularly in poor and
developing countries. In addition, the global financial
and food crises have exacerbated the negative effects
of such disasters in these countries, and led to a drop in
national and international responses to them.
Such developments require redoubled efforts by
the United Nations and its relevant partners to meet
increased humanitarian demands and to supply the
Organization with the financial and human resources it
needs to discharge its growing responsibilities. These
needs require Member States to cooperate with the
Organization in every way possible, particularly by
financing those agencies concerned with humanitarian
activities. They also underscore the need to facilitate
delivery of humanitarian assistance to those affected
and to remove any obstacles that prevent humanitarian
personnel from doing their work. It is also essential to
ensure that all States and parties to armed conflicts
protect civilians involved, in accordance with the
provisions of international humanitarian law, and take
preventive and effective measures to bring those
responsible for violations of such laws to justice.
The United Arab Emirates emphasizes the
essential role of the United Nations in mobilizing and

22

coordinating
humanitarian
efforts
to
provide
emergency relief assistance for millions of people in
the affected areas. We also recognize that international
partnerships and cooperation with the Organization are
the most effective ways of achieving the best outcomes
for humanitarian activities throughout the world.
The United Arab Emirates has therefore focused
on coordinating many of its humanitarian initiatives
and contributions with the United Nations and its
related agencies, in order to implement emergency and
long-term relief projects in countries affected by
natural disasters or armed conflict. As a member of the
Donor Support Group of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), we
have contributed to enhancing the humanitarian work
of the Organization in order to achieve the greatest
efficiency possible in that area. In 2009, we were proud
to be the first country in the Middle East to launch the
United Nations Consolidated Appeal, which took place
for the first time in our region.
Besides fulfilling our financial commitments to
the United Nations entities concerned with
humanitarian and development activities, the
Government of the United Arab Emirates, in concert
with a number of charitable foundations, led by the
United Arab Emirates Red Crescent, contributes to
international relief efforts to assist people in affected
areas all over the world. In the last two years, our
contributions have grown 300 per cent, to a total of
$156 million in 2008, compared to $45 million in
2007. United Arab Emirates humanitarian relief
assistance over the past three years totalled $3 billion,
including contributions to reconstructing countries
emerging from armed conflict, both directly and in
collaboration with United Nations major funds and
programmes, to finance and coordinate the
implementation of relief and development projects in
those countries. To alleviate the burden of rising food
prices in global markets, we have sent millions of tons
of wheat and food products to many countries affected
by this crisis.
The United Arab Emirates also plays a major role
in coordinating and strengthening international relief
efforts, by providing highly efficient logistic facilities
within our country, such as the Dubai International
Humanitarian City, the United Arab Emirates Red
Crescent and the Office for the Coordination of
Foreign Assistance, which is the first of its kind in the

09-63607

A/64/PV.59

Middle East for coordinating humanitarian relief
assistance at the national and international level.
The United Arab Emirates emphasizes the
importance of implementing the recommendations and
resolutions of all international conferences on national
and international strategies on how to deal with natural
disasters and their aftermath through all stages of
recovery. We have worked with some recipient
countries to help build their national capacity to predict
natural disasters and contain their effects. At the
national level, we have launched a “Crisis Management
and Emergency Response” project aimed at developing
an integrated response mechanism for emergencies and
environmental disasters.
The United Arab Emirates attaches special
importance to providing support and assistance for the
Palestinian people and their Government in their
humanitarian plight resulting from Israel’s occupation
of their lands. We have translated our political and
moral solidarity with the Palestinian people into
ongoing financial and economic support, which
includes emergency humanitarian relief and long-term
development and technical assistance amounting to
more than $3 billion. In March 2009 we pledged
$174 million in Sharm el-Sheikh for the reconstruction
of Gaza.
In that regard, we urge the international
community to compel Israel, the occupying Power, to
immediately lift its blockade on the Palestinian people
in order to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to them; comply with international law and
resolutions, the principles of international humanitarian
law and the Fourth Geneva Convention; end its
occupation of Arab territories; and resume peace
negotiations on the basis of the relevant international
resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative. Furthermore,
we urge donor countries to continue their assistance to
the Palestinian people and Government to help them
meet their daily requirements until the end of the
Israeli occupation of their land and the establishment
of an independent State, Palestine, with Al-Quds
Al-Sharif as its capital.
Until a final solution is reached, we reaffirm our
support to the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) and emphasize the vitality of its role. We
demand that its personnel and assistance be able to
reach Palestinian refugees in all areas of its operations.

09-63607

We stress the need to provide adequate financial
support for the agency to allow it to fulfil its
commitments to all refugees. We have doubled our
annual contribution to UNRWA in order to help it
discharge its responsibilities towards Palestinian
refugees.
Ms. Rovirosa (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mexico has taken the floor once again to express its
concern about the increase in seismic and
hydrometeorological events, which have been affecting
our society as a negative impact of climate change. In
that connection, my delegation would like to reiterate
its appeal for a redoubling of efforts to reduce the loss
of human life and material costs associated with such
events. Increased drought and floods, less ice and
snow, more heat waves, increased torrential rains and
the potential reduction in harvests are but a few
examples of the gravity of the consequences of climate
change, with some parts of the world being more
vulnerable to those changes than others.
Mexico would like to express its solidarity with
all victims who have succumbed to the terrible
consequences of such natural events. We would like to
underscore the importance of the need for the
international community to step up its efforts aimed at
consolidating a genuine culture of prevention. Against
that backdrop, Mexico would like to recall that the
2005 to 2015 Hyogo Framework for Action constitutes
a resolute step in that direction, as it provides a
specific focus for what should be done at the various
levels in terms of risk management. That mechanism
establishes a list of minimal steps for strengthening
preventive measures, including, among others,
conducting studies, drafting vulnerability maps,
establishing early warning systems and raising
community awareness.
We also hope that the Copenhagen Climate
Change Conference, which is beginning just today, will
produce timely and lasting solutions in line with the
pressing needs of today’s world. Mexico would like to
reiterate its belief in the need for better understanding
of the frequency of natural disasters and climate
change, phenomena that need to be addressed in a
holistic manner while making use of the advantages
and opportunities provided by the agenda for climate
change adaptation and of disaster risk reduction efforts.
Mexico is certain that the current diversity in the
humanitarian field illustrates the level of maturity of

23

A/64/PV.59

the international community when it comes to focusing
on disasters. Galvanizing that advantage in a lasting
way so as to benefit our communities, in particular
those affected by disasters, entails that we have to have
the appropriate tools to coordinate such an approach
adequately. Making progress in strengthening the
coordination of humanitarian assistance requires a
commitment to participate actively in political dialogue
at all levels in order to create institutional and human
capacities and to ensure that financial resources are
available.
Today we can count on the efforts of the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA), and in particular on specific
instruments to address emergencies and the experts of
the United Nations Disaster Assessment and
Coordination Team. Adequate coordination of
humanitarian assistance also requires that we have
available to us financial tools commensurate with
current demands. In that context, the Central
Emergency Response Fund responds in a predictable,
transparent and, most importantly, timely and
immediate manner. The Fund is a very important
initiative in the context of the reform of the United
Nations, as it strengthens the international
community’s capacity to respond immediately to
humanitarian emergencies. Mexico supported the
establishment of the Fund and, in line with its
capabilities, has sought to increase its contribution to it
year after year. In spite of the effects of the
international economic and financial crisis, which have
led my country to put in place a very strict policy to
control expenses, our contributions will remain at a
level similar to this year’s.
Strengthening the coordination of humanitarian
assistance requires firm commitment on the part of the
international community. Our various experiences in
recent years should make it possible for us to consider
appropriate solutions for current and future needs, so
as to facilitate requests and deliveries of humanitarian
assistance. Mexico would therefore like to underscore
that it is important that there be common rules for such
activities. In that regard, we believe that the
Organization has an important role to play in providing
technical assistance to States.
Mexico has already underscored the need to
avoid the duplication of efforts and the waste of
resources on work already being done by existing
mechanisms. In that connection, Mexico advocates a

24

focus on the coordination of humanitarian assistance
that is based on synergy among existing mechanisms at
the international, regional, subregional and national
levels. Expanding dialogue in order to improve the
humanitarian response to disasters is in the interest of
the entire international community.
In that context, Mexico was pleased to pioneer
the series of regional meetings held in Latin America
and the Caribbean on the subject of international
humanitarian assistance mechanisms. Held in
cooperation with OCHA, the purpose of those meetings
has been to facilitate the exchange of information and
experiences in that field and to consider ways of
improving cooperation between States and the United
Nations. That initiative, which began in Mexico in
2008 and continued successfully this year in Brazil,
will be further strengthened in 2010 under the auspices
of the Government of Argentina.
Mexico would like to reiterate its concern about
the
fact
that
restrictive
and
inappropriate
interpretations of everything labelled humanitarian
weaken the rights of victims to receive timely
humanitarian assistance. In times of emergencies,
States have to consider the limits of national capacity
and exercise the prerogative of asking for assistance
and receiving it under the appropriate conditions and
modalities. Of that there is no doubt. Nevertheless,
those who lecture us in emergency situations about
humanitarian assistance while placing sovereignty
above the needs of affected populations merely imperil
the lives, dignity and health of the affected.
In conclusion, Mexico would like to emphasize
its commitment to the efforts of the United Nations and
of the members of the Inter-Agency Committee to
improve the coordination of humanitarian assistance.
We would also like to reiterate our support for the work
of OCHA and Under-Secretary-General John Holmes.
Mr. Sul Kyung-Hoon (Republic of Korea): I
would like first of all to thank the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive reports on humanitarian and
disaster relief assistance, which chart out the direction
for effective humanitarian action. Also, on behalf of
the Government of the Republic of Korea, I would like
to express my sincere appreciation to Mr. John Holmes,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, and
to his staff for their unwavering efforts in mitigating
humanitarian crises across the world. We reiterate our

09-63607

A/64/PV.59

firm resolve to work with the United Nations to help
those in dire need.

needs to engage more vigorously in the coordination of
regional mechanisms.

As has been well illustrated in the SecretaryGeneral’s reports, the global need for humanitarian
assistance continues to grow. Increasing numbers of
people face displacement due to violent conflicts,
natural disasters and climate change-related calamities.
Dramatic exposure to vulnerability has been further
aggravated by high food prices and the scarcity of
energy and water. While the demand for action is on
the rise, the global economic recession constrains the
capacity to respond effectively to those challenges.

In that connection, I would like to note the fact
that, in the Asia-Pacific region, the Regional Forum of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
has been instrumental in leading the discussion on
regional cooperation and in developing guidelines and
systems for disaster management cooperation at the
regional level. It also is encouraging to note that
regional efforts to cooperate in the area of disaster
response are being discussed in forums such as the
ASEAN+3 group, the East Asia Summit and the
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation. The Korean
Government hopes that the United Nations Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) will
further increase its proactive engagement with those
regional processes. Regional responses based on good
coordination will be vital to saving more lives in
time-critical emergencies.

In joining the international effort to address
looming challenges and crises, the Korean Government
echoes the call for stronger United Nations
coordination of humanitarian and disaster relief
assistance, as called for in resolution 46/182 of 1991.
We reiterate our strict adherence to the principles of
humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence.
As noted in the Secretary-General’s reports, we
have seen that humanitarian actors have proliferated at
a tremendous rate over the past two decades. While
that numerical increase can be viewed as a positive
sign, in the sense that it reflects the growing
compassion and sense of responsibility of the
international community towards humankind, it also
poses serious dangers of fragmentation and overlap in
conducting humanitarian assistance. Without doubt, the
proliferation of players calls for greater efforts to
coordinate among different actors to improve delivery
and achieve effective results. It will be critical for the
United Nations to play a leading role in the process of
coordination. The United Nations system should
effectively introduce existing coordination mechanisms
to new players and, at the same time, actively promote
awareness of humanitarian principles and codes among
humanitarian actors.
Another aspect related to the proliferation of
players in the field of humanitarian assistance is the
importance of coordination at the regional level. While
efforts to reform the United Nations system have
successfully strengthened humanitarian coordination at
both the national and international levels, coordination
at the regional level seems to require further
improvement. We believe that regional cooperation
mechanisms should be fully integrated for local
response to disasters. In that regard, the United Nations

09-63607

As we strive to bolster coordination, it will be
critical for the United Nations to intensify its efforts to
secure access to affected populations while ensuring
the safety and security of humanitarian personnel. The
recent events in Afghanistan, Central Africa and the
Philippines indicate that humanitarian workers are
more and more at risk of hostile attack. During 2009,
complex emergencies in the Gaza Strip, Sri Lanka,
Pakistan, Yemen, the Sudan and many other places
have demonstrated how limited access to victims can
impair humanitarian action.
In that respect, we commend the efforts of the
Secretary-General to reinforce the United Nations
security management system and place high priority on
the security and safety of humanitarian personnel.
Furthermore, we believe that the United Nations needs
to engage local non-governmental and regional
organizations such as ASEAN and the African Union to
bolster security networks in the field. That will enable
the United Nations to protect humanitarian personnel
more effectively and provide more options for safe,
unhindered and timely access to victims.
Efforts to strengthen disaster risk reduction and
preparedness will be as important as conducting
humanitarian assistance itself. In cooperation with
United Nations humanitarian assistance efforts,
disaster risk reduction strategies can play a bridging
role between disaster relief and development. The
disaster risk reduction framework needs to

25

A/64/PV.59

mainstreamed into reconstruction plans so that
post-disaster activities can treat the aftermath and
establish preventive measures, such as early warning
systems, to minimize or avert the effects of future
disasters.
Finally, in order to enhance the effectiveness of
humanitarian assistance and disaster relief, the United
Nations needs to incorporate the gender perspective
into the broader spectrum of humanitarian affairs.
Women and children are the most vulnerable among
those who become the victims of humanitarian crises.
Let me take this opportunity to briefly introduce
our humanitarian policy and efforts. The Government
of the Republic of Korea has steadily strengthened its
system for humanitarian assistance. In 2006, we
became a member of the OCHA Donor Support Group.
The Overseas Emergency Relief Act, a comprehensive
legal foundation for our response to international
emergency actions, was introduced in 2007. The first
comprehensive policy document on our humanitarian
and disaster relief assistance was adopted in 2008. This
year, we acceded to the Good Humanitarian Donorship
initiative and, starting next year, we will become a full
member of the Development Assistance Committee of
the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development.
In conclusion, let me reiterate our firm support
for the United Nations humanitarian effort. As an
emerging donor, Korea is committed to its growing
responsibilities in the humanitarian community. The
Republic of Korea will continue to uphold its
contribution in this field, including our support to the
Central Emergency Respond Fund.
Mrs. Pérez Álvarez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
As a consequence of climate change and ecological
imbalance, which have increased the occurrence of
natural disasters, we have noted with great concern the
growth in the number of humanitarian emergencies in
several parts of the world. These are exacerbated by the
humanitarian consequences of conflict situations, the
food crisis and the current global economic and
financial crisis.
Cuba reaffirms the fact that humanitarian
assistance must be carried out in full respect for the
principles set out in the hallmark resolution 46/182. We
also reject the imposition of ambiguous concepts that
have not been agreed upon, which can be easily
manipulated to justify any action contrary to the

26

principles of sovereignty, territorial integrity and
non-interference in the internal affairs of States.
It is a fundamental tenet that States in need must
request and consent to receive humanitarian assistance,
in line with the purposes and principles set out in the
Charter of the United Nations. The Charter must be
respected in every situation, including humanitarian
emergencies. Its purposes and principles cannot be
rewritten, distorted, restricted or conditional.
The Cuban State takes very seriously its central
role in initiating, organizing, coordinating and
providing humanitarian assistance on its territory when
our country is affected by natural disasters, pursuant to
the resolutions of the General Assembly. In that
context, Cuba reiterates the importance of
implementing the Hyogo Framework for Action
2005-2015 and, in particular, the concept of disaster
preparedness.
Over the course of less than three months in
2008, Cuba was affected by five extreme
meteorological events — two tropical storms, which
caused major flooding, and three hurricanes, the first of
which was the most devastating of the past 50 years.
The second cut across the entire country and caused
considerable damage to the Cuban economy. The losses
resulting from those climatological events amounted to
$9.721 billion. In that regard, 2008 was the most
destructive year in the history of our country.
Preventive measures taken by the Cuban
authorities and people ensured the safe evacuation and
protection of more than 4 million people in secure
shelters and the preservation of valuable economic
assets. The effectiveness of Cuba’s civil defence,
entrusted with the implementation of civil defence
measures and the international regulations and
covenants on civil protection to which Cuba is party,
was crucial to protecting human life and property. That
effort included the use of mass media and coordination
with governmental and non-governmental institutions.
The lessons we have learned in the course of
years of being lashed by major meteorological
phenomena have enabled Cuba to strengthen its
regulatory, legislative and institutional frameworks for
disaster risk reduction. Likewise, disaster reduction
issues have been included in national teaching
syllabuses, providing the civil defence system with a
wealth of scientific research, investigation and
knowledge.

09-63607

A/64/PV.59

Cuba believes that it is crucially important to
continue to strengthen the International Strategy for
Disaster Reduction as a mechanism for coordinating
efforts in that area of international concern. Our
country is also committed to continuing to work with
the United Nations Disaster Assessment and
Coordination team.
We regret the loss of human life and material
damage as a result of the meteorological phenomena
and complex emergencies that have affected thousands
of people throughout the world during the past year, in
particular in the countries of the South. In that regard,
we reaffirm the importance of honouring official
development assistance commitments and of promoting
United Nations programmes aimed at effectively
supporting the efforts of the countries of the South.
We stress that the United Nations system has an
important role to play in helping developing countries
to improve their existing humanitarian capacities,
know-how and institutions. In so doing, the
Organizations should, among other things, help them to
gain access to new technologies, financial resources
and technical knowledge.
Cuba reiterates its willingness to continue to
support countries in need that have been affected by
natural disasters in a disinterested manner and in a
spirit of solidarity. An example of that support is the
work undertaken by the Henry Reeves International
Contingent of Doctors Specialized in Disasters and
Serious Epidemics. The initial goal of the Contingent,
which was established in Havana in August 2005, was
to help people in New Orleans affected by Hurricane
Katrina. The Contingent now has extensive reach in

09-63607

disaster areas, having established comprehensive field
hospitals capable of providing a broad range of
assistance to affected populations. The Contingent has
carried out missions in seven countries with the
participation of 4,156 participants, of whom 2,840
were doctors.
Cuba is also carrying out several health care
cooperation programmes in numerous countries. That
effort includes the Latin American School of Medicine,
which has graduated 8,283 students from 24 countries
in its 10 years of existence. Throughout our country,
23,749 students from 100 countries from Latin
America and the Caribbean, Africa, Asia, North
America and Europe are currently studying medicine.
Our country has also implemented a comprehensive
health programme. Forty-four countries are currently
benefiting from the programme, which has deployed
2,920 Cuban doctors to provide services free of charge
in rural areas to all people, irrespective of their race,
creed or ideology. Cuba reiterates its resolve to
continue to provide, to the extent of our capability, the
support of our main resource — the human capital
created by the Revolution and our best experiences.
Lastly, for our country, the only way to face
humanitarian emergencies and the devastating fury of
nature is to place the infinite resources of the planet
available to the most affected, without petty
commercial interests or national selfishness. Solidarity
and international cooperation should always be
foremost among our concerns in providing
humanitarian assistance.
The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.

27
