324th

United Nations

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

PLENARY MEETING

FIFTH S,&SSION
Flushing Mertdow, New York

Official Records

CONTENTS
Page

Scale of assessments for the apportionment of expenses of the United Nations:
report of the Committee on Contributions: report of the Fifth Committee
(A/1669 and Corr.1) .•..•....•.•...• "........................... 653
Appointments to fill vacancies in the membership of subsidia.ry bodies of the
General Assembly: reports of the Fifth Committee (A/1671, A/1672,
655
A/1673, Aj1674 and A/1675)
Status of budgetary authorizations for the financial year 1950: (d) supplementary estimates for 1950: report of the Fifth Committee (A/16'!7) .. 655
Priority to be accorded to the discussion of a particular agenda item

<........ 655

Intervention of the Central People's Government of the· People's Republic of
.
China in Korea: report of the First Committee (A/17!7) ............• 655
Place of meeting of the sixth session of the General Assembly: report of the
660
Fifth Committee (A/1714)

President: Mr. Nasrollah EN'i'EZAM (Iran).
8ea1e of assessments for the apportionment of
the expenses of the United Nations: report of
the Committee on Contributions: report of the
Fifth Committee (AJI669 and Corr.I)
[Agenda item 40]
1. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Two documents are before the Assembly, namely, the
report of the Fifth Committee [A/1669 and Corr.l],
containing a draft resolution, and an amendment
[A/1670] to that draft submitted by the Soviet Union.
Under that amendment, the following text would be
substituted for paragraph 1 of the draft resolution:
r'l. That the present scale of assessments for the
apportionment of the expenses of the Unit~d Nations'
shall continue to apply in 1951."
2. I put tfult amendment to the vote.
.The amendment was rejected by 21 votes to 5,

with 8 abstenHons.
3. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
now put to the vote the draft resolution contained in
the report of the Fifth Committee [AI1669 and
Corr.l}.

.

The draft resolution was adopted by 41 votes to 6,
. .

with 2 abstentions.

4. Mr. PODTSEROB (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): Both in the
Fifth Committee and in the General Assembly the
USSR delegation voted against the draft resolution on
the scale of assessments. for 1951 which provides for
changes in the' percentage contribution of twenty-three
countries. It considers that there is no sufficient justification for making such material changes in the existing scale and increasing the contributions of a number
of States, including that of the Soviet Union.
5. In determinin~ the scale of contn"butions on the
basis of the national revenue and the per capita..
income, the following two factors are particularly.. ~..
portant: .the .extent of the damages suffered by mdi...,
vidual Member States of the United Nations as· a
result of the Second World War, and the ability of
a given. Member State to procure the foreign currency
in which the contributions to the Organization. are
made. The Committee on Contributions and the Fifth
Committee disregarded both these factors when th~
drew up the scale of assessments for 1951 which the
Fifth Committee then submitted to the General Assembly· in a draft resolution.
6. Yet it is a known fact that the USSR suffered
great losses in the .war against the Hitlerite bloc. The
war against Germany and Japan cost the Soviet Union

653

A/PV.324.

654

General Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

the enonnoussum of 357,000 million dollars. Furthermore, it is necessary to take into accoant the damages
suffered by our State during the war years from the
vast destruction and plunder of State, co-operative and
private property in that part of the territory which
was occupied by the enemy.
7. The Committee on Contributions did not take into
account, or attach sufficient importance, to the above
factors when it recommended a 10 per cent increase
in the contribution of the USSR, which is already very
considerable.
8. Furthermore, the Soviet Union has been faced
with additional, artificially created difficulties owing to
the fact that it is being discriminated against economically in flagrant violation of the basic principles of
the United Nations.
9. Consequently, the increase in the share of contributions of the USSR can in no way be considered
equitable.
10. Mr. NOSEK (Czechoslovakifl): The Czechoslovak delegation does not and cannot agree with the
resolution which has just been adopted by the General
Assembly. That resolution, the text of which was submitted to the General Assembly by the Fifth Committee on· the recommendation of the Committee on
Contributions, changes the rates of contributions for
1951 for twenty-three Member States. According to
the proposal of the Committee on Contributions, the
contributions of nine States are being reduced while
those of fourteen other States are being increased.
Among the latter is my country, Czechoslovakia.
11. My delegation, after thoroughly examining the
recQ"'l1l1endations of the Committee on Contributions,
arrived at the opinion that that committee, in formulating its proposal, had deviated from the basic principle established in 1946 [resolution 14(1)]. In that
year the General Assembly decided that the scale of
assessments should be based on the principle that the
expenses of the United Nations should be apportioned
broadly according to repacity to pay. The recommendation of the Committee on Contributions reveals that
that committee did not adhere to that principle in its
consid\..ration of the question, regardless of certain
historical as well as present facts.
12. Allow me to remind the General Assembly of
those facts. Czechoslovakia was the first cotm'cry to fall
victim to German nazism and its imperiaastic designs
for the domination of Europe and of the whole world.
Fer the period of an entire year before the outbreak
of the Second World War my country was subjected
to looting and devastation by Hitlerts war machinet
and, that looting became even more extensive in the
course of the war, which brought to my country additional destruction and loss. Only a figure of hundreds
uf billions of Czechoslovak cro'wns would be capable of
expressing the damage and los~ which my country
suffered from Hitler's war machine.
13. Since 1945 my countrymen have been working
hard to replace the war losses and to build up again
what was destroyed during the nazi occupation. Ever
since that time the ~ople of Czechoslovakia have been
making every poSSIble effort to repair the damages
caused by Hitler's fascist war machine and have also
been working hard to prevent the outbreak of a new

war which is so much desired by the capitalist rulers of
certain countries.
14. It is those very same people )Yha consistently
wish to oestruct the peaceful building up of Czechoslovakia, and the fact that the United States discriminates against my country in foreign trade is a typical
example. In spite of this, according to the resolution
which has just been adopted, the rate of contribution
of the United States is to be reduced while the rate
of contribution of Czechoslovakia is to be increased.
15. I have disclosed a number of facts which prevent
my delegation from agreeing with the resolution which
has just been adopted; because of those same facts, my
delegation voted in iavour of the Soviet Union
amendment.
16. Mr. DEMCHENKO (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) (translated from Russian): The resolution w~llch the General Assembly has just adopted
on the basis of the Fifth Committee recommendation
provides for considerable changes in the scale of CO:1tributions for 1951.
17. The delegation of the Ukrainian SSR pointed out
in the Fifth Committee that there was 'QO justification
for effecting such changes and for increasing by 10
per cent the contributions of a number of Member
States, including the Ukrainian SSR.
18. In determining the share of contributions to be
paid by the Ukrainian SSR in 1951, the Committee
on Contributions and the Fifth Committee did not
take into consideration the fact that the Ukrainian
SSR had suffered great material losses during the war
against Hitlerss armies and as a result of the enemy
occupation of its territory, from which it has not yet
completely recovered. None of these factors was taken
into account v/hen the scale of assessments was determined, and consequently one of the basic criteria which
should guide the United Nations in determining the
amount of the contribution of the Ukrainian SSR was
not applied.
19. The delegation of the Ukrainian SSR cannot agree
with such an approach, which it considers wrong. That
is why it voted against the draft resolution submitted
~y the Fifth Committee, and supported the USSR
amendment which provided that the scale of assessments for 1951 should be maintained at the present
level, without any changes.
20. Mr. SHVETSOV (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist
Republic) (tra.nslated from Russian) : The delegation
of the Byelorussian SSR feels it necessary to explain
its vote.
21. The Fifth Committee, in its report on the scale
of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses
of the Ur£~ted Nations for 1951, proposed an increase
in the contributions of fourteen States, including the
Byelorussian SSR.
22. The delegation of the Byelorussian SSR voted
against that prof'osal becauset in proposing a change in
the scale of assessments, neither the Committte on Contributions nor the majorltyin the Fifth Committee
had re~rd to me chief criterion for the assessment
of conttibutionst namely, the extent of the damage
suffered by States during the Second World War and
their sacrifices L'1 men and materials in the common
struggle against Hitlerite fascism.

..

324th Meeting-14 December 1950
23. Everyon~ knows· that the whole territory of the
ByeIorussian SSR was occupied by the nazi hordes,
that the fascist barbarians lorded it over Byelorussian
soil for over three years and that, as a result of bitter
fighting, barbarous destruction and pillage, our pros..
perous land was laid in ruins. When the scale of con..
tributions was drawn up in 1946, that fact was taken
into account. This year, however, the Committee on
Contributions decided to increase the contribution of
the Byelorussian SSR by 10 per cent.
24. The principal criteri~n for assessing contributions
has thus been disregarded. The Committee on Con..
tributions did not take into account the enormous resources and efforts which the people of the Byelorussian
SSR arp. devoting to the rehabilitation of their national
economy and to the reconstruction of the towns and
villages destroyed during the German occupation.
25. For these reasons, our delegation voted against
increasing the contribution of a whole group of States,
including the Byelorussian SSR.

Appointments to fill vacancies in the membership
of subsidiary bodies of the General Assembly:
reports of the Fifth Committee (A/1671, AI
1672, A/1673, A/1674 and A/1675)
[Agenda item 43]
26. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
put to the vote the draft resolutions contained in the
reports of the Fifth Committee [A/1671, A/1672,
A/1673, A/1674 and A/1675].
The draft resolutions were adopted unanimously.
Status of budgetary authorizations for the finan..
cial year 1950: (d) supplementary estimates
for 1950: report of the Fifth Committee
(A/1677)

[Agenda item 38]
27. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
put to the vote the draft resolution contained in the
report of the Fifth Committee [A/1677].
The draft resolution was adopted CJjl 48 votes to 5.

Priority to be accorded to the disci18Sion r;f a
particular agenda item
28. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) : I
call upon the representative of Egypt on a point of
order.
29. Mahmoud FAWZI Bey (Egypt): We have, as
the eleventh item on our agenda for today, a matter
of extreme urgency. With respect to that matter we
have a report from the First Committee [A/1717]
which deals, among other things, with the draft reso..
~ution approved by the Committt.'e; the principal aim
of that draft is to sect,re a cease-fire in Korea. I do
not need to dwell· at length upon this point and upon
the urgency of this question. I submitthaf we should
give priority to this item before we pass on to deal
wi.th any ot~er item. I hope there will be approval of
this suggestIOn.
.
30. The PRESIDENT (translated fro'hJ French):
The representative ('f Egypt proposes that the As-

655

sembly should give priority to the eleventh item on
the agenda for this meeting [item 76].
31. If there are no objections to that proposal, it
will be so decided and the Assembly will proceed immediately to the consideration of that item.
It was so decided.

Intervention of the Central People'8 Gavemment
of the People's Republic of Chb,~ in Korea:
report of the First Committee (A/1717)
[Agenda item 76]
32. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
must ask the Assembly whether it wishes to have a
discussion on this item of the agenda.
It was decided not to discuss the item.
33. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The First Committee has .submitted an interim r~rt .
which contains a draft resolution [A/1717]. Generiilly,
I call on members of the Assembly who wish to explain
their votes after draft resolutions have been voted u~n.
In the present case, however, the question is a very important one. and if delegations wish to explain their
votes, I shall caU on them to speak ~ediate1y.
34. I call upon the representative of the Soviet Union
for an explanation of his vote.
.
~5. Mr. MALIK (Union,of Soviet Socialist Repubbcs) (translated from Russwn) :. The USSR delega.tion
deems it essential to make the following statement in
explanation of its vote.
.
36. As we know, the question of the"alleged interven..
tion of China in Korea, submitted by the delegation of
the United States and several other delegations, was
_included in the agenda of the First Committee as item
76. f'he Commi~e<: proc;;:eded to consider that question,
havmg, on the InSistence. of the Anglo-American .bloc,
interrupted its consideration of the question of United
States aggression against China, submitted earlier by
the USSR delegation.
.
1
37. In the course of the debate, several draft resoIu..
tions w~re submitted wi~ regard to th~ question which
the Umted States delegation had sublDltted to the First
Committee. The delegation of.the Soviet Union, for its
part, submitted a draft resolution [A/C.l/MO] recommending the immediate withdrawal of foreign troops
from Korea and that the settlement of the Korean question should be left to the Korean people themselves.
38. Having forced the First Committee to engage il·
legally in the consideration of this question, the AngtoAmerican bloc then· did its very ut.tnost to obtain priority of consideration for another draft resolution
[A/C.1/6,41], in spite of the fact that it had been presented later than the USSR draft" Tesolution calling for
the withdrawal of foreign troops from Korea.
39. The delegation of the Soviet Union.urged.thatita
draft resolution should be considered and put to the
vote, but owing to the efforts of the Anglo--Americ:an
bloc, the First Committee proceeded to approve the
d.raft resolution contained in document A/C.l/641. It
then interrupted its work and postponed consideration
.1 See. Official R!cordso! th, General Assoo;" Fifth S . .
.non, Pl,rst Commdtet, 408th to 417th meetings inctusive.

----------

General Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

of the USSR draft resolution and other draft resolutions on the pretext that the draft..reso.lution approved
by the First Committee had to be sent to the Genend
Assembly for consideration.
40.. The USSR delegation considers this procedure irtegular and takes exception to such a strange method of
work. We protest against the consideration by the Genet'.:'l Assembly of the text submitted to it by the First
Co1'l.11nittee before that Committee has exam.ined and
taken a decision otfthe draft resolution of the Snviet
Union and the other draft resolutions which have been
submitted to it on the same question.
41. As to the text now before the Assembly, the real
purpose of the measure.s proposed in it is to enable the
United States armed forces in Korea to continue their
armed aggression. This is clear from the statements
made by the United States and United Kingdom representatives in the First Comtnittee on 12 December,'
when the draft resolution set forth in document A/C.I/
641 was discussed.
42. The United Kingdom repre3entative, Mr. Younger,
speaking of the. SUb.stance of the draft resolution., said
that the proposal for a cease-fire contained in the draft
was merely a temporary measure strictly limited in
scope. He further stated that he supported the draft
resolution on that practical, strictly limited basis, which
would ensure th~ safety of United States and United
Kingdom troops .~n. Korea. The United States representative, Mr. A~tin, took a similar position.
43. .The statements. of the United States and United
Kingdom representatives in the First Committee show
that they oppose the immediate withdrawal of foreign
troops from Korea because they are seeking thereby
to continue United States armed intervention in Korea
and aggi'ession in the Far East, whereas a proper solution of the Korean question is possible only if foreign
troops are withdrawn from Korea and the Koreans
themselves are allowed to settle the questions which
concern their country.
44. It was precisely on those grounds that the USSR
delegation submitted its <haft resolution to the First
Committee, recomm~ndil1g·, ~ t have already said, that
all foreign troops should be it.'1111ediately withdrawn
from Korea. and that the decision~l'l the Korean que.c;. tion should .be entrusted to the KorC211 peopJ~ them-

selves.
.
45. The delegation of the Soviet Union insists on the

,adoption of tb:..~t draft resolution; it therefore voted
in the First Co:cunittee against the draft resolution
contained in document A/C.I/M1 and wUlvote against
that text .in the General Assembly.
46.. Mr. BARANOVSKY (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) (translated from RUSSia1t) : The delegation of the Ukrainian SSR fully associates itself with
the statement of the USSR delegation concerning the
~ p~ocedure which has latelr. been adopted .by
UmtedNations organs for the conSIderation of certain
qt1estions~

47. The fact that the General Assembly now has
before it the draft resolution which was originally submitted in.the First Committee as document A/C.I/M1
is a consequence of the irregular procedure which the
United States delegauonhas shariielessly foisted upon

the United Nations. In its endeavour to induce the
General Assembly to adopt a resolution on item 76 of
the agenda which would meet with the approval of the
ruling circles of the United States, 'the United States
delegation twice forced the First Committee to interrupt
the consideration of certain questions and draft resolutions which it was di8~ssing .in order to consider
other questions or other draft resolutions to which the
United States delegation had decided to give priority.
48. That is what happened to the Soviet Union complaint regarding United States aggression against the
People's Republic of China; the consideration of that
item was deferred at the instance of the United States
representative, Mr. Dullec, and for more than two weeks
now it has been impossible to resume the discussion.
49. The same thing has now taken place in the case
of the draft resolutions submitted by the USSR and
other Powers concerning item 76 of the agenda; the
consideration of those drafts too has been deferred by
the First Committee, although they concern item 76 no
less than does document A/C.l/641.
SO. The delegation of the Ukrainian SSR considers
this new "procedure" irregular 9.Dd injurious to the
cause and the prestige of the United Nations. The First
Committee had no business to discuss the draft resolution contained in document A/C.l/641 before considering the draft resolution of the Soviet Union on item 76
of the agenda, the latter draft having been submitted to
.the First Committee before the fonner; for the same
reason, the Assembly has no business to discuss the
draft submitted to it.
51. With regard to the substance of that draft, the
delegation of the Ukrainian SSR shares the opinion
of the USSR delegati9n that the. real purpose of the
measures proposed therein is to enable United States
armed forces in Korea to continue their armed intervention.
52. For this reason, the delegation of the Ukrainian
SSR will vote against the draft resolution before the
Assembly.
53. Mr. WIERBLOWSKI (Poland) (translated
from Russian) :A few days ago the First Committee
decided, in spite of the opp,osition of a number of delegations, to include in its agenda the United States
charges concerning the so-called intervention' in Korea
of the Central People's Government of the People's
N.epublic of China.
54. The purpose of the United States complaint was
to relegate to the background another question, a question in which the United States was the accused,
namely, the complaint of the Chinese'People's RepUblic
that the United States had violated the territonal in- '
tegrity and sovereignty of the Chinese People's Republic, tnat it had carried out barbarous air raids over
Chi!1ese territory, and that ith~d commi~ed aggression
agamst the People's Democratic Republic of Korea. I
must say that the astonishing procedural manoeuvres
which we witnessed during the consideration of matters
connected with the Far Eastern situation are unparalleled in the history of the United Nations.
55. It all began when the United States submitted the
q!1esti.on of F~rf!10sa. for in~lusion
th~ agenda in
VIolatIOn of eXIsting InternatIonal declarations and the
principles of the Cllarter. Yet when it came to the con-

in

657
sideration of the question, the United States representative, who bad previously insisted that the question
should be'included and given priority over other items
of the agenda, argued with the same eloquence and
energy ,for postponing the discussion and placing the
item last on the agenCta.
.
56. When the next item, the comflaint of the Central
People's Government of the People sRepublie of China
concerning United States aggression in the Far East,
came up for discussion, it was genei"ally felt that in view
of the seriousness of the situation, the First Committee
would discuss the question exhaustively and seek ways
'
of preventing the conflict from spreading.
57. In order to obtain a full picture of the ~ituation,
the First Committee dedded by a tremendous maiorlty
to invite a representative of the Chinese People's Re..
public to take -part in the consideration of the question.
58. After the representative of the USSR had made
a detailed statement substantiating the charges against
the United, States, the Committee, at Mr. Dulles' re..
quest, decided to adjoumthe meeting in order to give
the United States Government time to prepare' its
reply. The Committee did not meet for several days,
and when finally it met, representatives learne!l~') their
surprise that a proposal had llieen made to the effect that
the consideration of that question should be postponed
and that another item of the agenda should be taken, up.
When the consideration of that question was at last
resumed, there was a new procedural mUlceuvre in the
form of a proposal' that priority should be given to one
of the draft resolutions before tIle Committee. And
finally, when, that draft resolution was approved, the
discussion in the Committee was again suspended.
59. These proceduralmanreuvres are clearlyareflec·
tion of the political manreuvres which are taking place
in the United Nations. The Polish delegation will
always pro.test in the most determined manner against
such unscrupulous schemes.
60. The mere fact that two draft resolutions were in..
trodqced"shows the ,real intentions of the United States.
Using the Philippines as its instrument, the United
States succeeded in having the draft resolution con'"
ceming a cease-fire considered first; that draft is very
much to the advantage of the United States at a time
when its armed forces are suffering defeat arid retreatingin. Korea. Mr. Austin openly admitted that fact in
a statement he made, yesterday at a meeting of the
Kappa Sigma Fraternity. '
,
61. According to Mr. Austin, the resolution calling
for a cease-fire will serve the interests of the United
States in any event. If the other party agrees to the
cease-fire, the United States forces t'ViII have a chance
to ,regroup." If. the other party.rejects it, the United
States, according to Mr. Austin, can use that as a
powerful propaganda. weapon to mislead the people
who are longing for peace; for a cease-fire does not
mean the enCting of hostilities, which we have been
requesting for. the past six months and whi~h we shall
go on requesting.
62., Naturally [ am not surprised at Mr. Austin's aP':
proachto the qtte$tion. lalso understand the part played
by the Philippines_ It is, however, difficult to under.
stand how ~lv.e Asian countries which, by 'rirtue of
their geograpmml situation, should have given more
I

serious consideration to the question, fail to see that
their desire to sett1~ the conflict is being exploited for
purposes- which do not serve the cause of peace and
cannot lead to a prompt settlement of the conflict..
63. A solution of the Korean problem is not possible
so long as it is not clearly understood that that problem
isa consequence of United States aggression against the
freedom and ind~ndence of Korea, and 'that United
States intervention in the Korean civil war, which was
brought on by the Syngman -Rhee regime, constituted
an illegal act. The so-called police action for the purpose
of re-establishing the status quo was but the first stage
in ,the ,military plans of General MacArthur. The second
was to have involved North, Korea, the third, China..
Carried away by temporary successes, MacArthurand
his henclun.en proceeded to the third stage.. by bombing
China and seizing Taiwan.
64~ It was only when the Korean people's anny, regrouped and reinforced by Chinese volunteers, launched"
a counter-offensive and inflicted a number of defeats
upon the enemy and forced him to retreat-it was only
then that the question of a cease-fire was raised.
65., The United States, which bears the responsibility
for the aggression in Korea and which has not scrupled
to use the most brutal methods, wiping -out Korean
towns, destroying Korean industry and dropping thousands of bombs, upon civilian objectives, is now saying
that furth.er bloodshed must be prevented.
66. The United States representative listened win,
stolid,indifference in the Security Council and in the
First Committee to the complaints of the Government
of the Korean ,People's Democratic Republic. Those
complaints contained descriptions of the immense de..
struction and unbelievable suffering which the air, land
and sea forces of the United States had inflicted upon
the Korean people. Instances were cited of atrocities
connnitted by United States troops and the Syngman
Rhee regime against the inhabitants of the occupied territory.At that time the United States repres~ntative said
nothing about human sacrifices or devastation, although
the American Press was full of photogra~hs of shootings, of pnsonersof war being tortured, of battle-fields
covered with the bodies of the dead, of Korean towns
in ruins. The United States representativeand,incidentally, several other representatives, were completely
indifferent to the draft resolution caning for' thecessation of the bombing of towns and civilians.t
67. Now, however, that United Stab~s forces are re-.
treating along the entire line and t1mt they need a
breathing spell in order -to regroup and continue their
aggression, the United States representative speaks of
human sacrifices; devastation, etc.
68. I ,do not, question the "sincerity-and good 'inten;.
tions of most of the twelve Asian countries which ~n...
sored the draft reso~ution of the~irst .Committee_ They ,
must, however, realtze what use 1$ being made of their
initiative, and what plans the United States 8gg1'essors
have in connexion with their proposal. 69. During the discussions in the First Committee, it
was repeatedly emphasized that a dangerous situation
had been brought abot;tt in the Far East. It is impo$Slote
T

.

tSee Official Records of the Secu"', CO'UHcil, Fifth YtlW,
No. 26, document 5/1679, page 20.

658

General A8eembly-Fifih Session-Plenary Meetinp

not to agree with tlmt 8-}lpraisal of the situation, since
we have witnessed witlun a relatively short time two
acts of aggression in the Far East-United States aggression against Korea and against the People's Republic of China.
70~ There can be no doubt but that it is the duty of
the United .Nations, in accordance with the purposes
and principles of the Charter, to maintain peace and
security and, to that end, to endeavour to resolve conflicts, prevent aggression and seek the peaceful settlement of disputes.
71. The draft resolution which has been submitted to
us does not, however, serve that purpose and actually
is more likely to help the aggressor by enabling him to
bide his guilt and to. encourage hhn to commit further
acts of aggression. The Polish delegation therefore win
vote against that draft.
72. I should like to add that the Polish delegation has
continuously tried to achieve an equitable settlement
of the Korean question on the basis of the principle of
the self-determination of peoples. That is evidenced by
the draft resolution [A/1426] which it submitted a few
weeks ago together with four other delegations, which
called for the withdrawal of foreign troops from Korea,
the cessation of hostilities and the establishment of a
unified and democratic Korea. We were guided by the
principle that the first step towards the solution of the
Korean problem must be t.1}e withdrawal of foreign
troops.
73. Six months of fighting in Korea and the developments in the Far East have fully confirmed the soundness of our point of view. Only if foreign troops are
, withdrawn can peace be re-established in Korea. Only
then will the Korean people be in a position freely to
settle their own destiny.
74. Such a settlement of the Korean question would
contribute to the maintenance of peace in the Far
East. Those principles are enunciated in full in the draft
resolution [AjC.lj640] which the USSR delegation
submitted to the First Committee. That draft sets out
the only correct and constructive approach to the question, and the PC'/lish delegation wholeheartedly supports it.
75. Mr. KISELEV (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist
Republic) (translated from Russian): My delegation
considers it necessary to make a statement in explanation
of its vote on the draft resolution before the Assembly.
76. . In the First Committee, the delegation of the
Byelorussian SSR objected to a procedure whereby the
General Assembly would consider this draft separately
before other draft resolutions on the same item.
But, owing to .the pressure exerted by the AngloAmerican bloc, the. majority in the First Committee
decided to submit it for the consideration of the Assembly entirely out of· turn; other draft resolutions, including the USSR draft caUing for the immediate withdrawal of foreign troops from Koreal have thus been
disregarded.
.

and

77. The representatives of the United States and the
United Kingdom., speaking in the First Committee,
strongly supported the draft resolution which is now
before the Assembly. This draft, which ostensibly calls
for a cease-firep is really designed to enable the United

...:-_---=:.-_---------

States forces in Korea to continue their armed intervention. The General Assembly would be wise to decide
to call for the immediate withdrawal of foreign troops
from Korea and to give the Korean people themselves
an opportunity of settling questions affecting their
own country.
78. The Anglo-American bloc, however, bas preferred
to postpone this extremely urgent and important question by claiming that the draft resolution before us has
priority.
79. The delegation of the Byelorussian SSR will vote
against the draft resolution approved by the majority in
the First Committee.
80. Mr. HAJDU (Czechoslovakia): The Czechoslovak delegation will vote against the draft resolution of
the First Committee, which was sponsored by thirteen
Powers, for reasons that it made plain in the Committee.
81. We base ourselves on the facts and the events that
have taken place since the conflict began. Let us recall
those facts and those events, ~nd we shall see that there
is only one outstanding factor in this whole question
and in the whole Korean conflict, this factor being an
undoubted aggression on the part of the United States.
As we all know, the United States thoroughly prepared the South Korean army for the purpose of
launching an attack against North Korea. That attack
was launched on 25 June. In a very short time, United
States forces intervened on the side of the South
Korean forces against the Korean people. That intervention, as well as the attack of the South Koreans,
was planned beforehand by the United States. That
United States aggression was subsequently sanctioned
by two illegal decisions of the Security Council.
82. Nevertheless, in spite of these preparations, the
heroic fight of the Korean people threw back the aggressors. All the military might of the United States
was concentrated against the Korean people. Everybody
knows about the savage bombardments and the razing
of whole Korean villages and towns to the ground. With
that military might the United States forces began to
push back the heroic defenders of Korea.
83. In the meantime the United States used the
Korean conflict as a pretext to commit aggression
against China. As we all know, under this pretext it
occupied an integral part of the Chinese territory,
Taiwan, and also bombarded the Chinese mainland one
hundred times. Besides these preparations for all-out
aggression against Chin? '(Jnited States forces began
to approach Chinese tL,- dtory itself, and they were
nearing-and I think already. reaching-the Chinese
frontier at the Yalu river.
84. The Czechoslovak delegation, together with the
Soviet Union and three other delegations, threw every
effort into the balance during this fight to end the
bloodshed and to end the Korean codiict, as the USSR
is doing now.. Our calls for peace and our warnings
were heeded neither by the United States aggressors
nor by the majority of the members of this Assembly.
On the contrary, they again sanctioned, post factum,
the crossing of the 38th parallel, instead of putting an
end to the fight. Our proposal [A/1426] was intended
to settle the whole issue· peacefully for. the benefit of
the Korean people. The resolution adopted by the

324th Meeting-14 Deeemher 1950
General Assembly on 7 October [294th meeting], on the
contrary, extend,ed the hostilities and prolonged the
fight. So there was no peaceful settlement.
85. The Chinese patriots were aroused by .these aggressive acts on the part of the United States; they
were aroused not oniy by suspicion, as previously,
but now by clear facts, the facts being the aggression
against Taiwan and the bombardment of Chinese territory. Their justifiable fears were increased many times
by the approach of· the United States armies to their
borders. Thev therefore fulfilled their duty towards
their motherland and volunteered en masse, in accordance. with intemational,law, to fight the armies ap'
proaching their borders and threatening their motherland. There was therefore no problem in this connexion
for the Assembly to consider. The heroic people of
Korea, with the help of the Chinese volunteers, turned
the tide of battle.. The advancing enemy was routed and
military disaster fell upon him. .
86. Suddenly the humanitarian feelings of the majority in the Assembly were aroused. They at once
began to try to save the United States armies from
disaster ~d to save United States prestige; they
tried to secure for the United States at least a foothold
so that it could launch aggression again in the future
against the KClrean people. Thus we were seized of a
curious document [A/1618] calling for the inclusion in
the agenda of an item entitled "Intervention of the
Central People's Government of the People's Repub.lic
of China in Korea", an item whose inclusion Czechoslovakia opposed. That document was subsequentiy superseded by a still more curious one, the draft resolution
we are now to vote. upon. Speaking in the First Committee, the majority of the members of the General
Assembly put forward arguments which they themselves had rejected two months earlier.
87. I do not intend to scrutinize the intentions of the
a.uthors of this draft resolution. Many of them certainly
have honest intentions, but the wording of the draft is
hypocritical and the effect of its adoption would be bad.
Its adoption, as I said before, would result in an attempt to save the United States forces from disaster
and to give them the possibility, after they had consolidated their ranks and renewed their armaments, of
launching an aggression in the future under better
conditio:1s. My delegation is sure that the Korean question would not be settled by the adoption of this draft
because the United States forces of aggression would
be able to remain in Korean territory.
88. My delegation is 'persuaded that only by adopting
the draft resolution LA/C.1j640] which the Soviet
Union submitted in the First Committee can we put
an end, immediately, to the hostilities. Only by adopting that text can we settle the problem of Korea for
the benefit of the Korean people, because that text not
only provides fot' the removal of any possibility of an
immediate or future conflict-whereas the other draft
does no such thing-but also safeguards the interests
of .the Korean people by al10wing them to settle their
own affairs and their own future. The Czechoslovak
delegation therefore supports the USSR proposal and
win vote against the <traft resolution of the First
Committee.
89. Mahmoud FAWZI Bey (Egypt): I had no intention of speaking on this matter, but I feel impelled to

659

say at least a few words, which youcancaU an eJq>1anation of my vote. I can hardly call it that considering
that my country was one of the sp<?nsors of the draft
resolution which, by the large majority of 51 votes, the
First Committee approved yesterday, and which favours
the making of an endeavour to secure a cease-fire in
Kotea.
90. I must confess my sense of-shall I say-frustration at the unjust criticisms which were levelled by
various delegations against this endeavour both yesterday and today. I had hoped that our attenipt to work
out a cease..fire in Korea w:ould be subscribed to by each
and every delegation present here or each and every
delegation which was present yesterday in the First
Committee; however, that was not the case. I realizeand I should be grateful for it-that the speakers who
today and yesterday criticized this draft resolution,
admitted .the sincerity of its sponsors. I should have
liked-and I still should like-them to follow this up
with the next logical step, namely, to vote for the draft
resolution and to work in support of it. It is not enough
merely to say that such and such motives can be imputed to the draft resolution and to take that as an
ex~se not only for not voting for it but for voting to
oppose the attempt to attain a cease..fire in Korea.
91. Let me 'recall that this is not by any means the
first time that we have been working for a cease-fire in
Kqrea. Since only a few hours after the fighting started
there, we have been working for a cease..fire. We even
met on a Sunday, the memorable Sunday, 2S June, and
w€; adopted a resolution in favour of· a cease..fire in
Korea. 8 Nobody could then attribute mysterious or
partial motives to our action, and I do not think that
anybody is now entitled to attribute anything but good
motiyes to our action today.
92. What in fact does the draft resolution ask for?
It asks that ways and means should be sought to determine the basis on which a satisfactory cessation of
hostilities in Korea can be arranged and that recommendations should be made to the General Assen1bly as
soon as possible. Could there be anything wrong in
that? On the contrary, there would be everything wrong
if we failed to do so, if we failed to try to establish a
cease..fire in Korea. We are trying to determine the
basis on which a satisfactory cease..fire can be arranged.
93. How can anybody, in logic or in fairness, challenge.
such a stand? I should like at the same time to point out
that when we worked with this objective in view, we
did so having in mind our responsibility as Members
of the United Nations and not only our interests as
peoples living in important countries of the world. r
should add to that that my country is. at the cross-roads
of the mighty whenever any war takes place. We have,
nothing to gain from war, and we have everything to
gain from peace. It is almost a sarcasm of fate that the
time has come when. one ha.s to point out such a plain
fact, to which the man in the street and every other
person should unhesitatingly subscribe and accept as
the reality. Nobody can gain anything ,from war, neither
the victor nor the vanquished, and we who live at the
cross..roads of the mighty whenever they disagree and
whenever they start war have every right to ask that
this madness of successive wars and preparations for
wars should be stopped. It is high time to do it.
I Ibid.,

No. 15.

~

94. I trust that the world will realize its responsibilities to work for the maintenance t,f peace and se..
cudty not only in. speeches and articles and propaganda
material but in reality, in fact, in action~ byrefl\Jing to
work£ol' war and insisting upon working each and
every day, each and every hour and minute, for Peace.
We have no right to think differently. Neither propaganda material nor bright speeches will serve as an
alternative to peace alld tranquillity or to the service of
the human race.

f

95. We have

~i.

the control and re<.!t.1ction of armaments, which weigh
so heavily upon the economy, the social life and the
prosperity of the human race. We shall continue so to
fail to agree as long as there are people who are hesitating to work for peace and to build up the structure
which is necessary for peace in the world. I hope that
those who are hesitating to subscribe to our attempt
in favour of peace will realize, and will realize soon,
that there is growing and building up, spirallin¥ and
snowballing, a world public opinion which detenmneclly
refuses to be driven to war. We must pay heed to that
public opinion. We must not continue to think of people
as cattle who car.. be driven to war and to massacre at
the whim of tho&e who cannot think of anything else.

I.

r

5,0

far failed to agree upon so

I many matters, including only yesterday the question of

96. The world is waiting for our action and I submit
ih:lt we should lose no more time. We should insist on
ading, and we should act for pe.~ce, and then the time
will come when everyone will know who is building up
and who is tearing down the st11.1cture of human
civilization.
97, The PRESIDENT (translated from French) : So
far, I have allowed those who have spoken on this
subject to exceed the prescribed time limit of seven
minutes. The question is so important, its gravity is
such, that I really have not presumed to insist on strict
adherence to the rule. I hope, however, that explanations of votes on other items will not take more ,than
seven minutes.
98. I shall now. put the draft resolution of the First
Committee [A/1717] to the vote. A roll-call vote has
been requested.

A vote was taken by roll-call.
India, having been drawn by lot by the Presidentl
was called upon to vote first.
J n favour: India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Israel, Lebanon, Liberia, Luxembourg, Mexico, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway" Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Philippines, Saudi Arabia, Sweden, Syria, Thailand, Turkey,
Union of South Africa, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United State:s of America,

Urugu~y, Venezue~a, Yem~11., Yug~sl~via, Af~h~nistan,

Argentina, Austraha, Belgtum, BobVla, Bra:il, Durma,
Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba l Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuado:-, Egypt, Et Salvador,
Ethiopia, France, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras,
Iceland.
Against: Poland, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Byeloru6'3ian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Czechoslovakia.
.
Abstaining: China.

The draft resolution was adopted by 52 flotes to 51

with 1. abstention.

99. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): 1.
do not wish to say anything at this moment, but you
will understand what responsibilities you have placed
on me arid on the two persons whom I am to select.
I should like to appeal to all parties, to all the representatives. We need their support in order to be able
to save the world from the danger which threatens it.
100. Before proceeding to the next item, I must ask
the Assembly whether it wishes to open a debate on the
fourth to the seventh and on the fifteenth· to the eighteenth items on the agenda for this meeting [place of
meeting of th!? si:rth session and items 12, 301 67, 591
21(f), 20 and 21].

It was decided -not to discuss those items,
Place of meeting of the sixth session of the Gener",} Assembly: report of the Fifth Committee
(Aj1714)
101. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
We have before us a draft resolution submitted by Bolivia, Colombia and Peru r..4./1593] and the report of
the Fifth Committee [A/1714].
102. The representative of Pakistan wishes to explain
his vote.
103. Sir Mohammad ZAFRULLA KHAN (Pakisstan) : On behalf of Pakistan, I am compelled with great
regret to raise a voice against the draft resolution on
this item which has been submitted to the General Assembly by Bolivia, Colombia and Peru.
1'04. The draft resolution is brief. It bases its Jl"ecommendation to the effect that the sixth session of the
General Assembly should be convened in Europe on two
consMerations: first, "that the building intended for the ,
holding of the General Assembly will not be completed
unti11952" and, secondly, "that in these circumstances
there may arise technical difficulties liable to impede
the normal functioning of the Assembly and the convenience of its deliberations".
105. Any difficulties that are contemplated in the
draft resolution cannot be new ones. In previous years,
the session had been held at Lake Success and at
Flushing. Committees sat at Lake Success and the full
Assembly sat at Flushing. We are assured that if the
session were held at Headquarters in 1951, Committees
could be convened at the Headquarters building in
Manhattan, though the Assembly would still have to
hold its meetings at Flushing. Surely that will reduce
the technical difficulties a:'1d the inconveniences that
have hitherto been experienced in that the sessions of
the Committees will be held in New York. It will not
add to the inconveniences. With regard to the Com..
mittees, two hours' additional work could most certainly be done each day with the journey to and from
Lake Success eliminated.
106. Let us compare that. with our experience in 1948
in respect both of the normal functioning of the
Assembly and of the convenience of its deliberation.s.
I have no right to speak on behalf of other delegations,
but I can say with confidence that our own experience
was that. with regard to the transaction of the business
of the Assembly, we were put to a great deal of incon-

661
324th Meeting-14 December 1950
------------------venience, and that to our minds, and in our judgment,
external and internal security services, ushers and
the functioning of the General Assembly was not nearly
so efficient as it was at the temporary headquarters,
even with the division between Lake Success and
Flushing. And the greater part of that inr.:onvenience
will disappear next year.
107. In any case, there is one criterion by which we
can judge the convenience of the Assembly's deUberations and the efficiency of its functioning. In Paris, we
were functioning under the best conditions that could
be provided in Europe inasmuch as after a consideration of every other venue, the Secretary-General came
to the decision that the most convenient place was
Paris. So it was the most convenient place at which
the Assembly could have sat in 1948. The very best
arrangements were actually made in Paris so that we
were working under the most ideal conditions that
could be provided in Europe. Yet what was the progress of business? We sat until 12 December. We then
had to adjourn until 5 Aeril following, and we had to
sit for six weeks in New 'Yark to 'conclude our business.
It might be contended that perhaps the agenda was
extraordinarily long. I believe it was a. shorter agenda
than we had last year and than we have this year.

108. Compare that with working at the temporary
headquarters where, as I have said, we have been
working under the handicap that the Committees have
had to be convened at Lake Success, a distance of about
50 minutes to one hour from New York, which entails
a journey in the morning and one in the afternoon back
again. Sometimes representatives have had to attend
meetings at Lake Success and also at Flushing. A great
amount of that will be eliminated altogether when
Committees alone are sitting. No journeys outside
Manhattan will be necessary. Therefore, from the point
of view of the efficiency of working and functioning of
the General Assembly and the speed with which we can
dispose of our agenda, there will be a saving of at least
two hours in respect of every Committee that sits each
day and the progress will even be faster. Under the best
conditions in Europe, it will be no faster than in 1948
and, owing to certain factors, it may even be slower.
109. With all due respect, we are of the opinion that
the two considerations set out in support of the draft
resolution do not hold water. On ex.amination they
cannot be substantiated. But there is also the question
of expenses to consider. The report of the Fifth Committee [A/1714] indicates that if the session is held in
Paris, there will be a minimum additional expense of
$1,750,000 which all of us, of course, will have to provide.
Of course, we do not provide it directly, but we provide it through our contributions. If the session is held
in Geneva, there will be an additional expenditure of
$1,600,000.

110. That is not the whole story though, because the
report, in paragraph 3, states the following: "The
Secretary-General in his report drew' attention to the
assumptions on which his estimates had been prepared,
including, in particular, the assumption that the host
govenlroent would provide, without charge to the
United· Hations, a General Assembly hall, conference
and office space, buildings, maintenance services, utilities, telephonic and telecommunications installations,

telephone operators, and· office furniture and furnishings, and tnat maximum co-operation would be offered
in connexion with the neces~ary procurement of supplies and services. The Committee was informed, in
the course of its discussion of the Secretary-General's
estimates, that, in the event of the above facilities not
being furnished by the host government"-and we have
no definite assurance with regard to that as that will of
course depend upon the place selected-"it would cost
the United Nations approximately a further $3 million."
111. Now the $1,750,000 which we are sure to incur
may easily go up to $2 million or $2,500,000. Inaddition, there is this $3 million which wiU be incurred in
case the host government is not prepared to invest that
amount, because the cost will be the same whether it is
the host government that provides these facilities or
whether the United Nations provides them. Therefore
the holding of the session in Europe will have to cost
somebody money, and may cost the United Nations an
additional $5 million.
112. What· would be the advantage in return for which
we were willing-lightheartedly I am constrained to
say-to vote an additional $5 million? The most important would be the political advantage which, it is true,
in normal circumstances may well justify the expenditure of $5 million. But again I venture to submit that
the political conditions a,re such that it is quite possible
that after the greater part of this expense has been
incurred, we may not be able to hold the session in
Europe. There is no certainty, in spite of all the preparations and expense, that we shall be able to hold the
session in Europe and to carry it through even if it is
convened in Europe. The political advantage, in the
circumstances, is problematical.
113. It is true most of us were delighted to be in
Paris, for \:onsiderations which had nothing to do with
the efficient functioning of the Assembly or the transaction of business, and of course the ladies were enchanted
to be in Paris. We should again be delighted to 1)(~ in
Paris and have the ladies enchanted ~r'I be in Paris, but
are we prepared, as serious men, having regard to the
responsibilities that we carry with regard to the United
Nations and also to our respective governments, to
adopt a resolution which will certainly entail an additional expenditure of $5 million ?
114. Individual delegations may feel that· they might
make some saving either in the over-all expenditure if
the session were held nearer to our homes, or possibly
might make some saving in hard currency. But the
great part of this we shall have to provide in hard
currency through our contributions.
115. For all these reasons I ·eamestly submit to the
Assembly that it would not be wise, certainly for 1951,
to vote for the holding of the session in Europe. It is
possible that in 1952, owing to other considerations, in
addition to the political advantage that we might then
feel would be derived for the session being held elsewhere than in New York, it may be desirable that we
should adopt that course. And one of those eonsidera...
tions may be that 1952 will be a presidential election
year in the United States. But that we shall consider
when the 'question has to ,be considered at the next
session.

662

General Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

116. I do hope that having regard to these considerations and othel" considerations that could be cited
-but I shall not weary the Assembly by citing themwe shall come to whatever decision that is necessary
wi~th great deliberation.
117. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I call upon the representative of Bolivia on a point of
order.
118. Mr. COSTA du RELS (Bolivia) (translated
from French ): Although the General Assembly decidednot to have a discussion on this question~ the
representative '0£ Pakistan has in fact opened the debate.
119. As a sponsor of the draft resolution, I am not
entitled, under rule 88 of the rules of procedure, to
explain my vote. Nevertheless, with the President'~
pernnssion, I shall ask the Assembly to give me it
attention, as I should like to put forward certain
arguments. In the Fifth Committee, only the budgetary
implications of the question were discussed. It is on the
political asp~cts of the qUf~stion that I should like to
~omment here, provided of course that the Assembly is
prepared to listen to me.
120. Th~ "DImSIDENT (translated from French):
It seems to me that the first comment just made by the
representative of Bolivia was justified. The representative of Pakistan C'Annot have understood me when I
said that there would be no discussion on the question
and that the time allowed each speaker to explain his
vote would be 'limited to seven minutes, but it was
obviously difficult tor me to interrupt him.
121. As the representative of Bolivia said, rule 88 of
our rules of procedure specifies that "the President
shall not permit the proposer of a proposal or of an
amendment to explain his· vote on his own proposal or
amendment".
122. Only one membe!' of the Assembly has requested
to speak in explanation of his vote. It is the representative ()f Australia, whose remarks are always very-brief
and very rele'Vant. After hearing him, we can proceed
to the vote and no discussion of the question will take
place in the Assembly.
123. Sir Keith OFFICER (Australia): Like the
representative of·· Pakistan, my delegation will vote
against the joint resolution. We believe that the grounds
on which the proposal for holding the session in Europe
is put forward, namely, administrative considerations
and the difficulty of holding the session· in New York,
are ill-founded.
.
124. There is apparently no doubt as to the availability
of facilities here, next year, at least as adequate as those
we have enjoyed at this session. On the contrary, we
have no guarantee whatever that if we go to Europe
the. facilities: will be anything near as good as they can
be here. Apparently, next year, according to the assurance we have obtained, four committee rooms will be
a'VaiIable in Manhattan, so that there will be no need
to make the journeys to and from' Lake Success. The
building at Flushing will be available for p;enary
meetings. I can only say that when the question was
discussed in the Fifth Committee,· an assurance was
"See. Official Records of the Gtneral Assembl;y, Piflh Session, Fifth Committee, 278th and 279th meetinr;s.

given to tqat effect. It seems to us that that slhould be
quite conclusive as regards facilities. The facilities will
be adequate here and probably better than they are this
year and better than anything we' can get in Europe.
125. But the main reason for our vote is the financial
one. The Fifth Committee was told that the additional
cost would be $1,600,000 if the session were held in
Geneva and $1,750,000 if it were held elsewhere in
Europe. These estimates were based on the assumption
that the host government would provide the greate:
part of the conference facilities.
126. Thus we should be faced with this position. We
have already thit. year had to increase our budget by
$1,500,000. If we go to Europe, we are going to add at
least. $1,750,CC0 to that. Can we seriously contemplate
doing that in the present situation? Can we take upon
ourselves the additional burden of a sum not less than
$1,750,000, which might easily, as the representative of
Pa1.dstan explained, go up to $2,500,000 or Ir,:ore?
127. Let us think of the other responsibilities we have
and which, it has been explained, there has been some
difficulty in meeting, such as the need to provide for
rehabilitation in Korea, the need to provide for the
welfare of children, the need to assist the Palestine
refugees and our expanding advisory social services.
128. For that reason my delegation will vote against
the joint draft resolution.
129. Mr. DEVINAT (France) (translated from
French): The delegations of Bolivia, Colombia and
Peru have taken the initiative of presenting a joint
draft resolution proposing that the sixth session of the
General Assembly should be hei 1 in Europe. The
French delegation cannot do otherwise than give its
unqualified support to that proposal, the wisdom of
which, is borne out by important considerations of
principle to which considerations of political expediency
lend added weight at the present time.
130. Generally speaking, my delegation has always surported the principle that the main organs 0f the United
Nations should meet away from Headquarter~, at mare
or less frequent intervals. It is not that we attach too
little importance to considerations of economy, which
favour the holding of most meetings at Headquarters,
but that we think that such considerations should not be
permitted to obscure the political or moral advantages
which, we feel, are involved in a reasonable decentralization of the activities of the United Nations organs.
131. Direct contacts between 'the various principal
organs of the United Nations and areas of the world
distant from New York cannot but help the United
Nations to get a quicker and better grasp of the many
local problems. Such contacts also enable the United
~ations to view the world problems before it in a new
11ght. And let us not forget that local public opinion,
whi~h so often is poorly or inadequately informed, finds
in those contacts and in the presence of our organs an
opportunity better to understand our aims and ideals
and to acquaint itself with the machinery which serves
those aims and ideals.
132. Those reasons have ,already led the French delegation to vote on several occasions in favour of the
holding of sessions of the Economic and Social Council
in Geneva and, only a few days ago, in favour of the

324th Meeting-14 December 1950
holding of the twelfth session of that Council in
Santiago,! Chile. Those reasons are eVP l1 more weighty
in the c~\se of a session of the General Assembly, the
supreme organ of the Organization.
133. May I add that a decision of the General Assembly to hold its sixth session in Europe would, in present
circumstances, have a great political and psychological
importance. It would testify to our faith in the Organization and to our confidence that mankind will survive
the crisis through which it is passing. Europeans would
see in it a message of confidence an4 a proof of
solidarity.
134. This psychological aspect of the proposal submitted to us should be emphasized. It largely overrides
the material or financial difficulties which might be
involved in leaving the New York Headquarters for
the 1951 session.
135. My delegation will therefore be especially happy
to vote in favour of the joint draft resolution.
136. Mr. AMMOUN (Lebanon) (translated from
French): My delegation will vote in favour of the
draft resolution presented by the delegations of Bolivia,
Colombia and Peru. It has two reasons for so doing.
137. The first is, naturally, the reason which led the
sponsors of the proposal to submit it. They have
stressed the technical difficulties which might impair
the normal functioning ann the facilities for discussion
of the General Assembly at its next session. We should,
in this connexion, bear in mind the difficulties with
which we are faced now despite the zeal of the Secretariat and the praiseworthy efforts which it has made
and which we should recognize. I do not wish to speak
of the inconvr~nienc:e suffered by delegations which are
compelled each day to make a double journey, the
pleasures of which wear rather thin with time. What we
are concerned with is the considerable loss of time,
which affects our work. At least two hours each dav
are wasted and that represents about one-third of our
time. It has been said that the third session, in Paris,
was longer than the present session. I doubt whether
such a criterion can be applied. What in my opinion
should be considered is the importance of the discussions rather than the number of subjects discussed. In
the circumstances, I am afraid that the difficulties
affecting our work might become even more serious
next year with the dispersal of services and meetings
between Manhattan and Flushing Meadow.
138. The second reason, political expediency, has just
been referred to by the representative of France. The

663

United Nations has decided to establish its He~d..
qt,tarters in New Yark. Nevertheless, when an opportunity arises to hold a session of the General Assembly
or one of its subsidiary organs, such as the Economic
and Social Council or the Trusteeship Council, in some
other countTy, I feel that such an opportunity should
not be lost. Devotion to the work of our Organization
cannot but be strengthened if the United Nations
establishes the strongest possible contacts with the
peoples that are its Members.
139. I am certainly not suggesting that Lite General
Assembly should become an itinerant body. But periodic
visits to various countries would help the peoples to
understand its work, just as they would help the United
Nations to understand the peoples and to know their
needs. One of those needs stands out particularly: the
need for peace and security. The presence of the United
Nations General Assembly on a continent where peace
of mind is more disturbed than anywhere else could not
fail to have some effect. The Assembly should meet in
Europe next year. It can serve the cause of peace there
too and, moreover, it can work even more effectively
for international understanding.
140. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I shall put the draft resolution [A/1593] to the vote.
A roll-call has been requested.
A vote was taken by roll-call.
Saudi Arabia, having been drawn by lot by the
President, was called upon to vote first.
In favour: Saudi Arabia, Syria, Thailand, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet So-'
cialist Republics, Uruguay, Venezuela, Yugoslavia, Bolivia, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador: Ethiopia,
France, Greece, Haiti, Honduras, Iran, Lebanon, Luxembourg, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay! Poland.
Against.: Sweden, Turkey, Union of South Africa,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Yemen, Australia, Canada, O.ina, India, Indonesia,
Israel; Liberia, Nethezlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Pakistan.
Abstaining: United States of America, Afghanistan,
Argentina, Belgium, Brazil, Burma, Denmark, Iceland,
Iraq, Mexico, Philippines.
The draft resolution was adopted by 31 votes to 16,
with 11 abstentions.
The meeting rose at 1.5 p.m.

.P&~nted
~-~~~-------------------------------------in U.SA.
A-40464-Apri11951-3,600 .
