S/PV.9038

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9038th meeting

Friday, 20 May 2022, 10.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Xing Jisheng
Mr. De Rivière
Ms. Oye
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Raghoram
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mrs. Toroitich
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco
Ms. Juul
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Mr. Kariuki

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-35557 (E)
*2235557*

S/PV.9038

The situation in the Middle East

difficult choices again this year, as we have discussed
so often in the past.

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in the meeting: Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator; and
Dr. Farida Almouslem, OB/GYN, Syrian American
Medical Society.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Griffiths.
Mr. Griffiths: Ten days ago, we attended at the
sixth Brussels Conference on supporting the future
of Syria and the region. That event, organized by
the European Union, was an opportunity for the
international community to demonstrate its continued
commitment to the people of Syria, and they did so.
Close to $6.7 billion have been pledged for 2022 and
beyond. My first message is one of sincere gratitude to
all donors for their contributions to the funds that are so
urgently needed, as I hope to outline in these remarks.
Brussels was also an opportunity to remind the
world of the scope of humanitarian needs inside Syria
and in the neighbouring countries. As the Security
Council hears from me each month, they are immense
and growing year by year. Madam President, you know
them all too well.
Despite the considerable funding pledged, the
commitments represent less than 50 per cent of the total
funding requirement for 2022. We need $10.5 billion
for the humanitarian response plan and the Regional
Refugee and Resilience Plan for countries of the region.
This is the largest appeal ever for the Syria crisis,
because we have the largest-ever number of people in
need. What does underfunding mean, though? It means
that we will have to prioritize our response and make
2/19

20/05/2022

The World Food Programme has warned that
further cuts to its programme could materialize by July,
driven by global food price rises and stagnant funding
levels. That would have a devastating impact on people
that depend on its assistance. Indeed, 1.9 million more
could slide into hunger due to the impact of rising food
prices and the effects of the Ukraine conflict, which
I know has been discussed extensively this week in
New York.
I was also pleased to see the level of consensus at the
Brussels Conference on the need to prioritize and focus
on early recovery programming, in which immediate
investments are imperative to support the delivery of
education, water and sanitation, health, electricity
and social protection. Only through a sustainable
commitment to basic services can we make good on
our common commitment to leave no Syrian behind. It
is now critical that the generous pledges announced in
Brussels be converted into early disbursals of funding.
Hostilities, including air strikes and shelling in
north-western Syria, continue to affect civilians,
including women and children. Constant care must be
taken to spare them.
Insecurity continues in Al-Hol camp. So far in
2022, 13 murders and four attempted murders have been
reported in the camp. An incident on 10 May targeted
an international non-governmental organization centre.
As a result, all activities in phase 5 of our security
arrangements are suspended until the safety and
security to humanitarian workers can be reassessed
and ensured.
As I and so many others have said before, the
situation in Al-Hol camp is a disgrace for the 56,000
civilians living there, the vast majority of whom are
women and children, which makes it much worse. In
fact, nearly 10,000 children and their mothers in the
north-east are detained in prisons and prison-like camps.
So, of course, we need to take action. Children should
not be detained based solely on alleged association with
armed groups. They should be released into suitable
care. They need protection and basic services. They
need a family life, and they need a future. Thus we
call once again on all Member States involved to take
urgent action to fulfil their responsibility to repatriate
their citizens through all available routes.
22-35557

20/05/2022

The situation in the Middle East

People living in Al-Hol and the humanitarian
partners serving them desperately need an approach to
safety and security that maintains the civilian character
of the camp and gives them a horizon and a future
beyond the camp.
We are fast approaching summer and its scorching
heat in most parts of Syria. That will lead to increasing
demand for water. Already, water levels in the Euphrates
River are dropping to a critically low point. Nearly
5.5 million people in Syria rely on the Euphrates and its
subsidiaries for drinking water.
The Tishreen Dam Authority has warned that due
to low water levels, the dam is going to be operational
only six hours a day, compromising the provision
of water and the supply of electricity. The supply of
electricity is not a luxury; it is critical to essential
services, as I saw very clearly when I was there last
year in Aleppo. Without electricity, irrigation pumps
cannot function, hospitals and other critical services
cannot be supported and residents must purchase
drinking water, further eroding their purchasing power.
Electricity therefore has an impact on many aspects of
emergency needs.
The Allouk water station continues to work only
intermittently, and pumping has been interrupted
several times in the past month owing to electricity
shortages, resulting, again, in limited water flows.
Al-Hasakah city continues to be supplied through water
trucking. That is not a sustainable solution. It is the last
one that anyone would consider, with its expense and
its inevitable lack of reliability, but it is better than not
having it.
The United Nations and our partners are currently
supporting more than 12,000 students to cross between
areas of control to take examinations at the end of this
month; I remember this also from last year. Those
children are so active in seeking the opportunities to
finish their education; they are our only hope for Syria’s
future, because when we see a generation of children not
having access to education, which is in one sense one of
the worst aspects of conflict, it is the responsibility of
all parties to respect that right, to provide every support
to allow children to travel safely to where they can take
those exams.
We continue our efforts to expand cross-line
humanitarian access. In the north-east, the United
Nations is planning to carry out a cross-line mission

S/PV.9038

in the coming days or week to Ras Al-Ayn to provide
medical supplies, including leishmaniosis medication.
On 16 May, the fourth cross-line convoy delivered
food assistance to north-west Syria to more than 40,000
people. The United Nations is now working on the
modalities of a fifth inter-agency cross-line convoy, in
line with the operational plan that we had submitted
to the Council and discussed before for cross-line
convoys to north-west Syria. The plan focuses on
the implementation of those inter-agency cross-line
convoys to communities in Idlib and Aleppo, and that
plan has been extended through December.
As we all know, the Security Council authorization
for United Nations and partners cross-border assistance
into the north-west expires in just over six weeks.
While we are doing our utmost to expand cross-line
access, leaving no stone unturned in that endeavour, let
me reiterate, as I have done on every occasion in the
past, that cross-line operations cannot under current
conditions replace the size or the scope of the massive
United Nations cross-border operation.
Failure to renew the authorization will disrupt
life-saving aid for the people living in the north-west,
including more than 1 million children.
As we speak, I am delighted to say that my
Deputy, Joyce Msuya, whom members have already
seen frequently in the Council, is completing a visit to
Syria and Jordan to support the humanitarian partners’
response to the crisis there and to identify strategies to
meet the challenges that the coming months will bring.
I will be meeting Joyce and other colleagues on Sunday,
and I will be hearing a lot more about the issues and
priorities that we need to address. We will be all the
better briefed when we meet again, and I look forward
to doing that at our next meeting.
The President: I thank Mr. Griffiths for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Dr. Almouslem.
Dr. Almouslem: I thank you, Madam President,
for the opportunity to brief the Council today. I am
also grateful to brief alongside Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths.
My name is Farida Almouslem. I am an obstetrician/
gynaecologist from Aleppo, Syria. I spent nearly 10
years working in hospitals throughout Syria, supported
by the Syrian American Medical Society and other
humanitarian organizations. I have dedicated my life

22-355573/19

S/PV.9038

The situation in the Middle East

to helping Syrian women through their pregnancies and
have delivered thousands of newborns.
From 2011 to 2016, I worked as an obstetrician/
gynaecologist in Aleppo, including in the eastern part
of the city, which was placed under siege and subjected
to ruthless aerial bombardments. I witnessed hundreds
of atrocities, which are still stuck in my mind. I will
never, ever forget the tears of a woman in her 40s who
was begging me to help her to get pregnant again after
losing her four children all at once because of a barrel
bomb. I cannot forget those moments.
My hospital — called M2 — was repeatedly
targeted by air strikes, including the use of cluster
munitions, barrel bombs and bunker-buster bombs. On
10 December 2016, I was working in an underground
hospital alongside my husband, who is also a physician,
and the other medical staff. We had moved the
operating rooms to the basement due to the heavy
bombardment. After bunker-buster bombs failed to
penetrate the basement, a munition containing chlorine
gas was dropped directly onto the hospital. Because the
gas is heavier than air, it sank into the basement. The
operating rooms quickly turned into gas chambers, yet
we had only one oxygen mask for all of the patients
and doctors. My 8-year-old daughter was there with
me. She struggled to breathe and began to cry. Even
though I myself was struggling to breathe, I gave her
the oxygen mask. Can those here who are parents
imagine that happening to their child, watching him or
her suffocating right in front of their eyes?
The second day, 11 December, another munition
containing chlorine gas was dropped in front of the
hospital. At the time, there was a woman in labour, and
her baby’s first breath was saturated with chlorine. Can
you imagine?
After that, we evacuated the hospital, and
within days we were forcibly displaced from Aleppo
to Idlib on the green buses. My family and I lost
everything — our home, our memories and, most of all,
our dignity when we evacuated. As a survivor, I ask:
where is the accountability?
After that displacement, I continued to work in
hospitals throughout northern Syria. I also directed
schools that trained new midwives and nurses. If I
could summarize my experiences working throughout
those 10 years in Syria, it would be this: tremendous
human suffering. I think of the pregnant woman who
suffered a shrapnel wound to her abdomen, and when I
4/19

20/05/2022

went to perform an emergency caesarian, I discovered
that the baby had been cut in two. I think of the many
women — and the many newborns who died in my
arms — because I did not have any medicine to give
them. I think of the many Syrian women and children
who continue to live in complete poverty. I think
of my own friends and family who remain in Syria,
suffering — educated people who earn the equivalent
of $30 a month in salary, and my parent’s home which
receives electricity only one or two hours a day. Syrians
throughout the country are suffering, and every one of
us has an obligation to help.
I would like to focus on three key points today.
The first is the growing humanitarian needs. As
the Emergency Relief Coordinator explained, the
humanitarian needs continue to grow, while funding
decreases. There must be additional funds provided
in order to prevent further closures of hospitals and
to provide critical nutrition assistance. For the Syrian
American Medical Society alone, nine hospitals will
close at the end of September unless new funding is
secured. These hospitals average a total of 260,000
beneficiaries each year. The Non-Governmental
Organization
Forum
for
non-governmental
organizations operating in north-west Syria estimates
that as many as 3 million beneficiaries will lose access
to services if more funding is not secured. A lack of
funding has already led to difficulties in purchasing
drugs for diabetes, heart disease and chronic respiratory
illnesses. There are also growing gaps in support
for prenatal care and maternal health care, including
for neonatal intensive care units. Combined with the
ongoing high rate of malnutrition, this is resulting in
more complications in pregnancies, and a rising infant
mortality rate.
While funding is urgently needed to support the
humanitarian response, it is also needed to increase
the capacity of the health-care system throughout all
of Syria. Efforts are needed to increase capacity, and
they must also be made to educate new health workers,
particularly nurses and midwives. My own experience
directing nursing and midwifery schools in Syria
showed the tremendous potential in young women who
earn their degrees and serve their communities.
Secondly, I would now like to turn to the crossborder mechanism. The reality is that the enormous
humanitarian needs in Syria require humanitarian
access for all modalities, especially through the crossborder mechanism. The numbers are clear: 4.1 million
22-35557

20/05/2022

The situation in the Middle East

people in north-west Syria are in need of humanitarian
assistance, an increase of 700,000 from last year.
To date, the impact of crossline deliveries to northwest Syria has been minimal when compared to the
needs, and these deliveries have been marked by poor
coordination with non-governmental organization
partners and a lack of proper needs assessments.
Crossline access must be improved through greater
planning and coordination, and it must be ensured that
urgently needed items are delivered. At the same time,
crossline activity cannot replace the enormous crossborder operation currently taking place. Instead, these
modalities should be viewed as complementary tools
to be utilized to meet the humanitarian needs in Syria.
If one looks at the resolution solely through the lens
of humanitarian needs, it is clear that a renewal of 12
months at a minimum is the right thing to do.
Corruption also remains a challenge in every part
of Syria. The Council can address this by requiring
the same strict levels of reporting and oversight for
humanitarian projects in all parts of Syria. If corruption
or aid diversion is uncovered, then there must be
accountability. For those Member States with concerns
about armed groups in north-west Syria, the crossborder mechanism is the single most effective tool to
push back on those groups’ attempts to gain further
control over the civilian population or to divert aid.
My final point is on the mental-health situation
in Syria. After more than a decade of brutal conflict,
the entire population is suffering from psychological
wounds. For some, this trauma can be too much to bear.
One of my closest friends took her own life. Only 24
years old, she was a well-educated midwife who lost
hope and could not find proper psychiatric support. I
was devastated to see someone so young, with so much
to offer the world, feel that there was no hope for the
future. Sadly, her story is not unique.
My own daughter, Huda, has endured many
traumas during her childhood. By the age of eight,
she had experienced siege, starvation, constant aerial
bombardment, chemical weapons, the bombing of her
school and her friends, and forced displacement. Even
her cat and pet bird were killed in air strikes. No child
should have to endure these traumas. Huda is still
affected by these traumas, and she, like millions of other
Syrian children, needs access to quality mental-health
services. More resources must be committed for such
services to be provided throughout all of Syria. We are
already seeing the negative consequences of this lack

S/PV.9038

of services: an increase in suicides, growing cases of
domestic and gender-based violence, and higher rates
of substance abuse. The children of Syria are the
future — what will become of them if they do not get
the help they desperately need?
Over the years, many people have asked me why I do
this work. For me, the answer is simple: it is my duty. In
a conflict in which there have been countless examples
of evil, atrocity and hatred, doctors and humanitarian
workers have been a source of inspiration. They are
the true unsung heroes as they risk their lives for the
sake of others. It is the Council’s duty to support them.
It is the Council’s duty to ensure that they are able to
perform their work freely and without threat of arrest,
torture or aerial bombardment. And if these incidents
do occur, the Council must pursue accountability on
their behalf. It is the Council’s duty to renew the crossborder resolution so that they continue to have the
medicine and tools they need to help their patients. It is
the Council’s duty to fully fund this work. It is the duty
of all of us to require proper monitoring and oversight,
so that what resources do go into Syria are properly
utilized. As doctors and other humanitarian workers
bravely continue this work in Syria, they and the people
they serve need the Security Council’s support now
more than ever.
The President: I thank Ms. Almouslem for
her briefing.
I would like to draw the attention of speakers to
paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in line
with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I make this statement on
behalf of the co-penholders of the Syria humanitarian
file, Ireland and Norway.
I offer many thanks to the briefers for making
clear the sheer breadth and depth of the humanitarian
needs across Syria. As co-penholders, we remain
deeply concerned about the almost 15 million Syrians
who need humanitarian protection and assistance for
their survival.
Soaring food prices have led to widespread and
deepening food insecurity. Humanitarian assistance is

22-355575/19

S/PV.9038

The situation in the Middle East

keeping people alive. We must scale up. We welcome the
substantial pledges made at the Brussels Conference.
They show the continued commitment of donors to
supporting the people of Syria.
Syria is a dangerous place for children to grow
up, as we just heard. In many parts, children and their
families live in fear of death, violence and sexual assault.
Women and girls are put in a particularly vulnerable
situation, underscoring the need for their continued
participation in the design and implementation of the
humanitarian response. We are deeply concerned that
violence and forced displacement have resulted in
limited access to education and health care and have
had dire psychosocial effects on children. Parties to the
conflict must immediately cease the grave violations
and abuses of the rights of children.
We urge all parties listed in the SecretaryGeneral’s annual report on children and armed conflict
(S/2021/437) to develop, and fully implement, action
plans to end, and prevent, violations against children
in Syria.
With
the
overwhelming
and
increasing
humanitarian needs in Syria, it remains critical that the
Security Council stand unified in its resolve to mitigate
them. In resolution 2585 (2021), the Council recalled
the need for all parties to respect the relevant provisions
of international humanitarian law, which includes
ensuring full, safe and unhindered humanitarian
access. Ireland and Norway, as co-penholders, strongly
support the use of all modalities to deliver aid to the
millions of Syrians in need.
This week’s arrival of another humanitarian
convoy across the conflict line into the north-west is
very welcome. We commend the United Nations and
its partners for making progress on those cross-line
deliveries. However, more can, and must, be done. We
call on all parties to support cross-line deliveries to
all parts of Syria, depoliticize aid deliveries and grant
the necessary security guarantees to ensure the safe
passage of cross-line convoys and their personnel.
With several hundred trucks every month, the
cross-border mechanism remains a critical lifeline
for millions in need in north-west Syria. Month after
month, it delivers food, medical items and shelter — all
monitored and checked. It is clear that there is no other
alternative that could replicate the scale, scope and
benefits of that operation. Without the cross-border
6/19

20/05/2022

mechanism, millions of lives would be at even greater
risk. The Council must prevent that from happening.
As co-penholders, we also welcome the progress
in implementing early recovery projects. The increased
funding and recognition of early recovery in the
humanitarian response are important steps. Sustainable
solutions are key to preventing a further increase in the
number of people in need. That work must continue.
The devastating humanitarian situation means
that the Security Council must abide by its unified
and collective duty to support the Syrian people. The
people of Syria are counting on the Council. We must
not fail them.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I have the honour to deliver
this joint statement on behalf of the three African
members of the Security Council (A3), comprising
Gabon, Kenya and Ghana.
We thank Under-Secretary-General Martin
Griffiths and Dr. Farida Almouslem, of the Syrian
American Medical Society, for their briefings. We
welcome the participation of the representatives of
Syria, Iran and Turkey at this meeting.
The humanitarian situation in Syria remains dire
and deserves the continued attention of the international
community to help alleviate the challenges faced by
the people. We therefore welcome the ongoing efforts
by the United Nations and humanitarian partners to
address the increasing protection needs and provide
aid to populations in both Government-controlled and
non-Government-controlled areas.
We note with concern that several factors,
including the protracted conflict, a deteriorating
economy, climate change, the prevalence of the
coronavirus disease pandemic and the lack of access to
basic needs, continue to compound the protection and
humanitarian needs of the Syrian people. Many Syrians
today live under increasing pressure arising from the
limited resources available to both internally displaced
persons and the host communities. Such conditions
have further exacerbated pre-existing levels of poverty
and unemployment, especially in rural areas. The
economic crisis, in particular, has impacted the prices
of basic commodities and contributed to growing food
insecurity. We note with concern that food prices have
been at record levels over the past seven months and
increased by 24 per cent between February and March
alone this year.
22-35557

20/05/2022

The situation in the Middle East

As a result of those daily struggles, negative coping
mechanisms, such as child labour and early marriages,
have been adopted to meet basic needs. Furthermore,
women and girls have increasingly become victims of
sexual and gender-related violence, with poor access to
medical and reproductive health care.
While noting the present strain on global financial
systems, we stress the need for international funding
support to meet the protection, legal and psychosocial
needs of those affected. We heard Dr. Almouslem
discuss the issue of psychological needs quite
eloquently. Without adequate and sustainable resource
backing, many more Syrians, especially women, girls
and children, will continue to suffer disproportionately
from the prevailing conditions in the country.
We condemn all human rights abuses, especially at
the Al-Hol camp, where murder cases are on the rise,
and call for thorough investigations to hold all offenders
accountable for their actions.
We are also concerned by reports of the emerging
use of laser-guided weapons, targeted at civilianpopulated areas, humanitarian centres and hospitals.
In that regard, we emphasize the obligations of the
conflicting parties to protect civilians and civilian
infrastructure from harm.
In view of the worsening humanitarian situation, it
is vital that humanitarian access be granted to all areas
where people are in need. We urge the parties, in line
with their obligations under international humanitarian
law, to eliminate, as much as possible, the physical
and administrative obstructions to the delivery of
life-saving aid to the people.
We urge continuous support for all mechanisms
of aid delivery, noting, however, the extensive reach
of the cross-border delivery mechanisms, which serve
as a crucial lifeline for some 2.5 million Syrians in
north-western Syria. As rightly noted by the SecretaryGeneral, the cross-line mechanism should continue
to function to complement United Nations-facilitated
cross-border deliveries. Ultimately, humanitarian
action anywhere should be guided by the principles of
humanity, impartiality, neutrality and independence.
The perils being visited upon innocent lives by
Security Council-listed groups such as the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham/Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant and Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham continue to be
of grave concern. The A3 underscores the imperative

S/PV.9038

for decisive collective actions to combat those terrorist
groups in a manner that ensures that the victims
receive justice.
Also deserving of urgent attention is the threat
posed by explosive-ordnance contamination in Syria. A
recent report issued by the International Humanitarian
Mine Action actors operating in Syria suggests that
explosive ordnance puts one in two people at risk of
death and injury and impedes the delivery of crucial
humanitarian assistance. Apart from the destruction
to infrastructure, innocent children, in particular,
stand the risk of injury from, or being killed by,
unexploded devices.
Finally, we support United Nations-led efforts in
several parts of the country that are aimed at enhancing
resilience in the communities and stabilizing livelihoods
through early-recovery programmes, thereby avoiding
further destitution and reducing dependence on
humanitarian aid. Early recovery forms part of the
measures needed to help Syria transition from conflict
to peace and to lay the foundation for the subsequent
reconstruction process and sustainable development.
In conclusion, I want to note that the A3 remains
collectively supportive of a comprehensive solution to
the crises in Syria. In that regard, we stress the urgency
of a political process that involves a nationwide
ceasefire and a political settlement negotiated between
the parties that creates stability and at the same time
deals with the drivers of the humanitarian crisis.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I would first
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Griffiths and
Dr. Almouslem for their briefings and for the vital
work that they and their colleagues are doing for the
Syrian people.
Over the coming weeks, the Council will be
deliberating on the future of the United Nations mandate
to deliver cross-border assistance for Syria. When we
authorized the United Nations to deliver that aid, in
2014, more than 10 million people required assistance.
Today around 14.6 million Syrians, more than 80 per
cent of the population, require such assistance. Against
the backdrop of a growing global food crisis, the
ongoing effects of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic and increasing violence, it is clear that the
people of Syria need more support from the international
community. The United Kingdom has supported the
Syrian people from the start of the conflict, having
spent more than $4 billion in aid to date. In the past six

22-355577/19

S/PV.9038

The situation in the Middle East

months, United Kingdom funding on early recovery, a
key element of resolution 2585 (2021), has enabled the
rehabilitation of water networks, agricultural training
and inputs for livestock and vegetable production, as
well as apprenticeships and small business grants to
help create jobs and fill key gaps in the market. At the
Brussels Conference last week, the United Kingdom
committed to contributing nearly $200 million over the
course of 2022. That funding will help further scale
up early recovery and resilience interventions inside
Syria and support vital humanitarian efforts to rebuild
Syrians’ lives.
The United Nations cross-border mandate is at
the heart of that humanitarian support, serving more
than 4 million people in north-western Syria. We have
heard time and time again from the United Nations
and non-governmental organizations on the ground
that there is no viable alternative to the mechanism.
Dr. Almouslem also made that point very clearly and
powerfully today. Closing the Bab Al-Hawa crossing
would reduce women and girls’ access to life-saving
sexual and reproductive health services, severely
disrupt early-recovery efforts and create a devastating
obstacle to ongoing efforts to vaccinate Syrians against
COVID-19. Moreover, without the United Nations goldstandard monitoring mechanism, closing the crossing
would make it easier for aid to fall into the hands of
terrorists. The Council needs to support the Syrian
people, who are trying to build a better future. We
therefore urge members to support the renewal and
expansion of the United Nations cross-border mandate
in July.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Martin Griffiths and Ms. Almouslem for their
briefings. I would also like to commend the United
Nations and the non-governmental organizations on the
ground for their remarkable work.
The Syrian population continues to pay the price
of this war. Hostilities continue daily. The air strikes in
the north-west intensified in late April. The protection
of civilians is still the top priority. After 11 years of
conflict, the humanitarian needs have never been
higher. The Russian war of aggression against Ukraine
is exacerbating food insecurity throughout the world.
Syria is bearing the brunt of the consequences. Nearly
10 million Syrian children need humanitarian aid, a
grim record, and many of them have known nothing
but war.
8/19

20/05/2022

The international community once again showed up
for the sixth Brussels Conference. The European Union
(EU) and its member States have provided more than
€27 billion in humanitarian aid since 2011. The pledges
from the EU and its member States at the Conference
accounted for three quarters of total pledges, of which
France’s announced contribution was €373 million
in aid.
We should make it clear that the renewal of the
cross-border humanitarian aid mechanism has never
been more crucial. The Secretary-General has said
unequivocally that it is a moral and humanitarian
imperative. The number of people in the north-west
in need of assistance has now reached 4.1 million, an
increase of more than 20 per cent since last year. The
cross-border mechanism sends close to 800 aid trucks
to around 2.4 million people every month. Progress in
cross-line access must continue. But as the Secretary
General has pointed out, even if cross-line convoys
were deployed regularly they could not replace crossborder operations. In the north-east, 2.1 million people
need humanitarian aid, 16 per cent more than last
year. The cross-line convoys, which depend on the
goodwill as well as the whims of the Syrian regime,
have never been able to compensate for the closure of
the Al-Yarubiyah crossing point.
France reiterates its call for safe and unhindered
humanitarian access to be guaranteed throughout
Syria. Only a credible, lasting and inclusive political
solution, based on resolution 2254 (2015), will put an
end to this war and finally pave the way for a safe,
dignified and voluntary return for refugees. In the
absence of a credible political settlement, France and
its partners will remain consistent in their position on
reconstruction, normalization and sanctions.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Martin Griffiths for sharing
his insights.
It would not be overstating things to say that in the
context of the issue under discussion today, we are all
concerned first and foremost about the question of the
future of the cross-border mechanism for delivering
humanitarian assistance to Syria, which will expire in
July. Today we heard and will probably continue to hear
opinions about the importance of this mechanism for
Syrian refugees and the need for its extension or even
expansion. The Council members are aware that we
have a different take on this issue and that we cannot
22-35557

20/05/2022

The situation in the Middle East

ignore the fact that if we call a spade a spade, the crossborder mechanism violates Syria’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity.
Nonetheless, a year ago we allowed our colleagues
to persuade us of the need to temporarily retain the
mechanism until deliveries across the line of contact
were fully operational. Resolution 2585 (2021) was
adopted as a result and included a number of other
elements, including support for early-recovery projects.
However, from the very beginning, the resolution’s
implementation was stymied, and the reason for that
immediately became clear. Quite simply, no Council
member wanted to be responsible for working with the
terrorists in Idlib to ensure that they stopped sabotaging
the cross-line convoys. In fact it was only in January,
facing the six-month extension, that they suddenly
recollected the problem and began trying to persuade
us that there were positive trends on the ground that
needed support.
We tried to see things from our colleagues’
perspective and agreed to extend the mechanism for
six months, as a serious down payment, so to speak.
And what do we have now? In principle, we are back
to square one. In terms of establishing sustained
humanitarian deliveries from Damascus, especially
to Idlib, four cross-line convoys in a year can hardly
be called a success. Stories of a lack of security in the
region essential to the convoys’ passage come up solely
in the context of the cross-line deliveries, while nothing
seems to prevent the constant transport of goods across
the Bab Al-Hawa checkpoint. And even if the total will
be six or seven convoys by the time the mechanism is
terminated, that will not change the picture. We see no
systematic efforts happening here.
Despite the vital need for early-recovery projects
outlined in resolution 2585 (2021) in order to establish
normal conditions for Syrians’ lives and livelihoods,
at this stage we can only welcome the intention of the
United Nations to expand those efforts. Martin Griffiths
repeatedly spoke in support of stepping up efforts in that
area. The fact is that the cumulative effect of restoring
basic infrastructure to increase Syrian society’s
resilience post-conflict could represent considerable
savings for donors. We fully support Mr. Griffiths in
that regard, and it is unfortunate that the fundamental
logic of ensuring humanitarian recovery in Syria has
not elicited the same response from donors, who include
countries that signed on to resolution 2585 (2021).

S/PV.9038

The main problem, which runs counter to the
principles of the work of the United Nations, is that the
implementation of early-recovery and reconstruction
projects continues to be hedged about by donor
countries’ political preconditions. It is deplorable that
the United Nations finds it extremely difficult to resist
that pressure. The Secretariat leadership’s shameful
internal guidelines, “Parameters and principles of
United Nations assistance in Syria”, which have
never been abrogated, are an obvious example of that,
including as they do political conditions.
Frankly speaking, in their efforts to preserve the
mechanism at any cost, my colleagues on the Council
increasingly resemble the parents of a lazy, sloppy
student who is threatened with expulsion from school,
pleading for keeping him in school for one more year.
As we are all well aware from our own life experience,
nothing good generally comes of such spoiled children.
And yet for some reason my colleagues are doing
everything they can, despite the facts, in an obstinate
attempt to portray their offspring as an excellent
student. The choice of one of the briefers for today’s
meeting was unfortunately a perfect example of that.
We have frequently pointed out that in general
the discussions on the situation in the Idlib terrorist
enclave and the extremely one-sided attitude of some
members to it have been rather protracted. They are
trying to maintain a status quo that is exceedingly
uncomfortable even for them, without proposing any
solutions or trying to meet any of Damascus’s legitimate
demands. We are not okay with that. We cannot turn a
blind eye to the fact that the terrorists of Hayat Tahrir
Al-Sham, who have been recognized as such by the
international community, have usurped power and are
manipulating humanitarian assistance that could easily
be organized from Damascus if the will were there. But
my colleagues have shown no such desire, leaving us
with no reason to maintain the cross-border mechanism.
And the Al-Nusra Front is openly saying that it will
not let humanitarian cargo from Damascus go through
to the detriment of the cross-border measures. As for
the three zones of Turkish operations in northern Syria,
internal deliveries to those areas have still not begun,
despite the fact that Damascus promptly accommodates
all United Nations requests.
We also feel compelled to point out that the United
Nations continues to try to circumvent the problem
of the destructive consequences of the illegitimate
unilateral sanctions of the European Union and the

22-355579/19

S/PV.9038

The situation in the Middle East

United States for Syria’s economy and the supply of
international humanitarian assistance to it. It is ordinary
Syrians who end up becoming hostages, deprived of
access not just to their oil resources but to agricultural
lands that once fed the entire region. In its lengthy
occupation of these lands of Syria’s, Washington has
essentially been deliberately creating famine in a
country that was once agriculturally self-sufficient.
On 12 May, the United States Treasury issued General
License no. 22, giving foreign private investors access
to north-western and north-eastern Syria, effectively
legalizing Washington’s plundering of Syrian grain
east of the Euphrates. We are sorry to see that since
then the United Nations leadership has been unable to
find an opportunity to comment on this illegal activity
of the United States in Syria, including yesterday, when
we were discussing issues of food security around
the world (see S/PV.9036). And yet ending a situation
counter to international law such as this one would ease
the lives not only of many ordinary Syrians but also
their neighbours, who used to buy Syria’s surplus food
products before the Americans intervened.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Syria has entered its twelfth
year of conflict. There is no end in sight to the suffering
of its people. It remains one of the world’s most complex
humanitarian and protection emergencies, and one that
seems to be going on forever. Syrians inside and outside
the country find themselves, endlessly, at the centre of a
calamitous mix of terrible violence, worsening hunger,
continued poverty and isolation. Millions of Syrians
struggle to survive every month.
The data are depressing. Ninety per cent of Syrians
live in poverty. More than 70 per cent of the country’s
population is in dire need. Sixty per cent suffer from
food insecurity, and in the past two days we heard a
great deal about the fact that more than 800,000 children
are malnourished. Almost 20 per cent of children in
Syria are not in school. More than 150,000 people have
disappeared or are still detained somewhere in Syria or
elsewhere. They must not be forgotten just because they
cannot be seen. More than 36,000 children continued to
be detained for alleged association with armed groups
or for security reasons. Millions of Syrians in the northeast rely mostly on aid that is delivered through crossborder assistance. In July, as we heard and as many
colleagues have mentioned, the cross-border operation
regime will end. With needs growing, it is vital that aid
can reach all who need it.
10/19

20/05/2022

Within that bleak and depressing picture, I would
like to call attention to a particularly and visibly forgotten
place, the Rukban camp, a makeshift settlement housing
about 10,000 internally displaced Syrians in the arid
no-man’s land between the Jordanian, Iraqi and Syrian
borders. Nearly 80 per cent of the camp’s residents are
women and children living in what can only be termed
squalid conditions. It is situated in Governmentcontrolled territory, but the Syrian Government has
kept it under a tight blockade. For more than three years
the Al-Assad regime has blocked United Nations aid
from entering the camp, forcing its residents to survive
on pitiful amounts of smuggled goods. Children in
the camp, who make up half of the population, are at
extreme risk of severe illness and malnutrition. There
is no education, of course, and pregnant women lack
proper attention and service. We call on the regime to
allow unhindered access for humanitarian goods and
personnel to the camp. When people are hungry and
in need, it does not matter who they are or where they
are — there is only need. We have long highlighted the
crucial importance of the July renewal and possible
expansion of the cross-border mandate outlined in
resolution 2585 (2021). Millions of people depend on
it, including, as we heard Under-Secretary-General
Griffiths say, 1 million children.
We reiterate our concern about the humanitarian
situation of women and children in camps and places
of detention in the north-east. We call for the release of
all children deprived of their liberty and support their
reintegration and their reunification with their families.
We reiterate our position that a mechanism on missing
persons and a consultative group would provide needed
support to detainees and forced disappeared and missing
persons in Syria. Humanitarian needs must come first,
but we should not forget that ensuring accountability
and justice for victims remains fundamental to enabling
Syria to make progress towards sustainable peace
and reconciliation.
If we do not help people in need, we fail,
morally and practically. We would only be left with
heartbreaking accounts of helpless victims, as Dr.
Almouslem reminded us this morning. That must not be
allowed. Let us not forget that if we do not assist people
in need, we inadvertently fuel future conflicts. Our
commitment is and should continue to be supporting
Syrians in rebuilding their lives and designing their
futures. Our responsibility is to help and provide
solutions. Geopolitical gains cannot and must not be
22-35557

20/05/2022

The situation in the Middle East

placed above people’s lives. Humanitarian assistance
must always be non-political, based solely on the needs
of the population, and must reach everyone. We must
do more to help Syrians get out of their nightmare. We
must nourish and support their hopes, because no one
has ever built a future without hope.
Mr. Raghuram (India): I join others in thanking
Under-Secretary-General Martin Griffiths for his
briefing today. I also thank Dr. Farida Almouslem for
her very insightful briefing.
The humanitarian situation in Syria, as is evident
from today’s briefing, has seen no major improvement
in the past month. The number of people needing
humanitarian assistance now exceeds 14 million, with
essential food items and fuel in short supply. While the
international community’s focus is on the humanitarian
situation arising out of Ukraine, we must not lose sight
of the suffering of the Syrian people. Making decisive
progress on the political track in Syria is vitally urgent
if we are to alleviate its people’s suffering. In order to
achieve that, all the parties, particularly the external
players, have to show tangible commitment to a political
process that is Syrian-led and -owned and facilitated by
the United Nations, in line with resolution 2254 (2015).
Initiatives taken by the countries of the region to
normalize relations with Syria can also make a positive
contribution to addressing the humanitarian situation.
We need to avoid tying humanitarian and
development assistance to progress in the political
process, which will only exacerbate the human
suffering. There is an urgent need to scale up assistance
and ensure that humanitarian agencies receive the
funding they need to fully execute their plans without
politicizing the people’s basic needs. The international
community needs to take a constructive approach to
promoting projects that can bring much-needed jobs
and economic opportunities to the Syrian people and
thereby help to ease shortfalls. In the face of falling
production of food staples and problems related to
water shortages, it is crucial to address the collective
concerns of the Syrian people with deep seriousness.
We also believe that a comprehensive, nationwide
ceasefire is in the larger interests of the Syrian people.
While cross-border operations are predictable and
important, they cannot continue in perpetuity. We
note the ongoing efforts, including the fourth convoy
from Aleppo, facilitated by Syria, and reiterate that the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs

S/PV.9038

(OCHA) and United Nations agencies should focus
more on enhancing cross-line operations.
India has repeatedly pointed to the looming threat
posed by the resurgence of terrorist groups in Syria.
We cannot discuss the humanitarian situation in Syria
in isolation without mentioning the growing activities
of terrorist groups such as the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL), also known as Da’esh. ISIL’s
January attack on a prison in the city of Al-Hasakah
demonstrated the severity of the problem. Hostilities,
including air strikes and shelling in north-western
Syria, continue to have an adverse impact on civilians,
including women and children. India has consistently
highlighted how external players have contributed to the
growth of terrorist groups in Syria. The international
community’s continuing neglect of this issue will cause
irreparable damage to our collective fight against
terrorism. The situation regarding camps for internally
displaced persons housing women and children also
remains serious, with continuing grave concerns about
the conditions in the camps, where much criminal
activity, including murder, has been reported this year.
We are concerned about the fact that humanitarian
assistance to Syria in 2021 was lower than the previous
year. There is an urgent need to scale it up. In that
regard, we request that OCHA harmonize the data
related to early-recovery and resilience projects in a
comprehensive manner so that the Council can have a
holistic view of it by the end of June, well before the
cross-border authorization expires.
In conclusion, India has continued to extend
development assistance and human resource
development support to Syria through grants and
lines of credits for development projects, supplies of
medicine and food, artificial-limb fitment camps, a
next-generation information technology centre and
capacity-building training programmes. Since the
beginning of the conflict, India has always stood by the
Syrian people in their hour of need and will continue
to do so.
Mr. Xing Jisheng (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Under-Secretary-General Martin Griffiths for
his briefing, and I listened carefully to the statement by
the representative of civil society.
Throughout
the
11-year
Syrian
conflict,
humanitarian issues have been at the centre of the
efforts of the Syrian parties and the international
community. However, the humanitarian needs in the

22-3555711/19

S/PV.9038

The situation in the Middle East

country have increased rather than lessened and are
currently at the highest level ever. According to figures
published by the United Nations, 14.6 million people
are currently in need of humanitarian assistance in
Syria, representing 80 per cent of its total population.
Among them, 12 million are food-insecure. These
deeply alarming and troubling numbers compel the
international community to look more closely at the
situation, consider the issues and take action that is
specifically tailored to them. Humanitarian assistance
to Syria should put the well-being of the Syrian
population first. All parties should work together to
maintain the humanitarian nature of aid and avoid
politicizing humanitarian issues. China has noted
the information from the sixth Brussels Conference
on supporting the future of Syria and the region. We
maintain our position that humanitarian assistance
to Syria should fully respect Syria’s sovereignty and
ownership and serve its people as a whole, free of any
political preconditions.
There has been some progress in cross-line
humanitarian operations since the adoption of
resolution 2585 (2021), with four convoys dispatched
by the United Nations to north-western Syria and the
cross-line programme extended until the end of the year,
which is worthy of positive recognition. In the interests
of safeguarding the Syrian Government’s sovereignty
over humanitarian issues, and in line with the common
practice of international humanitarian relief, the
cross-border operations should gradually transition to
cross-line operations. At present, cross-line relief is
on a smaller scale than cross-border deliveries. The
international community should strive as diligently to
remove the barriers to cross-line operations as it has
done to invest in cross-border relief. The priorities
include ensuring that the relevant parties grant access
to north-western Syria, that humanitarian workers are
safe and secure and that an enabling environment is
created for the distribution of supplies.
The recovery of the Syrian economy will ultimately
be the conclusive way to reduce the country’s
humanitarian needs and overcome its humanitarian
woes, but at the moment it is in the grip of grim
challenges. The Syrian pound continues to depreciate,
and food prices remain at high levels. The Syrian
Government has launched a number of initiatives to
support agricultural development, build infrastructure
and initiate energy cooperation, with some positive
results. China welcomes the allocation by the United
12/19

20/05/2022

Nations of 26 per cent of the Syrian humanitarian
response plan to some 570 early-recovery projects. We
hope that donors will provide adequate funding for those
projects, to the benefit of the entire Syrian population.
The unilateral coercive measures against Syria
have greatly hampered the Syrian Government’s
capacity to mobilize resources, control the pandemic
and undertake reconstruction, and should all be lifted
without delay. Since March, Syria has also been hit
by a fresh fuel crisis, while rampant oil pillaging has
persisted. The entire Syrian people is the rightful
owner of its petroleum resources and the unlawful
practice of pillaging and smuggling the country’s oil
must stop immediately.
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to thank Mr. Mark Griffiths, the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, for his briefing. Mexico
commends his work and determination. We also thank
Dr. Farida Almouslem for her message to us today and
welcome the presence of the representatives of Syria,
Iran and Turkey.
Mexico, like the vast majority of the members of
the United Nations, regrets the increasingly critical
situation facing the civilian population in Syria,
whether due to the direct effect of hostilities or the
multiple consequences resulting from 11 years of
conflict, which have caused massive displacement
of the population and now growing and increasingly
serious food insecurity. That is why Mexico believes
that our discussions on this issue in the Council should
be guided by the humanitarian needs of the population,
which are increasing every month and leaving the people
in extremely dire circumstances. What other proof do
we need of their fundamental needs when 90 per cent
of the population is living below the poverty line? We
would like to focus specifically on some factors that
require urgent attention.
First, mines and explosive devices continue to be
a threat to the population. In 2021 alone they caused
the deaths of 805 people and injured more than
3,000. The impact and potential risk of mines and
unexploded ordnance require urgent action to prevent
further suffering and devastating consequences
for the population. That is why we must prioritize
demining action.
Secondly, the situation of the more than 56,000
inhabitants of the Al-Hol camp, as Mr. Griffiths
22-35557

20/05/2022

The situation in the Middle East

explained, is truly deplorable and particularly affects
women and children. The insecurity in that camp, in
addition to the lack of basic services for its inhabitants,
in no way makes it a nurturing environment for
children. We cannot lose sight of this crisis, which is
why we reiterate our call to prioritize the repatriation
and reintegration of nationals of other countries who
are still in Syria.
Thirdly, regarding humanitarian access, we
welcomed the crossing to Sarmada on 16 May of a
fourth humanitarian aid convoy, and the plans to
continue developing that access route until December,
and we recognize the progress it represents in the
implementation of resolution 2585 (2021). However,
given the growing humanitarian needs of the
population, as was said this morning, the humanitarian
aid that enters through the north-west between the
conflict lines is still only complementary to that of the
Bab Al-Hawa border crossing. At the moment, crossline convoys cannot replace the more than 800 trucks
carrying humanitarian assistance that enter through
the Bab Al-Hawa cross-border crossing every month.
Through Bab Al-Hawa alone, 1.8 million people receive
food assistance. That is why Mexico firmly believes in
the vital importance of renewing the authorization of
that single transborder crossing, which constitutes a
last hope of survival for thousands and thousands of
Syrians. Likewise, we take note of the visit of Ms. Joyce
Msuya, Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator.
We hope that her mission will translate into concrete
actions that can expand humanitarian access. We look
forward to the next report from Mr. Griffiths.
Fourthly, we consider it a positive that the
humanitarian response plan for Syria emphasizes
the priority of early-recovery projects, an essential
component of resolution 2585 (2021). Those projects
also enable the discussion on the situation in Syria
to focus on longer-term options, particularly with
regard to solving the problems of temporary housing
and other aspects of human development. Mexico
reiterates the fundamental importance of achieving an
end to hostilities in order to concentrate efforts on the
political process.
In conclusion, we hope that Council members will
negotiate in good faith so that in July the Council will
remain united, focused solely on the humanitarian
situation in Syria and thereby demonstrating by its
deeds its genuine desire to alleviate the human suffering

S/PV.9038

resulting from 11 years of conflict, particularly with
regard to a generation of young girls and boys who, as
others have said today, have known nothing but war.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank Mr. Martin Griffiths for his important
briefing today. We welcome the recent visit of Deputy
Emergency Relief Coordinator Joyce Msuya. We also
thank Dr. Farida Almouslem for her briefing, which
highlighted the difficult conditions for women in Syria.
At the outset, we would like to commend the
convening of the sixth Brussels Conference earlier this
month, which we believe is a positive step that we can
build on to support the future of Syria and the region.
The Conference also emphasized the international
community’s continuing solidarity with the Syrian
people. Although the provision of basic humanitarian
assistance remains a critical issue, the scope of current
talks should be broadened to include discussions on how
to restore security, stability, and prosperity to Syria.
After 12 years of crisis, Syrians are still living in camps
that do not meet the most basic human needs. In order
to move beyond short-term solutions, the international
community must take concrete steps to end the
humanitarian crisis in a sustainable manner and ensure
that the Syrian people live in dignified conditions.
In the light of the upcoming mandate renewal of
resolution 2585 (2021), I would like to reiterate our
calls to consider the renewal of the cross-border aid
mechanism to Syria as a critical decision that must be
made in an objective and logical manner that reflects
the facts on the ground. Regardless of any differences
over other dossiers, we need to work together on this
one to ensure that cross-border and cross-line aid
reaches those in need.
While the cross-border aid delivery mechanism is
not perfect, it remains necessary at this stage in order
to ensure the delivery of all aid to all in need in northwestern Syria. In that context, the United Arab Emirates
supports the delivery of humanitarian aid by every
means, including cross-line assistance. We welcomed
the extension of the United Nations operational plan
until December, as well as the deployment of a fourth
cross-line convoy to north-western Syria, which
included vital food aid. Given that the Bab Al-Hawa
crossing is the only humanitarian passage for crossborder aid delivery to Syria, its security and stability
must be maintained by all parties. At the same time,
we must work to increase the number of cross-line aid

22-3555713/19

S/PV.9038

The situation in the Middle East

deliveries, and all the parties on the ground should
work together to remove any security obstacles that
could hinder the delivery of aid.
We are deeply concerned about the dire security
situation and the accompanying deteriorating
humanitarian situation in Al-Hol camp, especially
with the recent increase in murders and violence this
past week, including violence committed against
humanitarian actors. We want to stress that our success
in addressing the humanitarian conditions in the camp
depends on addressing the security conditions there,
which are impeding the delivery of drinking water
and halting life-saving activities. In that context, it is
important for the camp to preserve its humanitarian
and civilian nature and for citizens of other countries
to be repatriated. In that regard, we welcome the recent
repatriation of 500 families from Al-Hol to Iraq, most
of them women and children. We encourage other
countries that have citizens in the camp to take similar
steps. Syrian women must also be supported and
protected, and their resilience strengthened, especially
in the camps, where women and girls are at risk of
sexual and gender-based violence.
Finally, we urge the international community to
make additional efforts to support the speedy restoration
of civilian infrastructure and vital sectors, especially
education and health, that have been affected by the
conflict. That is particularly important because the
current humanitarian response is unsustainable, owing
to persistent gaps in funding. It is therefore important
to scale up international investment in food and water
as part of early-recovery efforts in order to help to
strengthen the humanitarian response for Syrians.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I would like to start
by thanking Under-Secretary-General Griffiths and
Dr. Almouslem for their briefings and reiterating my
delegation’s concern about the situation in Syria. I also
want to welcome the representatives of Syria, Iran and
Turkey to today’s meeting.
Yesterday we met here for a timely open debate
on conflict and food security (see S/PV.9036). As the
monthly average price for the standard reference food
basket continues to reach record levels in Syria, much
of what we said yesterday applies to our discussion
today. But I would like to highlight one key message.
As the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations and the World Food Programme have repeatedly
pointed out, food insecurity is not a by-product of food
14/19

20/05/2022

scarcity but rather of a lack of affordability and access.
We must therefore ensure that international agencies
are adequately equipped and financed so that food
supplies can continue to reach those in Syria who need
them most.
Brazil also highlights the need for a thorough and
permanent review of the consequences of unilateral
sanctions for the civilian population in a scenario of
acute economic crisis and escalating hunger. We hope
the resources made available after last week’s donor
conference in Brussels will help provide the immediate
assistance needed and contribute to the ongoing earlyrecovery and resilience initiatives aimed at restoring the
provision of essential services such as health, education,
electricity, water and sanitation. We were happy to hear
from the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs that another cross-line convoy took place earlier
this month and that there is already a plan to enable
more deliveries through the rest of the year. Since
humanitarian assistance remains indispensable and
life-saving for millions across Syria, we must continue
to work here for predictable and regular delivery of
international aid to the Syrian people, through both
cross-line and cross-border operations.
In that regard, Brazil reiterates the call to all
parties to comply with their obligation to ensure free
and unimpeded humanitarian access that accords with
the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality
and independence. We also underline the importance
of monitoring all humanitarian operations closely and
meticulously, and of seeking ways to help increase
cross-line modality operations. We have no choice. The
conflict in Syria must remain at the top of our list of
priorities. Today we are here to discuss the immediate
humanitarian needs of the people of Syria. However,
we know that a path through a nationwide ceasefire and
a political solution pursuant to resolution 2254 (2015)
is still the only way out of this decade-long conflict,
which has caused so much destruction and suffering.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.
Let me start by thanking Under-Secretary-General
Griffiths for his tireless work and informative briefing.
My special thanks also go to Dr. Farida Almouslem
and the entire Syrian American Medical Society. Her
statement is an important reminder that millions of
Syrians still lack access to even the most basic health
care, let alone trauma care, for visible and invisible
22-35557

20/05/2022

The situation in the Middle East

injuries. I thank her for her amazing work, which she
describes as doing her duty. It is life-saving work and
carries so many risks in Syria, and I therefore want to
reiterate my gratitude to her.
After more than 11 long years of conflict in
Syria, I worry that the world is in danger of becoming
desensitized to this war — to the plight of the 14 million
Syrians who rely on humanitarian assistance, and to
the dreams of the Syrian people who wish for nothing
more than a peaceful, just and secure future. It does not
matter that we have a host of other crises on our plate.
It does not matter that the Al-Assad regime continues
to impede progress towards a political solution. We
cannot turn our backs on the Syrian people.
As the humanitarian crisis reaches disturbing
new heights, we must fully commit to supporting the
needs of vulnerable Syrians. That is why we are having
three meetings devoted to Syria during our Security
Council presidency this month. It is why I wanted to
make a point of travelling in person to Brussels to
announce that the United States will provide more than
$800 million in new humanitarian assistance for the
Syrian people — the largest pledge we have ever made
at the annual Brussels Conference. That assistance
includes essential food, health, shelter, water and other
critical relief that will go to helping those in dire need,
but also towards early recovery, so that we can prevent
people from getting to that dire stage in the first place.
And that is why I will be traveling back to Bab Al-Hawa
in the coming weeks for briefings and meetings on the
Turkish-Syrian border so that I am up-to-date on the
situation on the ground, because, as I have said many
times before, no amount of aid will be enough if we
cannot actually get it to those in need.
The United States is firmly committed to
implementing all aspects of resolution 2585 (2021)
to ensure that aid can reach Syria, including via both
cross-line and cross-border assistance. And we are
doing everything possible to facilitate additional aid
to Syria, including through our recent issuance of a
General License intended to promote investment in
north-western and north-eastern Syria. We applaud
the fourth cross-line delivery, made on 16 May, and
hope to see such deliveries become more frequent. But
we know that cross-line aid delivery cannot match the
volume or the efficiency of cross-border deliveries.
That is not conjecture — it is fact. The SecretaryGeneral made it abundantly clear, in paragraph 77 of
his most recent report (S/2022/330), that

S/PV.9038

“cross-line convoys, even if deployed regularly,
cannot replicate the size and scope of the United
Nations cross-border operation, which remains a
life-saving modality for millions of people in need
in the north-west.”
Attesting to that reality, the May cross-line delivery
provided food for 43,500 people. By contrast, in a
typical month, United Nations cross-border aid through
Bab Al-Hawa delivers enough food for 1.4 million.
There is simply no comparison, and Under-SecretaryGeneral Martin Griffiths reiterated that fact.
Last year, the Council voted unanimously
to continue the mandate for the mechanism (see
S/PV.8817) in an important, life-saving decision for
millions of people. It demonstrated the best of what we
can do when we work together. That is why I found it
odd that the Russian Federation suggested that it was
somehow misled into supporting the mandate, whose
benefits are obvious to all of us. This year, we urge
the Security Council not only to renew the mandate
for the United Nations cross-border assistance delivery
mechanism but also to increase the number of crossing
points to meet the rising demand for humanitarian aid
in Syria. The United Nations estimates that 14.6 million
Syrians need humanitarian assistance in 2022, a nearly
10 per cent increase over the past year. We simply have
to get this done, both the renewal and the expansion.
It is vital to so many people, especially at a time when
food and fuel prices are skyrocketing, forcing families
to make difficult decisions about whether to buy food,
medicine or fuel.
Nearly 2 million Syrians are on the brink of being
unable to meet their basic food needs, and 12 million
are already suffering from acute food insecurity. Those
are impossibly large numbers — more than the entire
populations of New York City and Paris combined.
And they are not just sobering statistics, these are real
people who are going hungry and do not know where
they will get their next meal. They live every single day
with uncertainty about how they will eat, how they will
get water, medicine or fuel and when they will know
peace. We cannot become desensitized to their needs
and dreams. We have to stay focused on this crisis. And
right now, that means renewing and expanding crossborder assistance.
It is in the interests of all of us, including Russia
and Syria, to prevent a dire humanitarian situation in
Syria from growing worse and more desperate. It is in

22-3555715/19

S/PV.9038

The situation in the Middle East

everyone’s interests, in fact. That is why I repeat that
last year the Council voted unanimously to renew the
mandate and why we must do so again this year, in the
interests of all Syrians. This past week we have been
working together to address global food insecurity.
Renewing and expanding cross-border assistance is one
clear way for us to take on hunger. It is fully within
our power. The actions we took in the Council last year
saved countless lives, and we can do it again this year.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I would again like to draw the attention of speakers to
paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in line
with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): I would like to begin by mentioning an
exceptional and extremely important development,
which is the President of the Syrian Arab Republic’s
granting of a general amnesty, pursuant to Syria’s
legislative decree no. 7 of 30 April, for terrorist
crimes committed by Syrians prior to the date of its
issuance, except for crimes that led to a person’s
death, as laid down in Syria’s anti-terrorism law and
penal code. We want to emphasize that the decree does
not include foreign terrorists and that their countries
of origin remain responsible for repatriating them
and their families from Syria. That legally, socially
and politically exceptional decree comes under the
framework of measures that the Syrian State has been
taking for years to improve the humanitarian situation
in Syria, consolidate national reconciliation, deepen
the values of tolerance, provide appropriate conditions
for the return of displaced persons and refugees to their
homeland, reintegrate all Syrian citizens into their
local communities and restore security and stability in
the Syrian Arab Republic.
Syria’s Ministry of Justice and competent legal and
judicial authorities began implementing the decree’s
provisions throughout the country immediately after
it was issued. They have released large numbers of
detainees and cancelled all warrants for prosecutions,
searches, arrests and summons or judgments in absentia
issued against any Syrian citizen inside or outside the
16/19

20/05/2022

country, with immediate effect, and without the need to
refer to any judicial, legal or security authority.
I would like to recall that since 2011, the President
of the Republic has issued 20 general amnesty decrees
benefiting tens of thousands of Syrian citizens inside
and outside the country. The terrorism court has
released 28,864 detainees. Additionally, more than
272,000 Syrian citizens have been involved in the
processes of settlement and national reconciliation in
Syria’s various governorates, enabling them to return
to their normal lives. The Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic calls for an objective and balanced
consideration of the steps it has taken. It urges various
countries to abandon their mistaken policies and take a
positive and constructive political approach by engaging
responsibly with the Syrian Government, free from any
political considerations that are not consistent with the
interests, security and well-being of the Syrian people.
The Syrian Government’s efforts to achieve
economic and social stability and to improve its people’s
living conditions have come up against the persistently
hostile practices of some Western countries and their
allies and their continuing violations of the principles
of international law and the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations. A case in point is the Turkish and
United States armed forces’ continuing illegal foreign
military presence on the Syrian territories and their
sponsorship of terrorist organizations and separatist
militias and looting of our national wealth, including
oil, gas and agricultural crops, not to mention the
economic terrorism that results from the imposition of
unilateral coercive measures on the Syrian people.
The recent decision of the United States
Administration to grant a licence for economic activities
in specific areas in north-eastern and north-western
Syria controlled by separatist militias and terrorist
organizations demonstrates its direct support for such
illegal entities and constitutes a flagrant violation of
the sovereignty, independence and unity of the land
and people of the Syrian Arab Republic. It is a grave
breach of the relevant Security Council resolutions
and an attempt to impose an illegitimate situation and
a discriminatory approach on Syrian citizens, based
on offering support to those who are loyal to and
influenced by the United States Administration while
punishing those who reside in areas under the control
of the Syrian State.
22-35557

20/05/2022

The situation in the Middle East

Furthermore, this month we witnessed the holding
of another so-called Brussels Conference, identical to
the others, on supporting the future of Syria and the
region. The fact that the organizers of the Conference
excluded the Syrian Government from its work and
barred Russia’s participation, in addition to its lacking
United Nations sponsorship, has reduced the Conference
to a gathering of Western countries known for their
politicization of humanitarian issues and deviation
from the internationally approved guiding principles
for humanitarian action. Those Conferences are nothing
but a smokescreen created by their organizers to cover
up their practices against my country, at a time when
they are imposing collective punishment and a stifling,
inhumane siege on the Syrian people that prevents them
from meeting their basic living needs. Meanwhile, they
continue to insist on attaching politicized conditions
to humanitarian and development work, hindering the
implementation of resilience and early-recovery projects
and the rehabilitation of damaged infrastructure that
would allow for the dignified, voluntary and safe return
of refugees and displaced persons.
Those aggressive policies against my country were
accompanied by direct military aggression carried out
by the Israeli occupation forces on Syrian territory, the
latest of which was the firing of missiles at some parts of
the central region on the evening of Friday, 13 May. That
aggression resulted in the martyrdom of five people,
including one civilian. Seven civilians, including
a girl, were also injured, heavy material losses were
suffered and several fires broke out in the forests of the
Masyaf countryside. That Israeli aggression coincided
with a terrorist attack launched by terrorist groups in
north-western Syria against units of the Syrian Arab
Army, which led to the martyrdom of 10 soldiers and
the wounding of others. That confirms once again the
continuous coordination between the Israeli occupying
authorities and their terrorist tools. The Government
of my country has informed the Secretary-General and
the members of the Security Council of those attacks
and demanded that they assume their responsibilities
and put an end to the repeated Israeli attacks, which
pose a serious threat to regional and international peace
and security.
My country facilitated the passage of a fourth
United Nations convoy from Aleppo to north-west Syria
this week, including 14 humanitarian aid trucks, and we
look forward to enhancing cross-line aid delivery and
removing the obstacles imposed by the Turkish regime

S/PV.9038

and its tools of terrorist organizations. Syria reiterates
its position regarding the so-called cross-border aid
mechanism in view of the mechanism’s continuous
violation of Syria’s sovereignty, unity and territorial
integrity and of its serious flaws, which some are trying
to cover up.
Before I conclude, I would like to stress that with
regard to what the Turkish regime has stated about
creating a safe zone in the north of my country, such an
attempt is an anti-Syria project. Its aim is to achieve a
divisive, colonial goal while establishing a certain area
that helps implement terrorist plots against the Syrian
people. The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
condemns such statements and projects, which
undermine the unity and sovereignty of the Syrian
territories. We urge the international community not
to bargain with the Erdoğan regime over the lands of
others and not to support or fund such projects, which
are based on genocide, changing the demographic status
and harming the rights of the Syrian people. That would
have catastrophic repercussions on security, peace and
stability in the region and the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
I would like to thank the briefers for their statements.
Conflict, foreign intervention, terrorism, and
occupation have wreaked havoc on the Syrian people
for more than a decade. In recent years, unilateral
sanctions have also exacerbated the economic and
humanitarian crises in Syria. Despite the fact that
resolution 2585 (2021) supports early-recovery and
reconstruction projects, as well as the provision of
basic services, the continued unilateral sanctions have
unfortunately stymied the resolution’s implementation,
impeding Syria’s reconstruction efforts and hampering
humanitarian aid delivery in various ways, even
delaying the return of refugees and displaced persons.
Furthermore, those illegal measures have also
hampered the Syrian Government’s ability to achieve
economic and social stability and improve the living
conditions of Syrians. It is irresponsible, immoral
and illegal under international law to use unilateral
sanctions to starve Syrian civilians. Those illegal and
destructive measures must end immediately. Claiming
to care about the difficult humanitarian situation in
Syria while backing and imposing unilateral sanctions
against the Syrian people is hypocritical.

22-3555717/19

S/PV.9038

The situation in the Middle East

We support the Syrian Government’s full
cooperation with the United Nations and the numerous
humanitarian organizations involved in cross-line
aid delivery as a safe and legal method to help the
people in need. Under the current circumstances, the
provision of humanitarian aid is critical, and political
circumstances should not be allowed to prevent the
delivery of humanitarian aid. In that context, full
respect for Syria’s sovereignty, territorial integrity
and national unity must be observed. We also reiterate
that the cross-border aid delivery mechanism is an
exceptional temporary measure imposed by certain
circumstances and that humanitarian aid to those in
need must be delivered in cooperation and coordination
with the Syrian Government and from within the Syrian
territory. That will help prevent aid from being diverted
to terrorist groups.
We applaud Syria’s Government, United Nations
agencies and humanitarian partners for continuing
to expand the scope and frequency of humanitarian
relief operations. In that regard, we commend the
Syrian Government’s efforts in facilitating the passage
of a fourth United Nations convoy from Aleppo to
north-west Syria earlier this week. We also welcome
the Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs’ three-day visit to Syria on 17 May, as well
as her meeting with Syrian officials. We reaffirm our
commitment to Syria’s sovereignty, territorial integrity,
unity and political independence, as well as its efforts
to combat terrorism. We strongly condemn Israel’s
continued occupation of the Syrian Golan, as well
as its repeated violations of Syria’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity, particularly those that are targeting
civilians and civilian objects. We demand that the
Security Council hold that regime accountable for such
acts of aggression and malice. Moreover, the illegal
presence of foreign forces in parts of Syria, which has
created ideal conditions for terrorist activities, must
end immediately.
Finally, we support the initiatives to facilitate
the repatriation of refugees and internally displaced
persons and are willing to provide assistance to ensure
the success of such endeavours. Any initiative on Syria
must be supported by the Syrian Government and the
United Nations and respect Syria’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
18/19

20/05/2022

Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): I would first like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Griffiths for his briefing. I
also thank Dr. Farida Almouslem for her remarks.
The conflict in Syria has now entered its twelfth
year. As the war persists year after year, the scale of
the humanitarian suffering also continues to grow.
This year, an estimated 14.6 million people are in
need of humanitarian assistance, a number that has
grown by 9 per cent since 2021. We may reference
such statistics somewhat easily in this Chamber, but
behind each number and percentage there are real
human beings — mothers, fathers, children, wives
and husbands — each with their own story, pain and
loss, and very often with their own shattered hopes for
the future.
Since the war broke out in Ukraine, the
international community has engaged in a colossal
mobilization to help the millions of innocent civilians
in the middle of Europe. We have done so rightly and
will continue to put forward all the efforts that we can.
By the same token, we cannot and should not forget our
responsibility towards the millions of Syrians who have
been suffering all kinds of attacks and violations at the
hands of a brutal regime and terrorist organizations for
more than a decade now. We simply cannot afford to let
the humanitarian situation in Syria be sidelined on our
global agenda.
Let us not forget that the Syrian conflict continues
to pose a grave threat to international peace and
security. This war is still the primary breeding ground
for one of the most urgent humanitarian crises in the
world — a crisis of catastrophic proportions. Yet the
United Nations Syria humanitarian response plan
received only 46 per cent of the funds required for the
year 2021. That comes at a time when the needs have
reached unprecedented levels. For the 2020 to 2023
period, the United Nations will require $4.4 billion in
funding to be able to fully support everyone in need
within the country. To put it simply, more will be
needed, not less. The international community has to
ensure that humanitarian aid continues in an increasing
manner and without interruption.
We are now weeks away from the renewal of
the United Nations cross-border mechanism. The
humanitarian situation in north-west Syria continues
to deteriorate. That is evidenced by United Nations
reports indicating that the number of people in need
of humanitarian aid in north-west Syria rose from
22-35557

20/05/2022

The situation in the Middle East

3.4 million in 2021 to 4.1 million in 2022, for an increase
of more than 20 per cent. That means that 93 per cent
of the entire population in north-west Syria depends
on international aid. Some 3.1 million people need
medical assistance, while more than 2.8 million people
remain internally displaced — not to mention the fact
that 58 per cent of the people in displacement sites are
children. According to the World Food Programme,
food prices are up by as much as 67 per cent since the
start of the war in Ukraine, which has become an added
cause of food insecurity, impacting 3.1 million people
in north-west Syria.
In the face of the extremely precarious humanitarian
situation, the United Nations cross-border mechanism
has proved itself to be a life-saving instrument for
millions of Syrians. It is one of the most sophisticated,
scrutinized and transparent humanitarian assistance
systems ever put in place. The most recent cross-line
humanitarian aid delivery to Idlib took place this week.
Turkey remains committed to facilitating the safe
continuation of those missions. However, the crossline convoys cannot in any way replace or replicate the
size and scope of the enormous cross-border operation.
There is simply no alternative to the cross-border
operation for addressing the acute needs. The members
of the Council have an obligation to provide the millions
of Syrians squeezed in the north-west with long-term

S/PV.9038

support and certainty. The extension of the cross-border
mandate is a moral and humanitarian imperative, which
should be guided solely by humanitarian considerations
and not be politicized.
This week the United Nations is hosting the firstever International Migration Review Forum. We have
heard many wise words and strong commitments from
Member States in that regard. As the representative of
the largest refugee-hosting country in the world since
2014, let me also highlight the burden on the shoulders
of the neighbouring countries, which should not be
forgotten. We all know that the only way to stop the
suffering in Syria is a comprehensive political solution
to the conflict, in line with resolution 2254 (2015). The
longer we fail to effectively address the root causes of
the crisis, the more acute its repercussions will become.
Principled, responsive and effective action is needed
now more than ever to alleviate the humanitarian
crisis and produce a lasting political solution to the
Syrian conflict.
Regarding the hallucinatory statement made
by the representative of the criminal Syrian
regime — I repeat that I do not consider him as my
legitimate counterpart — I will therefore not respond
to his delusional accusations.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

22-3555719/19
