S/PV.8996

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

8996th meeting

Wednesday, 16 March 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Abushahab . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Arab Emirates)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Tirumurti/Mr. Ravindran
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in Libya

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-28990 (E)
*2228990*

S/PV.8996

The situation in Libya

Allow me to expand on the points just outlined.

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Libya to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs; and Ms. Jazia Jibril Mohammed
Shuaiter, civil society briefer.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Ms. DiCarlo, Ambassador T. S. Tirumurti,
Permanent Representative of India, in his capacity as
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya,
and Ms. Shuaiter.
I now give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
Ms. DiCarlo: I thank the President for the
opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
situation in Libya.
Since my last briefing to the Council on 24 January
(see S/PV.8952), there have been several substantial
developments in the country. The Libyan executive is
facing a crisis that could, if left unresolved, lead to
instability and parallel Governments in the country.
The United Nations is exerting significant efforts to
resolve this crisis. We aim to bring together Libyan
stakeholders to agree on a constitutional basis for the
holding of elections as soon as possible.
On the economic front, there has been some progress
in advancing the reunification of the Central Bank. On
the security track, the focus is currently on protecting
the work of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission (JMC)
from the negative impact of the political crisis and
on facilitating progress towards the withdrawal of
mercenaries and foreign fighters. Regrettably, the
humanitarian and human rights situations continue to
be sources of concern.
2/18

16/03/2022

Following the postponement of national elections,
originally set for December 2021, the House of
Representatives and the High State Council focused on
appointing a new interim Government. They also agreed
to chart a process to amend the 2017 constitutional
proposal and to a path towards elections.
On 10 February, the House of Representatives
adopted the twelfth constitutional amendment,
reportedly after achieving consensus with the High
State Council. The process set out in the constitutional
amendment calls for the appointment by 24 February
by the House of Representatives and the High
State Council of a constitutional review committee
representing the three regions of Libya. The review
committee never materialized.
On 10 February, the House of Representatives, with
the endorsement of 52 High State Council members,
also designated Mr. Fathi Bashagha, a former Minister
for the Interior, to form a new Government, which
would be presented to the House of Representatives for
a vote of confidence.
The United Nations took note of both the vote
on the twelfth constitutional amendment and the
designation of a Prime Minister. We advised the House
of Representatives that the vote of confidence on the
proposed new Government should be transparent and
consistent with Libyan laws and regulations. However,
on 24 February, the High State Council rejected
the formation of a new Government and the twelfth
constitutional amendment.
On 1 March, the House of Representatives held a
vote of confidence on the new Government. The United
Nations received reports that the vote was marred by
procedural flaws and threats of violence against some
members of the chamber and their families. These
shortcomings affected the credibility of the process.
In a statement on 2 March, the Secretary-General
expressed concern that the vote fell short of standards
of transparency and procedure. On 3 March, members
of Mr. Bashagha’s Cabinet were nevertheless sworn in
by the House of Representatives.
Since the 1 March vote, the situation on the ground
has remained relatively calm. However, we have
observed increasingly threatening rhetoric, growing
political tensions and divided loyalties among the
armed groups in western Libya. The Government of
22-28990

16/03/2022

The situation in Libya

National Unity leadership has rejected the legitimacy
of the vote, stating that it will only transfer power to an
elected Government. Meanwhile, Mr. Bashagha insists
he is heading the legitimate Government.
Our priority is to focus on fulfilling the aspirations
of the more than 2.8 million Libyans who have
registered to vote. They should be able to choose their
leaders through credible, transparent and inclusive
elections, according to an agreed upon constitutional
and legal framework.
The Special Adviser of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Stephanie Williams, has continued her consultations
with a broad cross-section of Libyan political and
security actors and civil society. The United Nations
is focusing its efforts on building consensus among
Libyan institutions to hold elections as soon as possible.
We aim to convene a joint committee of members of the
House of Representatives and the High State Council
with the objective of achieving agreement by both
bodies on a constitutional basis that would lead to
elections this year.
On 3 March, Special Adviser Williams invited
the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the
President of the High State Council to appoint six
members each to form that joint committee. The
leaders of the House of Representatives and the High
State Council responded favourably to the initiative.
Yesterday the High State Council nominated its
representatives to the joint committee. We expect the
House of Representatives to do the same in the coming
days to avoid further delays in the process.
I am encouraged by the support the United Nations
initiative is receiving from Libyans, but also from the
Presidency Council. International partners have also
welcomed the initiative. Separately, Special Adviser
Williams has offered her good offices to mediate
between Mr. Abdul Hamid Mohammed Dbeibah and
Mr. Bashagha to overcome the current political impasse.

S/PV. 8996

while, on 9 and 10 March forces in western Libya
supporting either side moved towards the capital. Special
Adviser Williams engaged both sides and managed to
reduce tensions. The United Nations continues to urge
both parties to engage in a constructive dialogue to
resolve the political impasse and refrain from unilateral
actions that could result in further divisions.
On the security track, the 5+5 Joint Military
Commission continues to take steps to implement
its action plan for the withdrawal of foreign fighters,
foreign forces and mercenaries from Libya. The
ceasefire monitoring component of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) continues to work
closely with the JMC to establish an operational hub
in Sirte.
Libya’s economic sector continues to suffer from a
lack of oversight and clarity on public spending. Since
there was no approved national budget in 2021, the
Central Bank of Libya issued payments for public-sector
salaries and subsidies on the basis of the last approved
budget. Those payments are being supplemented by
extraordinary spending measures requested by the
Government of National Unity from the Central Bank.
A controversy over budgetary payments inhibited
the functioning of the National Oil Corporation. On
9 January, negotiations between the Government of
National Unity and the Petroleum Facilities Guard
over non-payment of salaries averted a shutdown of
oil production in parts of the country. Despite those
concerns, I am nevertheless pleased to report that the
Governor and the Deputy Governor of the Central
Bank of Libya launched a programme to reunify the
institution, based on the recommendations of the
independent audit of the Bank in July 2021.

As long as the stand-off over executive legitimacy
continues, Libya could again see two parallel
Administrations. That could lead to instability, and
possibly unrest, and deal a severe blow to the prospect
of elections.

The human rights situation in Libya remains deeply
worrisome. UNSMIL observed an increase in hate
speech, defamation and threats, as well as incitement
to violence and acts of violence against activists,
journalists and political actors, including women. State
and non-State actors continued to arbitrarily arrest
and detain human rights activists. In eastern Libya in
particular, national security laws were often arbitrarily
applied. Meanwhile, a lack of due process and fair trial
standards marred proceedings in military courts.

There have been worrisome developments since
the vote of confidence that took place in the House of
Representatives on 1 March. Local flights between
Tripoli and cities in eastern Libya remain suspended,

Migrants and refugees at sea continue to be
intercepted by Libyan authorities and transferred to
formal and informal detention centres, where they
reportedly suffer serious human rights violations.

22-289903/18

The situation in Libya

S/PV.8996

Deaths in custody, torture, starvation and extortion
also have been reported. The United Nations reiterates
its readiness to work with Libyan authorities to
strengthen migration governance and border control
in line with international law and in cooperation with
international partners.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, the
United Nations recorded a further decrease in the
number of internally displaced persons, from 179,000 at
the end of 2021 to 168,000 by 5 March. However, forced
evictions by local authorities are a growing concern.
The need for durable solutions for the physical, material
and legal safety of internally displaced persons remains
a top priority.
Libya is now facing a new phase of political
polarization. That risks dividing its institutions once
again and reversing the gains achieved over the past
two years. We know from experience what unilateral
actions, divided Government and an unending transition
may hold in store for Libya. We remain convinced that
credible, transparent and inclusive elections, based on a
sound constitutional and legal framework, are the only
solution to the current stalemate.
I urge the members of the Security Council to
convey this message to the Libyan parties, to call for
responsible leadership by the Libyan institutions and
to remain united in support of United Nations efforts
to assist Libya in its path to becoming a peaceful and
stable country.
The President (spoke
Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.

in

Arabic):

I

thank

I now give the floor to Ambassador Tirumurti.
Mr. Tirumurti: In accordance with paragraph 24 (e)
of resolution 1970 (2011), of 26 February 2011, I have
the honour to report to the Security Council on the work
of the Committee established by the same resolution.
The report covers the period from 25 January to
16 March 2022. The Committee conducted its work
using the silence procedure with the aim of facilitating
the implementation of the sanctions measures.
Starting with the arms embargo measure, the
Committee received a letter from the United Arab
Emirates through which it elected to inform the
Committee of the transfer of non-lethal material
intended solely for security or disarmament assistance
to the Libyan Government, pursuant to paragraph 13 (a)
of resolution 2009 (2011), as modified by paragraph 10
4/18

16/03/2022

of resolution 2095 (2013). The Committee is considering
an exemption request submitted by Germany, invoking
paragraph 13 (b) of resolution 2009 (2011), which
pertains to the supply of small arms, light weapons and
related materiel, temporarily exported to Libya for the
sole use of, inter alia, United Nations personnel. The
Committee also responded to a request for guidance
from Turkey in relation to the arms embargo, as well
as a query from Sri Lanka in connection with the
sanctions regime.
In relation to the assets freeze, no negative
decision was taken by the Committee in relation to a
notification under paragraph 19 (a) of resolution 1970
(2011) submitted by Switzerland. The Committee
is considering a notification invoking paragraph 19
(a) of same resolution submitted by Bahrain, which
was previously submitted under paragraph 21 of that
resolution. The Committee also received a notification
submitted by Luxembourg, invoking paragraph 19 (a).
No negative decision was taken by the Committee in
relation to part of the notified amount, whereas, for the
other part, the Committee advised that Luxembourg
submit an exemption request under paragraph 19 (b)
of the same resolution. The Committee is currently
considering responses to letters received from Libya
and Belgium on matters related to the frozen assets of
the Libyan Investment Authority.
In connection with the measures aimed at
preventing the illicit export of petroleum, including
crude oil and refined petroleum products from Libya,
the Committee received letters from Libya and the
Libyan Government focal point, appointed pursuant
to resolution 2146 (2014), regarding an alleged attempt
to illicitly export crude oil outside the umbrella of the
National Oil Corporation. The Panel of Experts on Libya
also reported to the Committee on the same matter.
With respect to the sanctions list, the Committee
received a delisting request for five individuals
submitted by a Member State. The consideration of four
requests is ongoing, whereas the fifth request was not
approved by the Committee. Separately, the Committee
received a fourth communication from the Delisting
Focal Point, established pursuant to resolution 1730
(2006), in connection with the delisting request of
a listed individual. The Focal Point process is still
ongoing. The Committee also updated some identifying
information for an individual on its sanctions list.
22-28990

16/03/2022

The situation in Libya

As always, I would like to reiterate the Committee’s
commitment to facilitating the implementation of the
measures and contributing to the promotion of peace
and stability in Libya.
The President (spoke in Arabic):
Ambassador Tirumurti for his briefing.

I

thank

I now give the floor to Ms. Shuaiter.
Ms. Shuaiter (spoke in Arabic): I thank you,
Mr. President, for allowing me to participate in this
meeting on the situation in Libya. I am a legal academic,
a legal activist and a candidate for the upcoming
parliamentary elections. I was already honoured to
meet members of the Security Council, along with
some of my friends from the Libyan Political Dialogue
Forum, at the end of November 2020. I join the Council
today as a representative of Libyan civil society. In that
capacity, I want to convey the concerns and aspirations
of the Libyan people at this critical time in the life of
the modern Libyan State.
The first concern of the Libyan people is the
current developments, the ongoing impasse in the
political process and its deviation from its correct path.
In that regard, the Libyan people hope that the Security
Council will urge that peace and stability be maintained
and consensus among all the Libyan political parties be
restored, in line with all the resolutions adopted by the
Council on the situation in Libya.
It also gives me pleasure to convey the appreciation
of the Libyan people for the efforts of the Special Adviser
to the Secretary-General on Libya, Ms. Stephanie
Williams, to overcome this political impasse through
her initiative to support the consensual path between the
House of Representatives and the High State Council to
agree on a constitutional and legal framework for the
upcoming political elections.
The second concern of the Libyan people, which
is also of equal importance as the first concern, is to
adopt a permanent constitution for the country. All
political leaders, whether appointed or elected, could
not reach agreement on a consensual constitution.
That constitutional impasse led to the prolongation of
the transitional period. We have therefore reached this
current political impasse at both the executive and the
legislative levels.
The Libyan people are being deprived from
exercising their inherent right to hold a referendum on
the permanent constitution of the country due to the

S/PV. 8996

intransigence of all the parties concerned. All rights
and freedoms are now up to the legislative and executive
authorities, especially given that the Supreme Court
has refrained from monitoring the constitutionality of
Libyan legislations.
The Libyan people initially look forward to the
support of the Security Council in order to move forward
towards the adoption of a consensual constitution with
democratic and civil provisions that would guarantee
their rights and freedoms and allow them to have their
voices heard freely and clearly through a referendum to
be held shortly.
The third concern of the Libyan people is to renew
the legitimacy of the current executive and legislative
authorities of the Libyan State. As Council members
know, the current legislative authorities lack political
legitimacy and societal acceptance, be it the House of
Representatives or the State. Consequently, all executive
authorities also lack legitimacy. That is because the
last elections in which the Libyan people expressed
their free will was in 2014 — almost eight years ago.
The Libyan people have since lost confidence in all
the authorities as they have witnessed wars, divisions
and corruption.
The Libyan people are looking forward for the
will of more than 2 million registered voters to be
respected. They are eagerly awaiting free, inclusive,
fair and credible elections, without intimidation
by arms or corrupt money. That calls us to renew
our request to the Council to support us through the
international monitoring of elections, due to be held
soon, God willing.
Lastly, one of the most important concerns of the
Libyan people, especially civil society, is restoring
their rights The Council is aware of the human rights
situation in my country. There are many examples of
human rights violations — violations of the freedom
of expression, the right to life and physical safety,
as well as extrajudicial detentions, hate speech and
many others.
I will focus on violations of women’s rights, which
have, on the whole, regressed significantly in the most
recent period. The Constitutional Committee has
failed to establish a women’s council and to ensure a
gender perspective. The current legislative authority is
also delaying the enactment of a bill — submitted by
many women with great expertise and supported by the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya — to protect

22-289905/18

The situation in Libya

S/PV.8996

16/03/2022

women from violence. The same legislative authority
also violated the 30 per cent quota set for women in the
road map that was agreed upon by all political actors,
with international support.

years. The United Kingdom strongly supports Special
Adviser Stephanie Williams and urges those on both
sides of the current impasse to accept her offer to
facilitate dialogue.

At the end of 2021, the legislative authority issued
new election laws, with quotas of only 16 per cent. That
means that the incoming House of Representatives will
have only 32 women representatives out of 200. That is
unjust for Libyan women, who have made great strides
at the political, social, economic and cultural levels.

Secondly, as we heard today, 2.8 million Libyans
have made their aspiration for elections clear. We
support the efforts of Special Adviser Williams to
mediate between the House of Representatives and the
High State Council in order to establish a constitutional
basis for elections. Libya’s political leaders must set
aside narrow interests and engage seriously to address
the underlying conditions that prevented elections from
going ahead in December. While Libya lurches between
political crises, it is the Libyan people who continue
to suffer from a lack of proper service delivery, an
unstable economy and fragile security.

The legal and executive authorities recently
joined forces to delay the Libyan plan to implement
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security. International Women’s Day, on 8 March,
was accompanied with an unprecedented loss of faith
among women. Libyan women therefore look forward
to the Council’s continued support by urging the Libyan
leadership to honour the commitments of the Libyan
State under all the ratified treaties and conventions to
respect women and ensure a gender perspective in all
policies, legislation and national strategies.
In conclusion, I thank members for giving me this
opportunity to address the Council. I hope to God that
there will be more concerted efforts to put an end to this
constitutional and political impasse in Libya through
comprehensive national reconciliation and by stressing
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Libya and the prevention of war and incitement to
war. I hope to see my country enjoy lasting peace,
genuine and comprehensive security, stability and
prosperity sooner rather than later.
The President (spoke
Ms. Shuaiter for her briefing.

in

Arabic):

I

thank

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo, Ambassador
Tirumurti and Ms. Shuaiter for briefing the Security
Council today. Tensions in Libya have risen since
we last met on this subject (see S/PV.8952). Today’s
discussion is therefore particularly timely. I will make
three points.
First, I would like to echo the Secretary-General’s
call for de-escalation. All actors, internal and external,
should refrain from any moves that could undermine
stability or deepen divisions in Libya and threaten to
undo the hard-won progress achieved over the past two
6/18

Thirdly, we call on all Libyan parties to protect
the independence, integrity and reunification of public
institutions. The National Oil Corporation should not be
politicized and must be able to fulfil its duties without
interference. Attempts to shut down oil production are
concerning and are only to the detriment of the Libyan
economy and its people. Libyan public institutions
are there to serve the whole of Libya and should be
empowered to do so.
In conclusion, Libya is at a crossroads. There is a
real risk of dangerous escalation that could unravel the
hard-won ceasefire and threaten Libya’s stability. It is
now incumbent upon all of us to facilitate a path to the
elections that the Libyan people are waiting for.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I want to thank
our briefers — Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo,
Ambassador Tirumurti and Ms. Shuaiter — and to
welcome our colleague the Ambassador of Libya to this
morning’s meeting.
The deterioration of the overall situation on
the ground in Libya since the postponement of the
December elections is a matter of really serious concern.
The fragile, hard-won unity and calm achieved since
the signing of the ceasefire agreement in October 2020
is now in danger. For the sake of the Libyan people, it
cannot, and should not, be eroded.
Reports of the mobilization of forces in and around
Tripoli are deeply troubling. The serious political
polarization we are witnessing is equally disconcerting.
We reiterate calls on all parties to refrain from violence
22-28990

16/03/2022

The situation in Libya

and from any provocative or destabilizing deeds
or words.
At this critical juncture, all actors have the
responsibility to safeguard the progress that the Libyan
people, supported by the international community, have
worked so hard to achieve in recent years. Outstanding
disagreements among Libyan stakeholders can be
resolved only through peaceful dialogue. The Libyan
people deserve nothing less.
We therefore welcome the recent proposal of
Special Adviser Williams to convene a joint committee
from the House of Representatives and the High State
Council. We hope that the consensual constitutional
basis envisaged by that committee can forge a pathway
out of the current impasse. The destination is clear: the
holding of credible, transparent and inclusive elections.
The Libyan people have demonstrated clearly that they
are ready to choose their own leaders; they should not
be made to wait indefinitely to cast their votes at the
ballot box.
Libyan women, like Ms. Shuaiter, have every right
to participate fully and safely in the elections, both as
candidates and as voters. That is intrinsic to the goal of
achieving inclusive, sustainable peace. We call on all
parties to engage in the joint committee process in good
faith, to urgently nominate their representatives and to
cooperate fully with the Special Adviser.
Full respect for the human rights of Libyans from
all backgrounds is a prerequisite for them to shape the
future of their own country. Weekly abductions and
disappearances of journalists and civil society activists,
as documented by the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya, are deplorable. A free civic space is the
centrepiece of a democracy; its protection is paramount.
Just last week, we celebrated International Women’s
Day. Regrettably, it coincided with the announcement
by the Libyan authorities that they had suspended
work on a national action plan on women and peace
and security, which was agreed in collaboration with
UN-Women only last year. Landmark resolution 1325
(2001) highlights the crucial role played by women in
building peaceful and inclusive democracies and calls
for special measures to protect women and girls from
violence. We sincerely urge the authorities to reconsider
the suspension of that work, which we believe remains
vital to Libya’s peacebuilding efforts.

S/PV. 8996

We also deeply regret the lack of tangible progress
in addressing the conditions faced by detainees,
migrants and refugees, including many women
and children who are arbitrarily held in State- and
non-State-operated facilities. Tragically, detainees
continue to face heightened risks of sexual violence,
including rape. We call on the Libyan authorities to
urgently ramp up efforts to prevent those abuses and to
end all practices of arbitrary detention. Furthermore,
all allegations of sexual and gender-based violence,
as well as other abuses of human rights, should be
thoroughly investigated and prosecuted. It is essential
that perpetrators be held accountable for such crimes.
We underscore that the vital work that is being
undertaken by the Independent Fact-Finding Mission on
Libya is a critical step towards justice and accountability.
Finally, we once again offer our full support for the
efforts of the Special Adviser, who has been working
tirelessly with the parties on the ground. And we look
forward to the timely appointment of a special envoy
and the renewal of the Mission’s mandate next month, at
what is a critical juncture on the path to peace in Libya.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I thank UnderSecretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo. I also thank
Ambassador Tirumurti for his briefing on the work of
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya. I welcome
the delegation of Libya to this meeting. I also thank the
briefer from civil society.
The most recent political developments in Libya,
unfortunately, were not entirely unexpected. Limited
progress in the process of national reconciliation,
the absence of a constitutional framework and the
postponement of elections jeopardize the fragile
stability achieved after years of conflict. Once again, the
country finds itself divided between rival authorities,
none of whom can claim the legitimacy of the vote.
At this time of uncertainty, we encourage Libyan
political forces to act with restraint, refrain from
violence and renew their commitment to national
reconciliation. We also encourage the prompt definition
of an electoral timeline, respecting the will of the
2.8 million people who registered to vote at the end
of last year, and the establishment of a constitutional
framework to define the relations between the powers
and govern the elections.

22-289907/18

S/PV.8996

The situation in Libya

Brazil supports the mediation efforts of Special
Adviser Stephanie Williams, particularly her proposal
of a joint committee from the House of Representatives
and the High State Council to establish a consensual
constitutional basis for elections. We believe that the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya has played a
key role in ensuring the preservation of the ceasefire
and the continuity of a Libyan-led and Libyan-owned
peace process, free from outside interference.
Elections and political dialogue are necessary
to ensure the confidence of the Libyan population
in national reconciliation. But it is also necessary to
go further and express our firm condemnation of the
spoilers of the peace process. Individuals involved
in violence and human rights violations must not
go unpunished.
Brazil reiterates its condemnation of the murder of
hundreds of people in Tarhuna, found buried in mass
graves. Incidents of this nature cannot be tolerated,
and those responsible must be identified and held
accountable for their crimes. We also condemn the
undignified treatment of refugees held in detention
centres. It is unacceptable that families forced to leave
their countries of origin out of absolute necessity be
subject to arbitrary detention and violations of their
human rights.
The fight against impunity and ensuring the rule
of law are the only way for the Libyan people to regain
confidence in their institutions. Without that, no
Government can claim any degree of legitimacy.
Libya’s stability ultimately depends on the country
being able to resume its development. Brazil takes
note of recent institutional advances, such as efforts to
reunify the Central Bank. We understand that it is also
necessary for Libya to regain access to its assets held
abroad. Those resources belong to the Libyan people
and must be used for their benefit.
Brazil reiterates its support for the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Libya and expresses its
solidarity with the Libyan people.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Under-Secretary-General,
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, and the Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011), concerning Libya, Ambassador Tirumurti,
for their briefings. We listened closely to the statement
by Ms. Shuaiter.
8/18

16/03/2022

We respect the desire of Libyans to resolve their
internal problems independently. By the same token,
we respect the House of Representatives’ appointment
and establishment of a new Government led by Prime
Minister Bashagha. That is an important step towards a
resolution of the protracted crisis.
At the same time, developments in Libya following
the failure to hold general elections scheduled for
December 2021 are a cause for concern. There is a
risk of descending into a state of de facto diarchy
and a deterioration of the situation in the country,
which is fraught with risks of a resumption of armed
confrontation. That must not be allowed to happen.
We advocate resolving existing conflicts through
negotiations and compromise.
We hope that, in the current difficult circumstances,
the Libyan people will nevertheless be able to reach
a national agreement and resolve the complex tasks
related to the transitional period on the basis of an
inclusive dialogue. It is essential to make meaningful
progress on the issues related to the reunification of
Libya’s administrative and security structures and to
strengthen the economy and the social sector. We attach
particular importance to preparations for the holding of
general elections within a reasonable time frame.
We have not yet seen significant positive progress
on the military track towards a settlement. Of course,
we welcome the fact that active hostilities in Libya have
been halted for more than a year. We also welcome the
regular meetings of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission.
However, tangible steps to pre-empt a potential
escalation of persistent armed hostilities are not being
undertaken by the parties. Heavy weaponry has not
begun to be withdrawn, nor have military units been
redeployed. All that risks undermining the ceasefire
and resulting in a fresh outbreak of violence following
a deliberate provocation or an inadvertent incident.
With respect to the evacuation of foreign forces
from Syria, our position here is well known. We have
consistently advocated the synchronized, balanced,
steady and phased withdrawal of all non-Libyan armed
groups and armed units. We believe that that specific
approach will help to avert a negative shift in the power
balance that could result in armed hostilities.
We wish to emphasize that we look forward to
the timely appointment of a new Special Adviser on
Libya, whose work for a comprehensive settlement
is more important than ever before. The Russian
22-28990

16/03/2022

The situation in Libya

position remains unchanged: that candidature needs
to be acceptable to the Libyan people and must be
supported by regional stakeholders and approved by the
membership of the Security Council.
We are troubled by the fact that against the backdrop
of current events that have had a serious impact on the
political situation in Libya, members of the Security
Council have received limited information from the
Secretary-General about the activities of his Special
Adviser, Stephanie Williams. We are also surprised at
the fact that the penholders of the Libyan dossier in the
Security Council also have failed to demonstrate their
usual proactivity, which is being seen in other areas,
preferring to cast a shadow over the serious processes
that are taking place in Libya.
To conclude, I wish to underscore that we continue
to be troubled by the problem of illicit migration
and arms proliferation in Libya. That has an impact
on the security of both the country itself and the
Sahelo-Saharan region as a whole. Clearly, 11 years
on, the country has still not managed to address the
consequences of the collapse of Libyan statehood,
spawned by NATO’s unlawful intervention. We also
wish to underscore that international restrictions should
help facilitate the political process to restore stability
in Libya and not obstruct efforts to that end, as well
as ensure that Libya’s assets are safeguarded and not
capitalized on for the enrichment of Western States.
Mr. Biang (Gabon): I have the honour to make this
statement on behalf of the three African members of
the Security Council (A3), namely, Gabon, Ghana and
Kenya. We thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary
DiCarlo; Ambassador Tirumurti, Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011) concerning Libya; and Ms. Jazia Jibril
Mohammed Shuaiter for their briefings and insightful
perspective on the situation in Libya. We also welcome
the participation of the Permanent Representative
of Libya.
Listening to the people of Libya, we have repeatedly
heard their keen desire for a secure environment in
which to pursue their socioeconomic and political
aspirations. In the past one and a half years, they have
made significant progress in their peace process. Indeed,
the current political stalemate in Libya, as well as the
reported increase in the movement of armed groups
around Tripoli, is concerning since it threatens to erode
the gains attained painstakingly attained, including on

S/PV. 8996

other tracks of the peace process. It is important that
the stalemate be quickly broken.
We therefore call for calm and restraint from all
parties and encourage them to utilize the mediation
channels on offer by the United Nations and the
African Union, neighbouring States and other partners
of goodwill.
We acknowledge and support the desire of the
people of Libya to hold elections. We commend them
for having registered in large numbers as voters.
It is important that the elections be grounded in
a constitutional framework that enjoys the widest
possible consensus.
(spoke in French)
We propose that the efforts of the United Nations
and international partners be based on the following
three imperatives.
The first imperative is national dialogue and
reconciliation. The A3 has always underlined the
importance of prioritizing national dialogue and
reconciliation, which are vital for an enduring exit from
the political stalemate. It is indispensable that national
dialogue and reconciliation be integrated throughout all
stages of the peace process, including the unification
of national institutions and the implementation of the
comprehensive action plan of the 5+5 Joint Military
Commission of 8 October 2021. We also underscore the
need for an inclusive process that takes all protagonists,
including women and young people, into account, with
a view to greater ownership and acceptance of the
electoral results. We encourage the Libyan people to
make use of the good offices of the Secretary-General
and the African Union in the implementation of the
national dialogue and reconciliation.
My second point concerns a more robust mandate
for the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL). The mandate of UNSMIL is to support the
peace process so as to give the Mission the resources
necessary to respond effectively to the demands for peace
at every stage of the process. The recommendations
of last year’s independent strategic review must be
implemented. We encourage the members of the
Council to work towards a consensus based upon those
elements in the context of a substantial renewal of the
mandate of UNSMIL for a significant amount of time.
Thirdly, there is a need for the implementation of
guarantees against the consequences of instability in

22-289909/18

S/PV.8996

The situation in Libya

the region. The presence and continued activity in Libya
of foreign combatants and mercenaries undermines
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the country
and complicates the peace process. That presence also
constitutes a threat to the Sahel region, whose porous
borders facilitate the free movement of those forces.
Their withdrawal from Libya will require followup and coordination to ensure their disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) into their
countries of origin.
It is therefore important that that DDR process be
conducted in close coordination with neighbouring
States based on the competent regional and subregional
mechanisms and the support of the international
community. We wish also to stress the fact that the
regional fragility resulting from the accumulation of
foreign combatants and mercenaries creates a climate
that is conducive to the development of terrorism. In
that regard, it is crucial to help Libya to bolster its
capacity to combat terrorism.
Given the inextricable link between Libya, the
Sahel and the whole of the African continent, we
recommend that the Secretary-General make use of
the vast body of African expertise available in the
context of the high-level United Nations leadership to
achieve progress in the dialogue between the parties
and strengthen coordination with States of the region.
We reiterate our deep concern regarding the
suffering of the thousands of migrants and refugees in
Libya. The persistent interception and return to Libyan
ports of migrants crossing the Mediterranean to seek a
better life in Europe are not lasting solutions.
Moreover, the creation of waiting areas with
inhuman conditions is unacceptable. We condemn
the degrading treatment suffered by migrants and
call upon all stakeholders to stop such practices. We
also condemn the provision of targeted resources and
the dissemination of information that shore up such
treatment. Those concerned must respect the relevant
norms of international law and cooperate with the
international community to find viable ways to tackle
the root causes of that migration.
As Europe shows its empathy for refugees from
Ukraine, we urge the European Union to show the same
compassion, in keeping with international humanitarian
law, to Africans fleeing security and climate crises foe
which they are not responsible.
10/18

16/03/2022

With regard to sanctions, we recall that all frozen
Libyan assets must be preserved and eventually
returned to the Libyan people. We therefore recall the
need to protect them from loss or misappropriation.
We encourage the Libyan people to stay the course
for peace. Despite temporary setbacks, they can build
back better and stronger. But to build a strong, prosperous
nation for themselves and their descendants, they must
all show flexibility and compromise, choosing to put the
interests of the country ahead of individual interests.
We urge each side to forgo individual demands today
for the collective good of tomorrow.
Finally, we reaffirm our solidarity with the Libyan
people in the pursuit of a truly Libyan-led and Libyanowned peace process. We also reaffirm our respect for
the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Libya.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary
DiCarlo, our colleague Ambassador Tirumurti and
Ms. Shuaiter for their briefings. We welcome the
representative of Libya to today’s meeting.
In 2021, the international community witnessed
the positive effects of the progressive pacification of
Libya. Despite major challenges, the ceasefire and the
formation of a Government of National Unity enabled
the rapid reactivation of economic life, a significant
decrease in the number of internally displaced persons
and the reduction of humanitarian needs in the country.
Unfortunately, the current dispute over executive
power in Libya jeopardizes the fragile but decisive
progress that the political process has brought about.
That is why my country urgently calls on all Libyan
political groups to conduct themselves responsibly and
find a negotiated solution to the fragile situation that
prevails. We also call on international actors to use their
influence to facilitate an agreement that preserves the
political process, with full respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Libya.
The pending tasks to be undertaken by the
Government with the support of the Libyan political
factions are manifold, with the organization of
elections as soon as possible being the most important.
The registration of almost 3 million Libyan citizens in
the electoral registers at the end of last year shows the
interest of the population in participating in elections
and in moving towards a democratic transition.
22-28990

16/03/2022

The situation in Libya

The initiative of the Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General on Libya, Ms. Stephanie Williams,
to create a joint committee to draft a constitutional
basis for the elections is a step in the right direction.
Accordingly, we invite the High Council of State and
the House of Representatives to participate in this
exercise in a constructive spirit. A solid legal basis,
accepted by all political actors, is essential for ensuring
that the elections are an opportunity to move towards
national reconciliation and that they do not lead to
further confrontations and fractures.
In the current context of renewed instability, we
deplore the use of force that limits political participation,
as well as abuses and human rights violations against
the most vulnerable groups, such as migrants in Libya.
We urge all actors in the conflict to guarantee the
safety of the civilian population and collaborate with
accountability efforts. Mexico reiterates its conviction
that reconciliation in Libya will only be possible if the
victims of the conflict have access to justice.
I conclude by noting Mexico’s support for the work
of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya. We
hope that the Security Council will be able to agree, at
the next renewal of its mandate, on a configuration of
the Mission that will allow it to respond more effectively
to the reality of the conflict in Libya.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Ms. DiCarlo and Ms. Shuaiter for their
briefings, as well as the Permanent Representative
of India.
Libya is currently in a fragile situation. We must
avoid jeopardizing the progress achieved in recent
months by the Libyans themselves and under the auspices
of the United Nations. I am thinking in particular of the
ceasefire agreement, the remarkable work of the 5+5
Joint Military Committee and the political dialogue
between all regions and all political forces.
The absolute priority today is to preserve stability,
the unity of the country and respect for the letter
and spirit of the ceasefire agreement. We must avoid
anything that could lead to the division of the country.
France is concerned about the threats of force,
calls for violence, acts of intimidation and obstacles
to freedom of movement that have increased in recent
weeks. We reiterate the importance of maintaining
the freedom of movement throughout Libya in order

S/PV. 8996

to preserve the unity of the country, including in
the airspace.
Any individual who or entity that threatens peace,
stability and security or hinders the progress of the
transition in Libya is likely to be sanctioned by the
Security Council. The holding of legislative and
presidential elections is the precondition for stabilizing
the country.
France would like to see simultaneous presidential
and parliamentary elections. We support the SecretaryGeneral’s call for them to be held as soon as possible. The
holding of free, transparent and inclusive presidential
and parliamentary elections, with the full participation
of women throughout the country, should make it
possible to complete the transition process, reunite
political, economic, security and military institutions,
and fight against impunity for human rights violations
in Libya.
The population’s expectations after a decade of
conflict are high, as shown by the record rates of voter
registration and the mobilization of citizens in favour
of their being held. France encourages all Libyan actors
to work towards the implementation of a credible road
map for the elections. We support the efforts of the
United Nations in this regard. The current political
crisis can only be resolved through dialogue between
Libyans, their political leaders and their institutions — a
dialogue that must necessarily lead to the presence in
Tripoli of a single Executive capable of governing the
entire country and fulfilling the promise of democracy
made to Libyans.
Preserving the independence and integrity of the
National Oil Corporation and ensuring a transparent
and equitable distribution of oil revenues throughout
the country are necessary to stabilize the country. The
Libyan authorities and the Libyan Central Bank have
a responsibility to ensure transparent management of
public funds.
Finally, France remains committed to the
withdrawal of foreign mercenaries, fighters and forces.
This process must be led and directed by the Libyans
with the help of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL) and in coordination with the countries
of the region. France calls for the United Nations to step
up its contribution in this area. We will also remain
vigilant with regard to the full implementation of the
arms embargo.

22-2899011/18

S/PV.8996

The situation in Libya

In the current context for Libya’s direction, France
calls on all actors to preserve the gains made over the
past year and complete the transition process. We call
on international actors to work together to this end and
ensure that the United Nations has all the necessary
tools to support the intra-Libyan transition process,
particularly with a view to renewing UNSMIL’s mandate
at the end of April and appointing a Special Envoy.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and
Ambassador Tirumurti, Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) and Permanent Representative of India, for
their briefings. I welcome the presence of Ambassador
Elsonni, Permanent Representative of Libya, at
this meeting.
The 11-year conflict in Libya has brought about
disastrous consequences for the Libyan people with
far-reaching spillover effects on Africa as a whole, in
particular the Sahel region and the Mediterranean. The
Libyan people and the international community share
the hope that the Libyan peace process will stay on
the right course, make continued progress and achieve
lasting peace as soon as possible.
However, according to the briefing by UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo, for some time now the
differences and tensions among the parties in Libya
have intensified. The positive momentum of last year
has been on the decline. The uncertainty regarding the
political process has increased. All those issues are
extremely regrettable and worrisome. China wishes to
make the following observations.
First, the fundamental principle of peace should be
upheld. The current ceasefire in Libya has been hardwon. A relapse into conflict will unravel all the peace
gains made over the past two years. China has noted
that all parties in Libya have generally remained calm
and exercised restraint at this critical time. We hope
that they will continue to seek a political settlement
and avoid taking any action that may complicate the
situation. All parties with influence to bear on the
situation in Libya should adhere to the principle of a
Libyan-led and Libyan-owned process and play an
active and constructive role in that regard.
Within its mandate, the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) should continue to work
with the 5+5 Joint Military Committee in monitoring
the ceasefire. The foreign fighters and mercenaries in
12/18

16/03/2022

Libya should withdraw in a phased, balanced, orderly
and organized manner without delay.
Secondly, there must be persistence in dialogue
and consultation. The difficulties in Libya’s political
process are essentially due to the lack of consensus
among the parties. We hope that all parties in Libya
will restore the momentum of dialogue that prevailed
some time ago, reach early agreement on issues vital
to Libya’s future, especially regarding the timeline
and the road map for the political transition, tackle the
direct causes for the postponement of elections and
hold elections as soon as possible, while maintaining
peace and stability in the country, so as to usher in a
new chapter for Libya’s national development.
China encourages UNSMIL to continue to actively
facilitate peace talks. In principle, we support the
renewal of the UNSMIL mandate and call for the prompt
appointment of a Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Libya, as provided for in Council resolutions.
Thirdly, peace should be promoted through
development. Growing the economy and improving
people’s livelihood can help the Libyan people to
reap the peace dividend and foster a force for peace.
Restoring Libya’s oil production to pre-war levels has
not been easy to achieve. As the main source of Libya’s
national revenue, the stable production and export of
oil should be ensured. The humanitarian situation in
Libya has somewhat improved. China encourages
the international community to actively engage in
Libya’s reconstruction and increase support for Libya’s
economic recovery and development. The Libyan
Government has long been concerned about the losses
suffered due to frozen assets. The Security Council and
the Libyan sanctions committee should take that matter
very seriously and adopt practical measures.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): At the outset, I would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo
for her briefing. I also thank Ms. Jazia Jibril Shuaiter
for her remarks, and we welcome the presence of the
Permanent Representative of Libya at this meeting.
We noted with concern the recent developments
and political disagreements in Libya. We hope that all
outstanding political issues can be resolved peacefully
by the parties concerned, keeping the larger interests of
the Libyan people in mind. In that regard, we once again
reiterate the imperative of holding the presidential and
parliamentary elections at the earliest. We have seen
22-28990

16/03/2022

The situation in Libya

S/PV. 8996

the enthusiasm among the Libyan people, who have
registered in large numbers to vote.

people in their endeavour to bring about lasting peace
and stability in the country.

The holding of the elections in a timely manner
will be necessary to carry forward the momentum
generated by the signing of the ceasefire agreement in
October 2020. In that regard, we appreciate the efforts
of the United Nations to form a joint committee of
representatives from the House of Representatives and
the High Council of State to decide on the constitutional
basis for holding elections.

Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank Under SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo for her briefing and Ambassador
Tirumurti for the periodic report of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011)
concerning Libya . I also want to thank Ms. Jazia Jibril
Shuaiter for her insightful briefing.

We have also noted, including from the briefing by
the Under-Secretary-General, that serious challenges
still remain in Libya, including the reported mobilization
of armed groups in and around Tripoli. There has also
been a resurgence in terrorist activity, and continued
violations of the arms embargo are equally alarming.
The priority right now must be to ensure that
elections are held at the earliest in a free, fair, inclusive
and credible manner. We hope that all parties in Libya
can unite around that common purpose. We also call on
the Security Council and the international community
to support the Libyan people in that endeavour. There
should be a clear message against violence in all
forms, which could undermine the progress achieved
since 2020.
The sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of
Libya need to be safeguarded. The political process
must be fully Libyan-led and Libyan-owned, with no
imposition or external interference. We also stress the
need for concrete progress in the full and complete
withdrawal of foreign forces and mercenaries. We
need to plan for the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of armed groups and non-State
armed actors.
It is also important for the international community
to focus its attention on the threat of terrorism in
Africa, particularly in the Sahel region. We must ensure
that terrorist groups and affiliated entities are not
allowed to operate unchallenged in Libya. The report
of the Secretary-General (S/2022/31) highlighted the
presence of training camps of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant and its affiliates in southern Libya. It is
critical for the Security Council to focus and act upon
the growing threat of terrorism in Africa.
India has traditionally enjoyed close and mutually
beneficial bilateral ties with the Libyan people, and we
remain committed to supporting Libya and the Libyan

As we heard, the situation in Libya is fragile. We
are concerned about a possible escalation of violence
and fighting. It is critical that Libya preserve the gains
made and not fall back into a spiral of violence. We
urge all actors to refrain from provocative actions and
rhetoric. The path for a stable and peaceful Libya is
through dialogue. Differences can be solved only by
political and diplomatic means.
While Libyans leaders call for a Libyan-led and
Libyan-owned political process, the same leaders must
show responsibility towards their own population, who
demand improved public services, their say through
democracy and a better future. Forces for the status quo
cannot continue to neglect those demands.
We welcome the initiative of Special Adviser
Williams to form a joint committee with representatives
from the House of Representatives and the High
Council of State to establish a constitutional framework
for the elections. Cooperation and compromise are key.
We urge the parties to contribute to that process in a
constructive and flexible way, and all international
actors should support the process.
The goal must be a peaceful transfer of power to
democratically elected institutions. It is imperative
that we not let spoilers create alternative undemocratic
tracks. A total of 2.8 million Libyans have registered
to vote. They deserve to have their voices heard. In
this tense situation, it is particularly important that the
ceasefire agreement be upheld, and we urge continued
cooperation within the 5+5 Joint Military Commission.
Similarly, it is critical that foreign fighters, mercenaries
and foreign forces withdraw from the country, as
Libyans themselves have called for.
Norway is gravely concerned about the reported
arrest and detention of members of civil society,
human rights organizations and international
non-governmental institutions. We urge all political
actors to continue working for equal rights and to ensure
women’s equal participation in political and economic

22-2899013/18

S/PV.8996

The situation in Libya

processes, and we remind Libya of the duty of States
to fulfil their obligations to respect and protect human
rights. Norway recognizes that the humanitarian
situation in Libya has improved during the past year,
with a 40 per cent reduction in the number of people in
need of humanitarian assistance.
The decrease in the number of internally displaced
persons is also encouraging. But, at the same time, we
remain concerned by the continued lack of protection of
civilians. Violations of the rights of migrants, refugees
and asylum seeks are unacceptable. The continuing
reported situation of people held in unlawful and
arbitrary detention is also highly worrying, especially
incidents of sexual violence and child abuse.
Finally, Norway looks forward to the mandate
renewal for the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya, which will take place next month. We sincerely
hope the Council can agree on a substantial resolution
to renew the mandate for one year. Furthermore, we
support the implementation of the recommendations
from the independent strategic review.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
I want to thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo,
Ambassador Tirumurti and Ms. Shuaiter for their
briefings today.
Clearly, the current situation in Libya is
deeply concerning. Multiple actors, whose political
legitimacy is in question, are vying for control of the
Government, raising the risk of escalating violence
and further delaying the prospect for presidential and
parliamentary elections.
The Libyan people have been clear that what
they demand are elections — not continued delays or
endless arguments among elites and the well-armed.
Nearly 3 million Libyans clearly conveyed that demand
by registering to vote, and they are waiting for their
leaders to deliver on their promise to hold elections.
Free and fair elections are the sole path to stability
and prosperity for the Libyan people, and we have an
obligation to support the Libyan people’s desire for
elections. We support the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Adviser Stephanie Williams to
generate dialogue among key political actors that leads
to rapid agreement on a consensual and constitutional
basis for holding genuinely free and fair presidential
and parliamentary elections as soon as possible. We
strongly urge the House of Representatives and High
14/18

16/03/2022

State Council to participate in the United Nationsfacilitated dialogue.
We also encourage and will materially aid continued
efforts by the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) to support the admirable work of the High
National Election Commission to prepare for eventual
elections and deliver a free and fair voting process.
Elections absent these conditions risk exacerbating
the conflict.
We call on all parties to refrain from violence
and to take part in negotiations to de-escalate current
tensions. We reiterate our reminder to those who
obstruct or undermine the successful completion of
Libya’s political transition that such activities may lead
to listing by the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011), in accordance with resolution
2571 (2021) and other relevant Council resolutions.
We are concerned about the findings of the Panel of
Experts on Libya, in its mid-term report, of an emerging
pattern of targeting individuals actively promoting or
preparing to be candidates in the 24 December. We
encourage the Panel to continue to monitor efforts to
derail elections and welcome recommendations on how
to more effectively deter such action.
The United States strongly supports the full
implementation of the arms embargo. I want to reiterate
that the United States opposes all military escalation
and foreign military interventions in Libya, including
through proxies and mercenaries. Foreign actors
exploiting the conflict pose grave threats to regional
stability and global commerce. The continuing presence
of private military companies on both sides is deeply
concerning. That is especially the case for Russian
Wagner forces, whose destabilizing role has now taken
on a dangerous regional dimension.
The United States remains encouraged by the
steady progress of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission
as it implements its comprehensive action plan for
the withdrawal of the armed groups. Challenges on
the political track should not be allowed to spill over
into the military domain and impede the substantial
progress that has been achieved.
We call on all parties, Libyan or international, to
refrain from politicizing or interfering in the work of
Libyan sovereign institutions. We welcome progress on
the unification of the Central Bank of Libya and the
spirit of cooperation that has animated that process.
22-28990

16/03/2022

The situation in Libya

We likewise call for continued respect for the integrity
and independence of the National Oil Corporation. We
also share our concern over the closure of airspace to
domestic air travel and, in the interest of preventing
division, call for an immediate resumption of flights.
We are looking forward to close cooperation with
the United Kingdom as penholder and other Council
members on the resolution renewing UNSMIL’s
mandate. It is past time that we adopt a comprehensive
mandate that gives UNSMIL the strongest foundation
for its future work.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Let me also thank UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo, Ambassador Tirumurti
and Ms. Shuaiter for their remarks. I also welcome the
presence of the Libyan Ambassador.
Libya is again at a crossroads. The latest confusing
developments call for caution, patience and restraint.
In that regard, I would like to make three brief points.
First, at this critical moment, the priority must
be to preserve stability on the ground. All Libyan
actors must refrain from unilateral steps, which may
exacerbate political and institutional divisions. The
current threats and attempts to disrupt oil production
and to sell it outside of the formal channels are
concerning and must not be condoned. All Libyan
parties must allow the National Oil Corporation to
continue its vital work for the benefit of all Libyans, as
outlined in Security Council resolutions. We call on all
stakeholders to act constructively and in a transparent
and inclusive manner.
In that context, we are extremely worried by recent
reports of violence, threats of violence, intimidation
and kidnappings. Likewise, we are deeply concerned
about the shrinking of the civic space in Libya, which
also manifests in attacks against political activists,
women human rights defenders and all civil society
actors trying to make their voices heard. The killing in
Misrata of Tayeb Al-Shariri, a blogger and civil society
activist, is a crime, and those responsible for those
hideous actions must be brought to justice.
Albania echoes the Secretary-General in urging
restraint and the need to abstain from provocative
actions, both in words and deeds. Mobilization and
movement of convoys of armed groups increase
tensions and remind us of the sad scenarios that the
Libyan people have faced in the past. They will not do
any good and must not be repeated. Libya must not undo

S/PV. 8996

the gains of the past years. Anyone who undermines
peace and stability in Libya or its political process must
be held to account.
At such a critical stage, it is essential that all
Libyan actors and institutions pursue a consensual
approach in all further developments. All decisions
and initiatives must be perceived, by both internal
and external stakeholders, as legitimate and
compliant with constitutional and inter-institutional
arrangements and regulations in force, starting with
the Libyan Constitutional Declaration and the Skhirat
Political Agreement.
Secondly, we strongly reiterate our commitment
to putting the political and electoral process back on
track. We must encourage the Libyans to keep the focus
on elections, based on solid and shared constitutional
and legal bases and within a time-bound framework.
Elections cannot be postponed indefinitely, because
they are essential for the sustainable reunification
and stabilization of the country and key to fulfilling
the democratic aspirations of the Libyan people,
particularly the 2.8 million who registered to vote.
To this end, in reaffirming our full respect for
Libyan sovereignty and for the United Nationsfacilitated, Libyan-led and -owned political process,
we fully support Special Adviser Stephanie Williams’
mediation, including efforts to agree the constitutional
basis required to ensure that free, fair and inclusive
elections take place as soon as possible. We encourage
all Libyan stakeholders, including the leadership of both
the House of Representatives and the High Council of
State, to cooperate fully with the Special Adviser.
Thirdly, political instability may have negative
repercussions for the military track. The withdrawal
of mercenaries and of all foreign fighters remains a
key priority. The concerning developments in Europe
reinforce the sense of urgency of our call for the urgent
and full withdrawal of mercenaries and foreign forces
from Libya.
The current political stalemate risks compromising
the crucial progress made in the past months by the 5+5
Joint Military Commission. However, its action plan
remains a fundamental blueprint for withdrawing all
external forces, including foreign mercenaries, from the
country, and it should be implemented without delay.
The words of Ms. Shuaiter are a clear testimony
that Libyans need and deserve a renewed momentum of

22-2899015/18

S/PV.8996

The situation in Libya

democratic perspective. Narrow political interests with
a negative impact on the political process and national
reconciliation should not be allowed to come before the
rights and wishes of the Libyan people.
We should therefore work together, in the Council
and with international partners, towards meeting the
common goal to stabilize Libya, for the sake of the
Libyan people, and help them to build a more peaceful,
stable future for the country and its people and to
support its stability, independence, territorial integrity
and national unity.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
United Arab Emirates.
I would like to thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo
and Ambassador Tirumurti for their comprehensive
briefings. I would also like to thank Ms. Jazia Shuaiter
for her valuable opinions and welcome Ambassador
Taher Elsonni, the Permanent Representative of Libya,
in our meeting today.
Regarding recent developments in Libya, we
commend the Libyan parities for showing restraint and
abstaining from conflict, despite the current uncertainty
in the political process. The Libyan people have
suffered greatly as a result of conflict, and therefore
they should continue to choose peace as the sole path
to achieving security, stability and prosperity in Libya.
At the same time, the international community should
remain committed in its support for the State of Libya
during this critical period.
As a priority, all diplomatic efforts must continue
to advance the political process. All efforts must
be focused on the holding of free, fair, inclusive and
credible presidential and parliamentary elections, as
affirmed by resolutions 2570 (2021) and 2571 (2021), as
well as the outcomes of the second Berlin Conference.
This must be carried out as soon as possible and on a
date agreed by the Libyan people.
We stress the need for all parties to respond to
the Secretary-General’s call to prioritize maintaining
Libya’s stability as a top concern. Parties should
exercise restraint and avoid taking any measures that
could undermine the progress made in resolving the
Libyan crisis.
All parties should commit to focusing on a
comprehensive national reconciliation process and
engage in a frank and transparent dialogue with all
16/18

16/03/2022

stakeholders that does not exclude any segment of
Libyan society. This would maintain the country’s
unity and protect its national institutions from partisan
interests and disputes. In this regard, we stress the need
to involve women and youth in every step of Libya’s
State-building process.
In terms of the security situation in Libya, my
country commends the critical work of the 5+5 Joint
Military Commission to achieve stability and peace
in Libya. We also commend Commission’s role in
maintaining the ceasefire agreement, despite the
uncertainty of the political situation in Libya. We
look forward to intensifying efforts to make tangible
progress in implementing the Commission’s plan,
which calls for the simultaneous, phased, gradual
and balanced withdrawal of foreign forces, foreign
fighters and mercenaries from Libya. In that regard, we
reiterate our previous calls to deal with the withdrawal
in a serious manner, as this issue impacts all tracks in
Libya, especially the security and military tracks.
Additionally, all regional and international
parties must take serious and concrete steps to unify
the Libyan military and security institutions and to
maintain security and stability in the country, as well
as in neighbouring countries. The unification of these
institutions will also help to prevent the creation of a
security vacuum. The remnants of terrorist cells in the
country, especially cells affiliated with Da’esh, could
exploit a security vacuum to reorganize their forces
and form new hotspots of terrorism in the southern
border areas, particularly in the Libyan desert and the
Sahel region. In this regard, we appreciate the Libyan
forces’ role in confronting Da’esh terrorist elements in
southern Libya.
The achievements made in the security environment
have contributed to the improvement of the economic
and humanitarian conditions in Libya. According to a
report by the United Nations Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, the number of people in need
of assistance has decreased by 36 per cent this year
compared to last year. Therefore, we stress the need
to continue strengthening humanitarian efforts, while
focusing on implementing economic and financial
reforms in Libya, as well as addressing any challenges
that could undermine the gains made in Libya over the
past several months.
Finally, the United Arab Emirates reiterates its
full support for the United Nations Support Mission
22-28990

16/03/2022

The situation in Libya

in Libya calls for taking further steps to support the
Mission in implementing its mandate more effectively.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Elsonni (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council this
month and to thank you for organizing this meeting,
despite the current exceptional global circumstances.
I would like also to thank Ms. DiCarlo, Mr. Tirumurti
and our sister, Ms. Jazia Shuaiter, for their briefings.
It is no exaggeration to state that the biggest
challenge of my briefing today is to adequately describe
the current situation in my country. I noticed from their
statements the inability of some Council members
to clearly describe or even understand the recent
developments, not because of their lack of knowledge,
but rather because of the complexity of the situation.
As Council members know and as they have
noted today, the situation in Libya is very sensitive.
Members have noted the regrettable political impasse
that has prevailed since the failure to hold elections in
December 2021, which we had all hoped for. We are
currently going through a very critical phase. We are at
a dangerous crossroads, with the spectre of political and
institutional division looming over us once again a year
after the Geneva agreement and its outcome as well as
many months-long local and international efforts.
We are witnessing this political impasse at a time
when we are starting to see some community consensus
and an end to war and armed conflict. Thus the only
way forward is to work together seriously and positively
during this period to avert further divisions. All efforts
and initiatives must focus on de-escalation, and elections
must be held as soon as possible, as mentioned in the
outcomes of the Berlin and Paris talks and the relevant
Security Council resolutions. The most important thing
is that this would respond to the aspirations of the more
than 3 million voters who are looking forward to an end
to the transitional phase and would help to prevent any
torpedoing of current preparations despite the many
challenges that could lead to losing that momentum.
As soon as we see signs of détente in the Libyan
crisis and advance one step, some attempt to push us
back many steps. Differences and a lack of genuine
consensus are still the primary features of the current

S/PV. 8996

political landscape. That is the result of the political
polarization resulting from the crisis, fuelled by
multiple negative incidents of international interference
by countries that have transferred their conflicts to us.
Our stability is now subject to their concerns and their
interests. Thus holding transparent and fair elections
based on consensus laws and on a strong constitutional
basis is the only genuine guarantee that can return
legitimacy to the people, end the conflict and resolve
the situation in the country. That is what we have
stressed time and again and what was also reflected in
all the statements made at this meeting.
In that context, we refer to the initiative of the
President of the Government of National Unity
announced recently. He presented, in keeping with his
vision, means of addressing the political impasse in
order to ensure the holding of elections. He explained
the various mechanisms to achieve such a goal through
the creation of political circumstances conducive to
the elections without delay. That is in line with the
Secretary-General’s announced position that stresses
the need to hold elections as soon as possible and put an
end to the transitional period, based on recent United
Nations initiatives that attempt to find a consensus
between the House of Representatives and the High State
Council to establish a consensual constitutional basis.
In that regard, and despite all obstacles, we call once
again on all local and international actors, particularly
the United Nations, to support the efforts of the High
National Election Commission and send their own
teams to assess existing needs so that we can prepare
for the upcoming elections well ahead of time. That
would send a clear message to all about how serious the
international community is as to the holding of general
elections when circumstances allow. That is the step to
which everyone is looking forward.
The efforts of the Presidency Council are continuing
to garner consensus among all Libyans, despite existing
challenges. The members of the Presidency Council
have held a number of meetings and talks among all
national stakeholders throughout the country to find
common denominators that would help resolve the
current political impasse. It also aims to launch the
process of national reconciliation.
In that vein, a committee of legal experts has been
established to prepare a draft law to be submitted to
the legislative authorities to be adopted. Over the past
period, they have reviewed and assessed more than 30

22-2899017/18

S/PV.8996

The situation in Libya

draft reconciliation laws presented to the Presidency
Council. Six of those were selected and will all be
incorporated in one draft law. We will announce the
first reconciliation congress very soon.
When speaking of reconciliation, we must recall
the need to support the 5+5 Joint Military Commission,
which has so far kept itself free of any political
polarization. We call for its continued support to ensure
the full implementation of the ceasefire agreement
and to surmount any obstacles that prevent the
implementation of all its terms, primarily putting an end
to any foreign presence on Libyan territories, without
exception. That is an unequivocal, sovereign request.
We must also unify and build a military institution
that is professional and under the control of a civilian
authority, with the primary role of protecting the State
and its national security and territorial integrity, a State
that has monopoly over weapons under the umbrella of
its security and military institutions.
Libya is not excluded from the regrettable circle of
international conflict witnessed today. Unfortunately,
the Security Council has so far failed to counter that
challenge. For years it has failed also to find a solution
to the Libyan crisis. Undoubtedly, the conflict has direct
and indirect impacts on the situation in Libya and the
region. Those impacts have a security and economic
dimension owing to the multiplicity of intertwined and
conflicting international actors on our territories. Thus
we would warn against the attempt of some to use Libya
to transfer their conflicts or settlement of accounts
to Libya, especially the manipulation of the energy
dossier. We would stress that we reject any prejudice
against that dossier or its use to bring pressure to bear
on the current international conflict. That would have
dangerous domestic and international repercussions,
especially if we return to a state of division. That
wealth and its equitable distribution is the right of all
Libyans without exception or marginalization of any
city or region.
The political stability of Libya will ensure its
economic and security stability, which would in turn
contribute to the stability of the region, especially the
neighbouring countries and the African Sahel.

18/18

16/03/2022

To conclude, we must recall that the problem in
Libya is not merely a legal one but a years-long series
of accumulated political and community problems. Any
proposed solutions must therefore be comprehensive and
inclusive, and we welcome all local and international
efforts aimed at finding a peaceful solution to the
current crisis, particularly efforts aimed at bringing the
parties together at the negotiating table. We thus call on
all Libyans to uphold reason and wisdom and eschew
wars and dissension.
In that vein, we commend all those who have
contributed and are contributing to de-escalating the
conflict and the confrontations that could have been
possible over the past days, be they eminent persons
or the security leadership. We commend them for
their efforts, which flow from patriotism and a sense
of responsibility.
The one positive development over the past period
was the announcement by all active stakeholders in
the Libyan political landscape that they unequivocally
reject conflict and infighting. They all pledged to take
the path of a peaceful political solution. We stress
that we reject any further bloodshed, especially that
of young people, through the launching of wars that
would wreak havoc and bring in other countries for
proxy wars, proving that the enemies of today are the
friends of tomorrow and causing the blood of our sons
to be shed.
It is high time to end the cycle of conflict that
has lasted since 2011. It is high time to overcome the
painful differences of the past and together initiate a
genuine national compact that unites us, not divides us
and makes us stronger, not weaker. We trust that with
the will and persistence of our people, we will advance
in the right direction towards reconciliation and the
mending of rifts. No matter what the challenges are,
we will build a State of institutions and law, a State of
stability and prosperity.
The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.50 a.m.

22-28990
