S/PV.8264

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8264th meeting

Tuesday, 22 May 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Czaputowicz/Ms. Wronecka/Mr. Radomski . . . . . . . . .

(Poland)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Djédjé
Mr. Ndong Mba
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Koishybayev
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Kuzmin
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Allen
Ms. Eckels-Currie

Agenda
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Letter dated 9 May 2018 from the Permanent Representative of Poland to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2018/444)
Report of the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict (S/2018/462)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-15558 (E)
*1815558*

S/PV.8264

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Letter dated 9 May 2018 from the Permanent
Representative of Poland to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2018/444)
Report of the Secretary-General on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict (S/2018/462)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Argentina,
Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belarus,
Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Estonia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Guatemala, Hungary, India, Indonesia, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Jordan,
Kenya, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg,
Maldives, Montenegro, Morocco, Myanmar, New
Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Portugal,
Qatar, the Republic of Korea, Romania, Rwanda,
Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Slovakia, South Africa, Spain,
the Sudan, Switzerland, the Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates,
Uruguay, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Viet
Nam and Yemen to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in the meeting: Mr. Yves Daccord,
Director-General of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, and Ms. Hanaa Edwar, Secretary-General of
the Iraqi Al-Amal Association.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite Her
Excellency Ms. Joanne Adamson, Chargé d’affaires ad
interim of the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations, and Her Excellency Ms. Fatima Kyari
Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the African Union
to the United Nations.
I propose that the Council invite the observer of the
Observer State of the Holy See to the United Nations
to participate in the meeting, in accordance with the
provisional rules of procedure and the previous practice
in this regard.
2/98

22/05/2018

I propose that the Council invite the observer of
the Observer State of Palestine to the United Nations
to participate in the meeting, in accordance with the
provisional rules of procedure and the previous practice
in this regard.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2018/444, which contains the text of a letter
dated 9 May 2018 from the Permanent Representative
of Poland to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.
I wish to also draw the attention of Council
members to document S/2018/462, which contains the
report of the Secretary-General on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.
I now give the floor to His Excellency SecretaryGeneral António Guterres.
The Secretary-General: I thank the Government
of Poland for convening this open debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.
The most effective way to protect civilians is
to prevent and end conflicts. That is why conflict
prevention, resolution and peacebuilding are, and
will remain, the highest priorities for the whole
United Nations system. Conflict around the world
is unleashing relentless horror and suffering upon
millions of civilians — women, girls, men and boys.
More than 128 million people around the world need
immediate humanitarian aid, and that staggering
figure is mainly driven by conflict. Last year, the
United Nations recorded the death or injury of more
than 26,000 civilians in just six countries affected by
conflict: Afghanistan, the Central African Republic,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Iraq, Somalia
and Yemen. Ten thousand of them were in Afghanistan.
Civilians in conflict zones are also subjected to
horrific violations of human rights, including rape and
other sexual violence. In the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, for example, the United Nations documented
more than 800 cases of conflict-related sexual violence
last year — a 56 per cent increase over 2016. The
consequences of such attacks remain with survivors for
the rest of their lives.
18-15558

22/05/2018

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

S/PV. 8264

Conflicts continue to force millions of people to
flee their homes for an uncertain future, often with
limited access to basic help and protection. By the end
of 2016, 65.6 million people had been uprooted by war,
violence and persecution. Countless others go missing.
The bombing and shelling of towns and cities kill or
injure tens of thousands of civilians every year and
lay waste to homes and vital infrastructure, including
water and power systems. In Syria, for example, attacks
involving air and ground-launched explosive weapons
reportedly killed and injured significant numbers of
civilians in Aleppo, Deir ez-Zor, Homs, Idlib, Raqqa
and Rif Dimashq, destroying essential infrastructure,
schools and hospitals.

civilian harm in Somalia and the adoption of a national
policy on preventing civilian casualties in Afghanistan.
The United Nations strongly supports those efforts.

Around the world, medical facilities are routinely
attacked. Humanitarian and medical personnel are
targeted or prevented from carrying out their duties.
In 2017, the World Health Organization recorded 322
attacks resulting in 242 deaths among medical personnel
and patients. That is unconscionable. In some cases,
caring for the wounded and sick — the most basic acts
of humanity — can lead to criminal proceedings against
health workers. Medical supplies are looted or removed
from convoys. Parties to conflict resort to threats or
impose bureaucratic procedures that prevent people
from accessing the health care they desperately need.
Women, particularly those who are pregnant or need
antenatal care, are often disproportionality affected.

First, all Governments should develop a national
policy framework to protect civilians in conflict. Such
a framework should set out proactive measures that
mitigate and respond to civilian harm caused by national
militaries, partner forces and international coalitions.
They should make arms exports conditional on respect
for international humanitarian law and human rights
law, in line with the Arms Trade Treaty. And they
should improve their ability to protect civilians in
urban warfare, including finding alternatives to the use
of explosive weapons.

Conflict is also an important driver of global food
insecurity. Ten of the 13 major food crises in 2017
were driven by conflict. In Yemen, for example, nearly
3 million women and children are acutely malnourished,
and more than 8 million people do not know where their
next meal is coming from.
As bleak as the situation is, my report (S/2018/462)
outlines some reasons for hope. There is growing
recognition that respect for international humanitarian
law and human rights law contributes to reducing
conflict and countering terrorism. In General Assembly
resolution 70/291, adopted in July 2016, Member States
stressed that, when counter-terrorism efforts violate
international humanitarian law and human rights law,
they betray the values they seek to uphold and fuel
violent extremism. I welcome that acknowledgement.
Some parties to conflict and Member States have also
taken steps to enhance respect for the law and improve
the protection of civilians. Those steps include measures
to reduce the harm resulting from the use of certain
types of explosive weapons, mechanisms to track

We also see Governments, civil society and others
stepping up to advocate for change. Last November
in Maputo, 19 African States adopted a communiqué
on protecting civilians from the use of explosive
weapons in populated areas. I was proud to join the
campaign under the slogan Civilians are Not a Target,
launched by the United Nations and partners on World
Humanitarian Day last year. Such initiatives have the
potential to translate into concrete change. To that end,
my report recommends three actions.

Secondly, Member States should support the
United Nations and others in engaging with non-State
armed groups to develop policies, codes of conduct and
action plans to protect civilians. Seventeen non-State
armed groups have already signed action plans with the
United Nations to end the recruitment and use of child
soldiers. We need more of those initiatives.
Thirdly, Member States should support heightened
advocacy on the protection of civilians and take
concerted efforts to ensure accountability for serious
violations, with a view to ending the climate of impunity.
That should include credible national investigations
into serious violations and full support for the work of
the International Criminal Court.
I urge the Council and all Member States to give
those practical measures serious consideration.
I also urge Council Members not to allow political
differences to prevent or undermine action to protect
civilians. That is vital not only to save lives and safeguard
our common humanity; protecting civilians in conflict
is also the only way to lay the foundation for sustained
peace. Violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights law in situations of armed conflict

18-155583/98

S/PV.8264

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

are correlated with protracted wars, with radicalization
and violent extremism. Avoiding civilian casualties and
providing unhindered access to humanitarian assistance
speak to who we are as members of one human family.
They are essential to avoid a cycle of instability and
resentment, and make lasting peace and reconciliation
possible. I urge the Council to do everything in its
power to protect the millions of civilians caught up in
conflict around the world.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Daccord.
Mr. Daccord: I am honoured to address the
Security Council today on the topic at the heart of the
mission and mandate of the International Committee
of the Red Cross (ICRC), and at the centre of all
aspects of our daily work in armed conflicts around the
world. My wish — and, I believe, our wish — is that,
for once, we could discuss the protection of civilians
in a positive, celebratory tone; that we could say the
impressive progress on the normative and policy fronts
has been matched finally by action on the ground. That
is our wish. Sadly, we cannot. Once again, the gap
between the two remains enormous, while the reality on
the ground is characterized by a dire lack of protection.
We all know what that reality looks like. It is the child
left orphaned and permanently disabled after the family
home was hit in an air strike. It is the doctor threatened
by fighters for treating someone from the other side;
the detainee languishing in an overcrowded jail with
no procedural safeguards; the woman living in torment
for decades without news of her missing husband; and
it is the countless men, women and children suffering
the long-lasting consequences of armed conflicts in
every region of the world — each one with their own
tragic story.
Our focus here today, as always, is how best to
respond to such terrible suffering; how to prevent it
from happening in the first place; and how to close
the gap between words and action and actually protect
civilians. Our basic message is simple and clear: the
single most effective way to reduce suffering in war
is to uphold the fundamental principle of humanity.
The most important tool for achieving that is already
in our hands. That tool is international humanitarian
law, which is designed to respect and preserve life and
dignity even in the worst circumstances. Equally clear
4/98

22/05/2018

is that the primary responsibility for respecting and
ensuring international humanitarian law falls to States.
There can be no excuses and no exceptions to the
applicability of the law — no matter how complex,
protracted or fragmented an armed conflict may be
and what labels or designations are given to the parties.
We often see States and their partners claiming that
they are fighting individuals designated as terrorists
or foreign terrorist fighters, which sometimes includes
children, rather than a conventional enemy and that
international humanitarian law somehow does not apply
or applies differently. There is also a general trend of
denial of responsibility for international humanitarian
law violations, including for direct or proxy partners
and of passing responsibility to someone else down the
line. That only increases the climate of impunity and
ultimately causes yet more suffering.
Let us be clear. International humanitarian
law protects everyone who is not, or is no longer,
taking part in hostilities. Exceptional behaviour by
one side — even including large-scale violations of
international humanitarian law — cannot justify an
unlawful response. On the contrary, States must not
only respect international humanitarian law, but they
must also influence those with whom they partner
or whom they support to ensure compliance with
international humanitarian law. In many of the ongoing
armed conflicts that we see in the Middle East, Africa
and elsewhere, belligerents receive significant support
from States, for example, in the form of logistical
support, training, financing and partnered operations.
States that supply belligerents with weapons have a
special responsibility and are particularly influential,
as they are providing the means by which violations
might be committed. The message must be clear: there
will be no support without compliance with the law. A
failure to follow the rules, which is essentially a failure
in terms of humanity, results in much of the suffering
that we see every day in our work. I would like to
highlight four ongoing issues that we find of particular
concern, with clear recommendations for improving the
situation on the ground.
The first issue, which echoes the concerns of the
Secretary-General, is the enormous impact on civilians
from the use of heavy explosive weapons in populated
areas. Working on the front lines of armed conflicts
as we do, the ICRC sees close-up the often-devastating
humanitarian consequences of such weapons — in
Syria, Iraq, Yemen, Ukraine, Afghanistan, Libya and
18-15558

22/05/2018

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

elsewhere. With conflicts becoming more urbanized
and protracted, those consequences are becoming
more widespread and are lasting longer, sometimes for
generations. That is not only in terms of the traumatic
loss of life, livelihoods, infrastructure and services, but
also in terms of deep mental scars. The obvious solution
lies in changing behaviour. In view of the unique
vulnerabilities of civilians living in population centres,
it is crucial that parties to armed conflicts reassess
and adapt their choice of weapons in urban warfare.
To that end, we once again urge States and parties to
armed conflicts to avoid the use of explosive weapons
that have wide-area effects in densely populated areas.
That avoidance principle suggests a presumption of
the non-use of such weapons owing to the high risk of
their indiscriminate effects and of the consequent harm
to civilians.

S/PV. 8264

happening and to mitigate its consequences when
it does; and, fifthly, support behavioural change
initiatives and other means of awareness-raising
aimed at increasing respect for health-care workers, in
general, so that they can work in safety even under the
most difficult circumstances.

Damage and disruption to essential services brings
me to the second main issue of concern, that is, the
protection of health care. Resolution 2286 (2016) was
a significant first step towards better implementation
of existing international humanitarian law on medical
care in armed conflict. However, during the two-year
period since its adoption, from May 2016 to April
2018, the ICRC recorded more than 1,200 violent
incidents targeting health care in 16 countries whereby
health workers were killed, threatened or kidnapped;
ambulances were obstructed; medical supplies were
destroyed or prevented from crossing front lines; and
hospitals were bombed or looted. The gap between
words and actions is rather dramatic. It is imperative
that all States — not only parties to conflicts — uphold
international commitments and make the protection of
health care a national priority.

The third issue of particular concern that I would
like to highlight today concerns the deprivation
of liberty. The ICRC visits hundreds of places of
detention in conflict zones around the world every year.
In many of them, the use of torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment and punishment are
the norm, with dramatic consequences for detainees’
physical and mental health. Severe overcrowding is
also common. That is often due to a high incarceration
rate, shortcomings in the judicial process and limited
infrastructure. All too often, places of detention are
inhumane and unmanageable. In the long-term, that
has very negative repercussions on society as a whole,
while fuelling cycles of conflict and abuse. How can
that be remedied? States have an obligation to respect
human dignity at all times, including in temporary
places of detention. Prison infrastructure needs to
be planned in line with the Nelson Mandela Rules.
Detention staff should have the training, capacity and
independent oversight to manage places of detention
humanely and adequately. Judicial guarantees and
procedural safeguards must be enforced rapidly
following capture or arrest under the relevant law.
ICRC visits to places of detention in conflict zones can
play a critical role in ensuring that detainees are treated
humanely. We therefore call on States and other parties
to armed conflicts to grant the ICRC access to places
of detention.

One of the best ways to do so, we believe, is to
focus on national and regional initiatives, including
the exchange of best practices between States. More
specifically, we urge all States to take the following
five priority measures. First, they should review their
military doctrines, procedures, planning and practices
to protect medical care in the conduct of military
operations; secondly, ensure that their domestic
legislation enables health-care professionals to carry
out their work impartially and safely under international
humanitarian law and medical ethics; thirdly, ensure
conflict-specific training and support for health care
professionals, and capacity-building and preparedness
of health-care systems; fourthly, gather good quality
data to develop better tools to prevent violence from

The fourth and last issue concerns the many people
who go missing in armed conflict. No one can even be
sure how many people are affected, In Iraq, for example,
estimates on the number of missing persons from past
and current conflicts range from 250,000 to 1 million.
The plight of those people, and of their families, can
go on for many years, even decades. People have the
right to know what happened to their missing relatives.
International humanitarian law includes a range of
provisions to prevent people from going missing in
armed conflict and to account for those who do. Parties
to conflict have an obligation to provide information
and make efforts to put families back together, no
matter who they are or where they come from. The
way in which cases of missing persons are handled can

18-155585/98

S/PV.8264

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

have a long-term impact on reconciliation, stability and
peace, for better or worse. We can help. We can support
parties to conflict to fulfil their obligations, which
will, in turn, help people to rebuild their lives. This
year, we are launching a four-year project with a global
community of practitioners to develop professional
standards and practices to improve the response to
missing persons and their families.
Despite that very gloomy picture, it would be
wrong — and indeed dangerous — to believe that
international humanitarian law is always violated and
therefore is useless. Any normalization of violations
could have a terrible impact on those affected by armed
conflict. Conversely, we believe that a more positive
focus on international humanitarian law can actually
strengthen compliance.
While we are rightly concerned by violations of
the law, we must equally recognize the many positive
examples of respect for it. Those, of course, rarely
make the headlines. To that end, the ICRC is currently
undertaking a project on international humanitarian
law in action to collect and promote evidence-based
examples of respect for the law from parties to
conflict around the world. That, we hope, will reaffirm
and strengthen the positive impact of international
humanitarian law in today’s armed conflicts.
In conclusion, there is clearly still a long way to go
before the various normative and policy achievements
regarding the protection of civilians are felt where they
really matter — not on paper, but on the ground. The
ICRC therefore urges States to take decisive action in
the four particular areas that I highlighted, namely, to
avoid the use of heavy explosive weapons in populated
areas, counter a wide range of threats to health care,
ensure humane treatment and conditions of detention
for all detainees and commit to preventing people
from going missing and properly accounting for those
who do. Those are the responsibility of not just States
themselves, but their partners and proxies too.
We stand ready to guide and support States and
other stakeholders to take practical measures to achieve
those goals. Action in those four areas would go a long
way towards ensuring better protection of civilians in
armed conflicts everywhere, and it would do much to
restore faith in our common humanity.
The President: I thank Mr. Daccord for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Edwar.
6/98

22/05/2018

Ms. Edwar: I would like to thank Poland, in its
capacity as President of the Security Council, for
inviting me to participate in this debate.
I have been working for 50 years as a women’s and
human rights defender across Iraq. For most of that
time, I have been working to protect civilians living
in conflict and instability, by helping them recover
in the aftermath of violence and supporting the next
generation of Iraqis to do the same. I co-founded the
Iraqi Women’s Network in 2004 and the Iraqi Al-Amal
Association in 1992, which focuses on the rehabilitation
of people rather than bricks and mortar.
I come to the Council from a country filled with
horror that has suffered for more than three decades
from the scourge of war and siege. Over the past 15
years, civilians have been plagued by armed conflict,
insecurity and violence. Our people have sacrificed
a lot. We endured crimes of genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes. We suffered through the
mass executions of tens of thousands of people, ethnic
and religious cleansing of civilians, in particular the
Yazidis, and sexual violence and sexual slavery of
women and girls. Ten million of us have been displaced
from our homes. Essential services, like water and
electricity, are gone. Our hospitals, health centres,
schools and social welfare institutions in Nineveh,
Al-Anbar, Salahadin and Diyala have been destroyed.
The operations to liberate Mosul were extremely
fierce and costly. I was in daily contact with families
and human rights defenders in the city who were
hiding in basements. The fighting took place in densely
populated areas, involving explosive weapons with
wide-area effects. The bombardment waw constant,
destroying hundreds of thousands of homes. People
hiding had nothing to eat, resorting to eating the dirt
around them. Women were forced to give birth alone and
without any medical treatment. Injured people could not
easily access hospitals; many died because they could
not reach treatment in time. The departure of civilians
from those areas during the operation was extremely
risky. Mosul was reduced to rubble and turned into an
open cemetery. There are no data or statistics on the
numbers of the dead. We are now hearing accounts of
bodies appearing in the river around Mosul.
During those dangerous and tragic conditions,
voluntary youth civil society initiatives emerged.
Young people sought to collect medical assistance and
medicine and to cooperate with military forces to deliver
18-15558

22/05/2018

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

them to civilians. A team came forward to collect the
bodies from Mosul and save the city from the spread of
epidemic. I know of one nurse, Serour, whose sister was
killed by Da’esh. She turned her grief and anger into
spearheading that effort. In an old house, her team found
a room containing 150 stacked bodies — men, women
and children killed by shots to the head. The team has
recovered 1,350 bodies, including the bodies of Da’esh
fighters. The mission is dangerous. The bodies may be
near unexploded bombs, and the smell of the bodies is
unbearable. They collect the bodies and then transfer
them to a cemetery without passing through forensics,
which would facilitate the identification of the dead and
missing. To date, there are still 3,000 reports of missing
civilians in the old city.
All of those efforts require the support of the
Council. We must identify the missing, recover the
bodies and return them to their families. The missing
Yazidi women and children must be liberated and
allowed to return home. They, and many of the
people who have suffered, have deep psychological
trauma from their experiences. They need more help,
which requires particular capacity-building in Iraq to
improve local services, led by local organizations and
local people.
Civilians who have suffered must have access to
justice and accountability. The resolutions in 2017
on Da’esh accountability and the joint communiqué
committing to prevent and address conflict-related
sexual violence, signed in September 2016, are crucial
documents. We welcome them, and I urge the Council
to support their implementation. But there must be
accountability for all the harm committed in Iraq by
all parties to the conflict. Accountability should not be
limited to some people and some types of violations.
All civilians deserve redress for their suffering. That
must be clearly linked to the reconciliation efforts.
The families of many Da’esh fighters have been
badly treated and isolated in camps. Many of the
children do not have any legal documents. Women’s
organizations deal with many cases of women who
were forced to marry fighters and are now widows with
children, but lack marriage and birth certificates. Many
are threatened with death on the basis of honour. Many
are at risk of suicide. Those women and children bear a
huge stigma that must be addressed. They must receive
rehabilitation and reconciliation assistance.

S/PV. 8264

National authorities, United Nations agencies
and the international community must work with
local actors to demand, determine and agree on
an appropriate minimum package of support and
assistance for communities. Humanitarian action, as
well as longer-term assistance, must be conflict- and
gender-sensitive in order to facilitate social cohesion
and actively reduce conflict. It must address the longstanding structural drivers of conflict, which remain a
problem for communities after return. All populations,
civil society, women, youth and ethnic and religious
minorities must be involved. It must also include
communities affected by extremism. We must build
community capacity for the protection of civilians,
the early warning of conflict and address the legacy
of violent extremism. It is essential to protect civilians
from harm by avoiding it in the first place.
In conclusion, I come to the Council at a crucial
time for the issue of the protection of civilians in Iraq.
Successful elections following the liberation of areas
under the control of Da’esh offer us a chance to move
forward to build inclusive peace and justice. In that
effort, the increase in all women fully participating
should be respected. We must continue to focus on
people, not bricks and mortar.
As we look towards the future, I remain concerned
about many other civilians, in particular in my region.
Many live in great hardship because of the many ongoing
wars. They live without protection in places such as
Syria, Yemen, Libya and Gaza. I stand in solidarity
with them and with civilians across the world who are
suffering. I urge the Council to do all it can to ensure
that civilians are protected in line with legal obligations
under international humanitarian law and international
human rights law and as fellow human beings.
The President: I thank Ms. Edwar for her briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Poland.
I would like to begin by thanking Secretary-General
António Guterres, Mr. Yves Daccord and Ms. Hanaa
Edwar for their comprehensive briefings. I would also
like to underline the importance of the messages they
conveyed to the Security Council today. They show
that violations of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law continue to have an
enormous, negative impact on civilians.

18-155587/98

S/PV.8264

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

22/05/2018

Poland welcomes the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2018/462) covering the year 2017, in particular its
well-founded and accurate recommendations aimed
at solving the global protection crisis. It reveals a
particularly appalling image of suffering and pain
affecting millions of women, children and men who
have been the victims of deliberate and indiscriminate
attacks by parties to conflicts all over the world. The
report also underscores that as of 2017 more than
50 million people have been affected by conflict in
urban areas. Those who are particularly vulnerable in
conflict situations are women, children, persons with
disabilities and detainees.

and effective means to deal with such issues. In that
context, the existing disarmament machinery within
the United Nations should be used effectively. In
particular, I would like to stress the importance of the
implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition
of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of
Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction, as
well as the Chemical Weapons Convention. Another
important instrument is the Convention on Prohibitions
or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional
Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively
Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects and its
Protocols, which addresses the various inhumane
effects of existing and emerging weapons systems.

Civilian objects, such as schools, hospitals, markets
and places of worship, are often the targets of attacks.
The number of persons missing in armed conflicts
is equally of concern, as it is constantly increasing.
While the responsibility to prevent disappearances
and provide answers to relatives lies with the State
authorities, together with the International Committee
of the Red Cross and other aid organizations, we should
all take part in explaining their circumstances.

In recent years numerous countries around the
world have been severely affected by armed conflicts,
including Afghanistan, the Central African Republic,
Chad, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Iraq, Libya,
Mali, Myanmar, the Niger, Nigeria, South Sudan,
Somalia, Syria and Yemen. With regard to European
countries, Ukraine has been witnessing continuous
military aggression and the unlawful occupation of
its territories. Despite many efforts undertaken by the
international community, a ceasefire in Ukraine is
far from being achieved. The number of casualties is
particularly alarming. According to recent reports by
the United Nations, 2,830 civilians died and 25, 000
were wounded as a result of that protracted armed
conflict. There are also 1.5 million internally displaced
persons in Ukraine.

I would like to focus now on three main areas
in which we should act together to ensure effective
protection in conflict situations: prevention, protection
and accountability.
We should spare no effort to make conflict
prevention an overarching priority of the United
Nations. As the Secretary-General quite rightly stated
in his report, dialogue and inclusive peace processes
combined with a holistic approach to address the
root causes of conflicts are essential elements of
preventive action.
If an armed conflict breaks out, our focus must be
directed at the highest standard of protection provided
to civilians. That responsibility lies primarily with
parties to the conflict, both State and non-State actors,
but also with the international community as a whole.
It is of the utmost importance to develop and promote
good practices by parties to the conflict that would
prevent and mitigate harm to civilians.
We should also pay special attention to humanitarian
challenges to the protection of civilians, such as the
inhumane impact of improvised explosive devices and
the illicit flows of small arms and weapons. Both have
the same degrading, socioeconomic impact on affected
communities. The United Nations has the proper reach
8/98

Every month more than 1 million people are forced
to cross the front lines to receive humanitarian aid and
basic services. Such cases clearly show that civilians
are the ones who often pay the highest price in conflict
situations. Poland believes that respect for international
humanitarian law and international human rights
law must be enhanced. It is important that all State
and non-State parties to conflicts comply with their
legal obligations.
Moreover, it is crucial to implement good
practices in this field. An example of which is
Poland’s interministerial commission on international
humanitarian law, which several other countries
have also done, in order to ensure that international
humanitarian law is implemented throughout the whole
judicial system. Tasked with the dissemination of the
norms of international humanitarian law, the commission
meets twice per year and is made up of representatives
from the relevant ministries. It conducts reviews
18-15558

22/05/2018

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

S/PV. 8264

and analyses of international agreements related to
international humanitarian law and formulates opinions
on the legislative, organizational and educational
measures that should be undertaken to ensure the full
incorporation of international humanitarian law into
the Polish legal system. It also drafts national reports
on the application and dissemination of international
humanitarian law in Poland.

community to take practical measures to prevent that
from happening. At the forefront of medical-assistance
efforts is the International Committee of the Red
Cross, which delivers aid to victims of conflict. In that
context, I would refer to the valuable Health Care in
Danger initiative, which aims to address the issue of
medical personnel being targeted and to protect those
who provide aid.

Impunity for any violation of international
humanitarian law should be brought to an end, or at
least substantially reduced. It is necessary to ensure
accountability no matter who the perpetrator of a
given crime or abuse is. The International Criminal
Court should play a leading role in holding parties to
conflict accountable and in restoring a sense of justice
on the international stage. The Security Council should
refer flagrant violations of fundamental international
law standards to the International Criminal Court
with greater frequency. We also support initiatives
aimed at limiting the use of the veto by the Council in
cases related to war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide, which is one of the most horrific war
atrocities that can be committed against civilians. .

We have endorsed the Kigali Principles enunciated
in 2015, which set out critical benchmarks for Member
States and address the most relevant aspects of
peacekeeping, including pre- and post-deployment
training on the protection of civilians. We strongly
encourage strict implementation of the zero-tolerance
policy with regard to sexual exploitation and abuse
by peacekeeping personnel. The Blue Helmets should
make us proud of their activities instead of making us
feel ashamed.

This year marks the seventieth anniversary of the
adoption by the United Nations of the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide.
Sadly, despite the adoption of the Convention, human
beings have not stopped committing the crime of
genocide. One of the most dramatic cases we have seen
of this crime is the genocide that took place against the
Tutsis in Rwanda, where close to 1 million people were
killed in 1994.
Poland has supported and welcomes with
satisfaction the code of conduct regarding Security
Council action against genocide. We encourage States
that have not yet expressed their support for the code
of conduct, especially those that are members of the
Security Council, to consider doing so. I also encourage
the 116 States that supported the code of conduct to
enhance their commitment to the Security Council’s
actions against genocide, crimes against humanity and
war crimes.
Since the adoption of the landmark resolution
2286 (2016), in 2016, which is dedicated entirely to the
protection of medical-care providers in armed conflict,
at least once a week some medical-assistance personnel
have experienced some sort of hostility in the field.
It is the duty and responsibility of the international

Next year marks the twentieth anniversary of the
issue of the protection of civilians first being placed on
the Security Council’s agenda. It is worthwhile noticing
that some progress on the protection of civilians has
been made. In that context, it is important to commend
the initiatives of the World Health Organization to
develop a surveillance system for attacks on health care,
as well as the efforts of the International Committee
of the Red Cross aimed at adopting laws on protecting
health care.
Despite many achievements in the field, much more
needs to be done globally. The Secretary-General’s
words pronounced a year ago in this Chamber on the
occasion of the annual debate on the protection of
civilians remain valid today: “What is needed now is
action that will turn ... words into reality“ (S/PV.7951,
p. 3). It is hard not to agree. I look forward to the
discussion to come.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Koishybayev (Kazakhstan): I thank the
presidency of Poland and the Polish Minister for Foreign
Affairs, His Excellency Mr. Jacek Czaputowicz, for
putting the spotlight on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, and the Secretary-General for his
insightful recommendations. We also express warm
appreciation to the Director-General of the International

18-155589/98

S/PV.8264

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), Mr. Yves
Daccord, and the civil society representative from Iraq,
Ms. Hanaa Edwar, for their comprehensive briefings.
Statistics show that about 75 per cent of all war
victims are civilians. The impact of conflict on civilians
is particularly severe due to the hostilities in urban
areas, excessive use of explosive weapons and increased
use of improvised explosive devices by non-State
armed groups. Such fatalities and gross violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law are
accompanied by large-scale forced displacements that
have led to a global protection crisis.
My delegation supports the recommendations on
the three protection priorities set forth in the SecretaryGeneral’s latest report (S/2018/462) and would like to
make the following observations for consideration by
the Security Council.
First, ensuring compliance with international
humanitarian law and enhancing accountability are
critical for strengthening the protection of civilians.
All serious violations of international humanitarian law
must be investigated, and perpetrators must be brought
to justice, in order to end all forms of impunity. The
United Nations, the Council and the global community
should actively advocate enhancing respect for
international humanitarian law, including on provision
of impartial medical care and unimpeded access to
humanitarian aid. Improved data collection also needs
to be promoted.
Secondly, the survival of injured victims depends
upon operational medical facilities and medical
personnel. Kazakhstan co-sponsored resolution 2286
(2016), the unanimous adoption of which reflected
the Council’s unity in committing to the protection of
humankind in war. However, health-care personnel and
facilities remain under fire in a number of conflicts,
and the effective implementation of resolution 2286
(2016) becomes even more necessary. In that regard, in
October 2017, we signed the French-led declaration on
the protection of humanitarian and medical personnel
in conflict.
Thirdly, United Nations peace operations should
give priority to the protection of civilians. A whole-ofsystem approach, close cooperation among all
components, operational clarity on the formulation and
implementation of mandates and forging relationships
with local populations are all important. Our delegation
also believes that, in order for them to be sustained,
10/98

22/05/2018

mandates to protect civilians must be linked to
a comprehensive political strategy. We therefore
underscore the importance of implementing the relevant
recommendations of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations. Peacekeeping operations also
need to implement the recommendations of the Santos
Cruz report aimed at changing how the United Nations
works in high-risk peacekeeping operations. We
must also actively use non-military protection tools,
including unarmed civilian protection.
Fourthly, the protection of civilians is primarily
the responsibility of the host country. Member
States therefore need to develop national compliance
frameworks, which should include capacity-building,
strengthening the rule of law, comprehensive security
sector reforms and good governance, as well as the
adoption of legislation that conditions the export of
arms. Kazakhstan acceded to the Arms Trade Treaty
in December 2017, and calls on others to do the same.
We also call on the United Nations system, regional
organizations, the international community and donors
to provide the necessary technical and financial support
to Member States.
Women, children, internally displaced persons
and persons with disabilities continue to be
disproportionately affected by armed conflict and
need our special attention. All humanitarian responses
therefore must address the needs of vulnerable groups,
including access to essential medical care. Victims
of landmines and other munitions and the indirect
effects of armed conflict, such as disease, malnutrition
and famine, also need special medical care and
specialized services.
Fifthly, as the Secretary-General underscored, the
international community should focus on preventive
measures, including tackling the root causes of
conflict, peacebuilding and economic development. My
country is committed to enhancing regional stability,
using a three-pronged strategy to resolve regional
conflicts through the security-development nexus, a
regional approach and the United Nations Delivering
as One initiative. In our region, we are focusing
on Afghanistan, where more than 10,000 civilians
lost their lives or suffered injuries during 2017. We
provide humanitarian aid, development and technical
assistance to Afghanistan, with special attention to
women, youth and children. We are implementing a
scholarship programme for Afghan students. We also
contribute to reintegration programmes for children
18-15558

22/05/2018

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

and actively advocate for the gender equality and
economic independence of Afghan women. With that in
mind, this year Kazakhstan will convene the high-level
international conference on the theme “Empowering
women in Afghanistan”, aimed at strengthening the
status of Afghan women.
To conclude, Kazakhstan pays tribute to the noble
work of the ICRC and other humanitarian and human
rights organizations. We believe that all the challenges I
mentioned can be effectively addressed only by bringing
together Member States, international, regional and
local stakeholders and humanitarian and civil society
organizations and by building trust among them.
My delegation gives the utmost importance to
the security of civilians and is fully committed to
implementing the provisions of the relevant norms of
international law.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this debate.
I also thank the Secretary-General, Director-General
Daccord and Ms. Edwar for briefing the Security
Council today. I would like to thank Ms. Edwar in
particular for reminding us of the human suffering and
the human tragedy of war. I salute her determination to
focus on people, not on stones.
The core mandate of the Security Council is
to maintain international peace and security. As
recognized by the Council, large-scale human suffering
can fuel conflict and threaten security. Aside from the
clear moral reasons for doing so, the fact that the Council
should act to protect civilian populations affected by
conflict is therefore within its core mandate.
However, despite our many efforts, attacks on
innocent civilians and civilian infrastructure continue
to take place. The Secretary-General raised the issue
of the bombings in Syria. The harrowing images from
eastern Ghouta of homes bombed to rubble and of
innocent civilians, many of whom are children, killed
indiscriminately by the Syrian regime and its backers
should shock and appal all of us. Attacks on civilians
and the preventing of humanitarian and medical
supplies from reaching them have been a weapon used
by the regime.
In Ukraine, despite repeated calls by the European
Union and others to immediately stop ceasefire
violations near critical civilian infrastructure, notably
the Donetsk water filtration station, the indiscriminate

S/PV. 8264

shelling continues. The Education Cluster, co-led
by UNICEF and Save the Children, reported that the
parties to the conflict damaged 42 schools in Ukraine in
2017, representing an increase from 26 schools during
the previous year. Those attacks damaged the very
foundations of the systems that are essential to sustain
some of the most vulnerable societies throughout
periods of conflict and reconstruction.
Sadly, around the world, health-care workers are
threatened and killed. Their facilities are looted and
destroyed, affecting the access of communities to
health care for years to come. Schools also face attacks
and the teachers, boys and girls within them are the
target of recruitment, sexual violence and other abuses.
Those who dedicate their lives to providing essential
aid to civilians affected by conflict are also targeted.
In South Sudan, more than 100 humanitarian workers
have been killed since the conflict began five years ago.
As the members of the Security Council and the
international community, we must do more to protect
civilians who are affected by conflict. The intentional
targeting of civilians and civilian infrastructure is
a war crime. International humanitarian law is our
framework. As Mr. Yves Daccord said, it is our
fundamental principle of humanity. We must ensure
that it is enforced and that perpetrators of crimes
against such law are held to account.
Allow me to highlight three areas where the
protection of civilians could be improved through
the application and enforcement of international
humanitarian law.
First, concrete steps must be taken to integrate the
protections provided by international humanitarian law
into national policies and programmes. We urge States
to engage constructively in the intergovernmental
initiative on strengthening respect for international
humanitarian law, which can help States to share best
practices and to overcome challenges to the practical
implementation of international humanitarian law. The
United Kingdom recently endorsed the Safe Schools
Declaration. In line with that and with international
humanitarian law, we will continue to take all feasible
measures to ensure the protection of schools, teachers
and students, including particularly girls, whose access
to education is disproportionately affected by attacks.
We urge others to likewise endorse the declaration and
to take such action. In order to strengthen national
compliance with international humanitarian law by

18-1555811/98

S/PV.8264

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

the United Kingdom, we ensure that all our military
personnel receive robust training throughout their
careers. We are proud to share our expertise with
other countries to strengthen compliance, including by
developing more effective military justice systems.
Secondly, the effective monitoring and reporting
of compliance with international humanitarian, human
rights and refugee law in situations of conflict is
critical to raising awareness of protection issues and
can provide the necessary evidence base for timely
political and legal action.
The United Kingdom strongly supports technological
advancements for the monitoring and reporting of
violations, including the World Health Organization’s
real-time surveillance system of attacks on health care.
We also support effective international criminal-justice
systems, which have an important role to play in
bringing the perpetrators of atrocities to justice when
States are either unable or unwilling to do so. As the
Secretary-General said, we must end the climate
of impunity.
Thirdly, United Nations peacekeeping missions
play a vital role in protecting civilians in some of the
most fragile regions in the world, where the application
of international humanitarian law is critical. We
welcome efforts to support the strengthening of human
rights components in United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as well as the deployment of United Nations
civilian human rights monitors to countries affected
by conflict. Worryingly, we see at times the General
Assembly seeking to weaken mandates agreed by the
Council and the Fifth Committee by defunding human
rights posts. This must stop.
We welcome the efforts of the Secretary-General
to mobilize all partners and stakeholders in support of
more effective United Nations peacekeeping through
his Action for Peacekeeping initiative. Improving the
efficiency and effectiveness of peacekeeping missions,
including through better long-term planning, the right
troops and equipment, the increased participation
of women and a clear framework for monitoring and
evaluating performance within missions, will further
improve their ability to protect civilians.
Today millions of innocent civilians are suffering,
owing to appalling violations of international
humanitarian law. This leads to enormous suffering
and destroys the social fabric of communities, which in
turn threatens peace and security. We must ensure that
12/98

22/05/2018

such violations are not ignored, that perpetrators are
held to account and that we make it ever more difficult
in future for would-be violators to get away with such
actions unseen.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I should like to start
by joining others in commending Poland for
having convened this open debate, and we are glad,
Mr. Minister, to see you preside over this meeting. Let
me also thank the Secretary-General for his briefing
on the theme based on his comprehensive report on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2018/462).
I should also like to thank the Director-General of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, Mr. Yves
Daccord, and Ms. Hanaa Edwar for having shared their
perspectives with the Council.
Across the many conflict and crisis situations
that we deal with here in the Council, the protection
of civilians is a common challenge. Innocent civilians
suffer vicious attacks; many others become displaced;
some are kidnapped or are held under siege; and others
are starved or denied the basic necessities. Even the
lives of humanitarian workers and other actors, who
are the front lines of saving lives, continue to be at risk.
We have witnessed all this in a number of conflict and
crisis situations.
Therefore, the protection challenges identified in
the report of the Secretary-General, particularly those
related to attacks against civilians and civilian objects,
as well as instances of disregard for international
humanitarian law by parties to an armed conflict, are
indeed a matter of serious concern. We note the three
additional actions recommended by the SecretaryGeneral and the national protection policy framework
annexed to his report. We hope that these three
additional actions, as well as the policy framework, will
be further discussed within the appropriate framework.
As identified in the 2016 report of the SecretaryGeneral
(S/2016/447),
enhancing
respect
for
international humanitarian and human rights law and
promoting good practice by parties to armed conflict
should continue to be the priority for action in the
protection of civilians. Strengthening compliance with
international humanitarian law by both States and
non-State armed groups is important in this regard.
Peacekeeping operations continue to be an important tool
for the protection of civilians, in spite of the challenges
they face, especially in asymmetric environments.
18-15558

22/05/2018

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

As a major troop-contributing country to United
Nations peace operations and one of the signatories
to the Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians,
Ethiopia attaches great importance to the protection
of civilians. In this context, we believe that proper
consultation with troop- and police-contributing
countries in the formulation of the mandate of a mission
is vital in order to achieve greater effectiveness in the
execution of the mandate and ensure the protection
of civilians.
Moreover, peace operations should be adequately
resourced and equipped with the necessary capabilities
if they are fully to implement their protection-ofcivilians mandates. Without bridging this gap, it would
be too difficult to expect peace operations to deliver
on their mandates, and we have a long way to go in
addressing this critical challenge.
Of course, it goes without saying that peacekeepers
should be guided by the broader principles of
international humanitarian law in carrying out
their mandated responsibilities and that they should
be adequately trained in the area of international
humanitarian law and human rights law.
As one of the largest refugee-hosting countries,
we continue to grapple with increasingly complex
challenges related to the suffering of people on the
move as a result of armed conflicts. In this regard,
it is important to reinforce our international values,
solidarity and responsibility-sharing as the basis upon
which we, as the international community, must move
forward in responding predictably, comprehensively,
efficiently and meaningfully to these challenges.
I would like to conclude my remarks by reaffirming
the commitment of Ethiopia to the protection
of civilians, including by providing life-saving
humanitarian assistance and international protection
to the thousands of refugees we continue to host as
well as in our continued participation in various peace
operations in our region.
Ms. Eckels-Currie (United States of America):
Mr. President, allow me to welcome you to the Council.
I wish to thank Secretary-General Guterres for
his comments this morning, and I also want to thank
Mr. Daccord for his briefing today. It is good to see him
again after many years. I believe that the last time I saw
him was when I was still working for the International
Committee of the Red Cross, which seems like a

S/PV. 8264

lifetime ago. It is, unfortunately, under circumstances
that are not so positive, as he is here giving us a stark
reminder of the horrific situation that far too many
innocent civilians now endure in conflicts across the
globe. We are strongly encouraged by the presence here
today of Ms. Hanaa Edwar and her testimony before the
Council. Briefings such as hers give us a real sense of
the reality on the ground, and we encourage the Council
to continue this important practice.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/462) paints
a dismal picture of the protection of civilians in the
field and in its paragraph 5 describes a
“state of unrelenting horror and suffering affecting
millions of women, children and men across
all conflicts”.
The state of affairs with respect to the protection
of civilians is bleak, and millions of people are bearing
the consequences. Tens of thousands of innocent people
are dying from unlawful attacks involving explosive
weapons and chemical weapons, deliberate attacks on
schools and medical facilities, extrajudicial killings,
starvation, sexual violence and blatant disregard
for international humanitarian law. Millions more
are either missing or have been forced from their
homes, and medical and humanitarian personnel are
being targeted at an alarming rate. Sexual violence
increasingly is being used as a tactic of war, and
victims continue to be targeted based on their ethnic
and religious backgrounds. Member States seemingly
feel no qualms about routinely denying humanitarian
access to civilians in dire need, from Burma to Yemen.
We all have an obligation and moral duty to demand
and uphold the international community’s resounding
rejection of the use of chemical weapons in war 100
years ago, after the First World War demonstrated the
horrors of these weapons. We all have an obligation
to uphold Security Council resolutions that call for
the protection of schools, medical facilities and even
journalists from being targets in war. We have an
obligation to insist on unhindered humanitarian access
for all those in need and on safe, voluntary evacuations of
civilians compelled to flee their homes, consistent with
our obligations under international humanitarian and
human rights law. It is critical that all States Members
of the United Nations do their part to protect civilians.
The United States welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s steps to improve peacekeeping and revive
a sense of collective responsibility for the success of

18-1555813/98

S/PV.8264

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

United Nations peacekeeping operations. But we need
to be honest and clear when Member States are not
living up to their commitments, and we — especially
we in the Council — should be willing to apply
meaningful pressure when parties to a conflict do not
change course.
In missions across the globe, peacekeepers today
serve at great personal risk and act heroically, in many
cases, to protect civilians. However, we also still have
far too many examples of peacekeepers failing to take
necessary action to protect civilians. We continue to see
units retreat from towns they are supposed to protect
rather than standing their ground as armed attackers
approach. We continue to see those who are responsible
for protecting civilians abuse their positions of trust.
Improving the protection of civilians in
peacekeeping requires increased accountability, and
the United States welcomes the Secretary-General’s
steps to institutionalize a culture of accountability
for performance in United Nations peacekeeping,
starting with the development and implementation of
a comprehensive performance policy that identifies
transparent standards for performance and details
measures to hold underperformers accountable. The
United States stands firmly behind the commitment
to enhancing performance for the protection of
civilians and encourages all Member States to do
the same by supporting the Kigali Principles on the
Protection of Civilians, which were designed to help
peacekeepers effectively implement their protection-ofcivilian mandates.
For example, the Principles call for troopcontributing
countries
to
empower
military
commanders of peacekeeping contingents to use force
to protect civilians, knowing that if commanders have
to wait hours and hours for guidance from their capitals,
it may be too late to prevent a fast-approaching attack
on a nearby village. If properly implemented, there
is little doubt that the Kigali Principles would make
peacekeeping missions more effective, improve civilian
security and save lives.
We also join our United Kingdom colleagues in
support of the human rights elements of peacekeeping
missions. Their work fulfils crucial protection and
prevention aspects of Council mandates, to which all
Council members, but especially the five permanent
members, have agreed.
14/98

22/05/2018

But what else can we, as the Security Council or as
Member States, do to promote respect for international
human rights law? For one, we as the Security Council
should stand in solidarity against genocide, crimes
against humanity, war crimes and ethnic cleansing, and
work together to adopt urgently needed resolutions in
all such cases.
Secondly, we as the Council should use the entire
range of tools at our disposal that can and should be
employed to compel parties to comply with applicable
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law, and to promote accountability
for breaches or violations. That includes sanctions,
arms embargoes, fact-finding missions, independent
mechanisms to gather, collect and store evidence, and
justice mechanisms to bring to justice those responsible
for those violations.
Thirdly, each State should ensure that they have
appropriate legislative and institutional arrangements
to address current and prevent future violations of
international humanitarian law and violations and
abuses of fundamental human rights. Accountability
is essential to provide both justice for victims of such
violations and to end the culture of impunity that leads
to them in the first place. Individual States should
also investigate and, where appropriate, prosecute
crimes committed within their jurisdiction. Credible
national accountability efforts should be encouraged
and supported along with other mechanisms, including
fact-finding missions, commissions of inquiry and
international and hybrid tribunals. Those mechanisms
are critical when national options are unavailable
or futile.
Fourthly, we should use all the prevention tools we
have at our disposal to stop cycles of conflict, build
social cohesion and promote and protect human rights.
We note the Secretary-General’s important leadership
on the prevention and peacebuilding agendas.
Finally, the international community must give this
issue the attention it deserves. Today is an important
step in that regard. We all know it is not enough to
merely be outraged by the accounts we have heard
here today — and pretty much every other week that
we sit in the Council. It is not enough to say the right
things in the Chamber and then walk out of here and do
nothing. We must remain committed to promoting the
protection of civilians by doing our own part as well.
We have to use the tools that we have to ensure that we
18-15558

22/05/2018

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

are doing our part to protect civilian lives and fulfil
our own conventional and customary obligations under
international humanitarian law and international human
rights law. That is not something that any of us can do
alone, but that should not stop all of us from taking the
robust national and regional steps we can. We will need
solid commitments and urgent action by all to truly and
effectively protect innocent human lives.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation welcomes you, Mr. President, and
thanks the leadership of the Republic of Poland for
having organized and convened this meeting on such
a critical theme. We also thank the Secretary-General,
Mr. António Guterres, for his briefing, as well as the
Director-General of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, Mr. Yves Daccord, and Ms. Hanaa Edwar,
Secretary-General of the Iraqi Al-Amal Association,
for their respective briefings and for attending
today’s meeting.
Armed conflicts severely affect civilians, who are
at the mercy of the indiscriminate use of weapons of
all types, both in rural areas and in densely population
urban zones. In many circumstances they are seen as
military targets. According to the Secretary-General’s
report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2018/462), more than 50 million people in urban
zones are currently affected by armed conflicts. The
use of explosives caused the deaths of more than 42,000
people in 2017, of which 31,904 were civilians.
In addition to injuring and killing people, armed
conflicts have other consequences for the civilian
population, including forced displacement and sexual
violence. With regard to displacement, as the SecretaryGeneral’s report describes so well, that was one of the
characteristics of conflict in 2017. It is worth noting
that an alarming number of 65 million people were
forcibly displaced in 2016 alone. We also condemn
and deplore the confirmed increase in cases of sexual
violence in 2017.
Children are the most vulnerable segment of
the population in all those situations. They are
disproportionately affected by armed conflicts and their
consequences, whether sexual violence, abduction,
recruitment or forced displacement. Therefore, Bolivia
emphatically condemns any kind of violence, attack
or threat against the civilian population or against
hospitals, schools, health-care facilities, infrastructure
for water and energy supply, and humanitarian

S/PV. 8264

personnel, including doctors who risk their lives to help
the civilian population embroiled in armed conflict.
As we have said, armed conflict disproportionately
affects the civilian population. In the case of Yemen,
according to the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), more than 22 million
of the 27 million inhabitants will require some form
of humanitarian assistance in 2018 — 1 million more
than the previous year — of which 7.5 million will need
nutritional support, including 1.8 millions boys and
girls. In Palestine, again according to OCHA, 73 people
were reported dead and 8,154 injured in the course of
2017, both in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank. In
addition, in the past seven weeks and since the start of
the Great March of Return, more than 100 deaths have
been reported, among them 13 children — more than
half of whom died just on 14 May. Regarding Libya,
according to data from the International Organization
for Migration, in 2017 at least 2,824 Libyan citizens
died or disappeared in the Mediterranean Sea in their
attempt to flee the conflict in that country.
Those are only some data that reflect the negative
effect of armed conflict on the civilian population.
In that regard, and to address that regrettable
scenario, concrete initiatives have been taken, such
as resolution 2286 (2016), which seeks to protect
the civilian population and humanitarian personnel
during armed conflicts and to guarantee their fully
secure deployment, as well as ensure the protection
of civilian infrastructure, among other things. In
addition, the Agenda for Humanity, proposed by the
United Nations, encompasses five points on which
the international community must work in order to
alleviate humanitarian suffering and mitigate the risk
and vulnerability of the civilian population. It should
be noted that the agenda includes conflict prevention,
respect for international humanitarian law and work
with the most vulnerable populations. Moreover, the
Health Care in Danger initiative, launched in 2011 by
the International Committee of the Red Cross, aims at
addressing the problem of violence against patients,
health workers, facilities and vehicles, to strengthen
safe access to health care and to provide health care in
armed conflicts and other emergency situations.
Despite those initiatives, we believe that the
disproportionate impact of armed conflicts flows from
a failure to implement international law, including
international humanitarian law, and the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.

18-1555815/98

S/PV.8264

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

It should be recalled that international humanitarian
law and its principles of impartiality, neutrality,
humanity and independence were developed precisely
in response to violence in armed conflict, and must be
observed regardless of political or military disputes. It
is important to mention that some of those acts may
be considered war crimes or crimes against humanity,
and are therefore subject to prosecution before the
International Criminal Court. We call on all States to
ratify the Rome Statute to ensure its universality and
put an end to impunity.
We welcome the decision of the Palestinian
Authority to request the International Criminal Court
to investigate possible war crimes committed by
Israel, the occupying Power, in occupied Palestinian
territories, including the Gaza Strip. We also encourage
all States to ratify the 1949 Geneva Conventions and the
Additional Protocols of 1977 and 2005, so as to facilitate
humanitarian assistance and unrestricted access.
Our approach to armed conflict should be focused
on preventive action — including identifying potential
conflicts and threats to civilians — since the most
effective way to protect civilians is to prevent the
outbreak, escalation, continuation and the resumption
of armed conflicts. Bolivia therefore advocates the
use of peaceful means for the settlement of disputes
established by Charter of the United Nations, such as
negotiation, mediation, conciliation, prevention and
legal settlements for the peaceful resolution of disputes.
Finally, as Mr. Daccord and Ms. Edwar are at this
meeting, Bolivia would like to pay heartfelt tribute to
humanitarian workers, who often put their own lives
at risk or make the ultimate sacrifice, for their tireless
efforts to prevent or mitigate attacks on civilians in
armed conflict.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
commends Poland’s initiative to convene this open
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
We welcome Minister for Foreign Affairs Czaputowicz
to New York to preside over this meeting. I would
like to thank Secretary-General António Guterres,
International Committee of the Red Cross DirectorGeneral Yves Daccord and the non-governmental
organization representative, Ms. Hanaa Edwar, for
their briefings.
Civilians bear the brunt of war in armed conflict.
At present, the international security situation remains
grim. In some regions, armed conflict continues to cause
16/98

22/05/2018

heavy civilian casualties. Local medical personnel are
attacked and medical facilities are destroyed on an
ongoing basis. The international community is gravely
concerned about this situation. The parties concerned
should adopt pragmatic and effective measures to
ensure the safety of civilians in conflict. I would like to
highlight the following points.
First, we must address both the symptoms and
the underlying causes, strengthen prevention and
try to ensure the protection of civilians by tackling
the root causes of conflict. Effectively preventing
armed conflict offers the best protection for civilians.
The Security Council, which lies at the heart of the
collective security mechanism, should genuinely
fulfil its important responsibility of maintaining
international peace and security, actively encourage
preventive diplomacy and facilitate the settlement of
conflict through political means so that civilians can be
spared the scourge of war.
The international community should take concrete
actions to solve the underlying problems that give rise
to conflict. All countries should raise awareness of the
fact that we are in a community with a shared future
of humankind; we advocate the philosophy of global
governance characterized by extensive consultations,
joint contributions and shared benefits; and work hard to
create a peaceful and stable international environment.
Secondly, the Governments of the countries
and the parties to a conflict must live up to their
responsibilies to protect civilians. Governments
have the primary responsibility for protecting their
civilians. The international community can provide
constructive assistance, but it cannot replace the role
of the Government of the country concerned. All
parties to any conflict should respect international
humanitarian law, implement the Council’s resolutions
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
fulfil their obligations to protect civilians and ensure
humanitarian access. Any act in armed conflict that,
among other things, threatens or attacks civilians in
violation of international humanitarian law should be
investigated and punished by the country concerned
according to the law.
Thirdly, United Nations peacekeeping operations
must work strictly within the parameters of the
Council’s mandate in fulfilling their responsibility
to protect civilians. The mandate of peacekeeping
operations to protect civilians is no substitute for the
18-15558

22/05/2018

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

responsibilities and obligations of the Government of
the country concerned and of the parties to the conflict.
When drawing up a mandate for a peacekeeping
operation, the Council should holistically take into
account a whole raft of factors, including the context
and needs of the host country and the capacity and
conditions of the peacekeeping mission, so as to ensure
that the mandate is clearly articulated, realistic and
feasible. Missions should formulate clear strategies
and action plans in the light of the situations on the
ground, strengthen internal coordination and ensure the
effective implementation of the mandate. Regional and
subregional organizations, such as the African Union,
have unique local advantages and special roles to play,
which should be fully leveraged to generate synergy with
United Nations peacekeeping operations, strengthen
information sharing and policy communication and
help the host countries better protect their civilians.
Fourthly, humanitarian operations should respect
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and the United Nations humanitarian assistance
guidelines. Humanitarian assistance agencies and
medical personnel have been rescuing the dying and
treating the wounded in armed conflict. We pay tribute
to their work.
Humanitarian operations should remain neutral,
objective and impartial, fully respect the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of host countries and promote
their humanitarian character and professionalism, so as
to win the understanding and trust of all parties and
avoid becoming embroiled in conflict. That also helps
secure the safety of humanitarian workers and medical
personnel and facilities in conflict areas.
The United Nations should fully play its
coordinating role, maintain communication with
all parties to any conflict, strengthen guidance for
humanitarian workers and create conditions for timely
and safe humanitarian access to ensure the effective
implementation of humanitarian relief operations.
Mr. Djédjé (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): Côte
d’Ivoire thanks the Polish presidency of the Security
Council for organizing this ministerial debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.
My delegation would like to welcome the presence
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Poland among us
today and to congratulate him on his excellent conduct
of our work. My country also thanks the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. António Guterres, for the quality of

S/PV. 8264

his report (S/2018/462) and takes note of his relevant
recommendations to improve the protection of civilians
in conflict situations. My delegation would like to
express its appreciation to Mr. Yves Daccord and
Ms. Hanaa Edwar for their constant commitment to
making the protection of civilians a primary concern of
the international community.
Almost two decades after the adoption of
resolution 1265 (1999), which enshrines the inclusion
of the protection of civilians at the heart of the Security
Council’s agenda, there is no doubt that considerable
progress has been made in strengthening the
international normative and institutional architecture
aimed at protecting civilians, including humanitarian
personnel, from atrocities committed during conflicts.
My country regrets, however, that in different
parts of the world, multidimensional situations of
crisis and conflict are causing great loss of human life
and massive violations of human rights, in particular
of such vulnerable persons as women and children.
Sexual violence and the systematic use of explosives
in urban areas have become real weapons of war in the
hands of State and non-State actors alike, in contempt
of international humanitarian law and of human
rights. In addition, the persistence of political crises
and the proliferation of weapons, as well as changes
in the typology of conflicts due to the emergence of
asymmetric actors such as terrorist groups and crossborder criminal networks, render more complex the
challenges to be overcome in order to strengthen
protection for civilians in conflict.
The deterioration of the protection of civilians,
correctly described in the report of the SecretaryGeneral, challenges us. It stresses the need for urgent
measures at the national, regional and international
levels to ensure strict compliance with international
standards and practices for the protection of civilians.
Côte d’Ivoire endorses the Secretary-General’s
recommendations to Member States concerning the
adoption and implementation of national strategies to
strengthen protection for civilians. Having experienced
the difficulties of a post-electoral armed conflict and
its harmful effects on civilian populations, the Ivorian
authorities are fully aware that the protection of
civilians must necessarily begin with the training and
heightened awareness of all concerned.
On the strength of that conviction, Côte d’Ivoire
has adopted a preventive approach since the end of

18-1555817/98

S/PV.8264

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

the post-election crisis. It prioritizes capacity-building
and awareness-raising among national security
institutions with respect to international standards for
the protection of civilians and assistance to internally
displaced persons. With the implementation of the
national strategy for security sector reform and the
adoption of the military programming law, the Ivoirian
Government is concretizing its desire to make the
national armed forces a republican institution at the
service of peace, respectful of human rights and
committed to a new social pact based on mutual trust
with the civilian population.
As a signatory to the Oslo Convention, the Arms
Trade Treaty and the Economic Community of West
African States Convention on Small Arms and Light
Weapons, Their Ammunition and Other Related
Materials, Côte d’Ivoire has supported its security
sector reform with concrete measures in the area of
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
of ex-combatants. As part of that same preventive
approach, my country has proceeded to destroy and
secure stockpiles of weapons, with the support of
the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire and
international partners.
With the adoption of resolution 1894 (2009), of
11 November 2009, the Security Council recognized
that peacekeeping operations are an important tool at its
disposal for ensuring the protection of civilians. Also,
the Council reiterated its commitment to addressing
grave violations of international humanitarian law and
of human rights.
Because they have the legitimacy to act on our
behalf and also have the resources and a range of tools
to do so, peacekeeping operations are undoubtedly the
best instrument to ensure effectively the protection of
civilians and humanitarian personnel in countries in
conflict. It is that profound conviction that motivates
the unreserved support of Côte d’Ivoire for the Action
for Peacekeeping initiative, whereby the SecretaryGeneral intends to carry out the necessary reforms to
improve United Nations peacekeeping operations.
The protection of civilians and humanitarian
personnel, as prescribed by international standards, is
possible, effective and sustainable only in a supportive
environment, based on a political process for crisis
resolution and peacebuilding to which the parties to
the dispute subscribe freely. Côte d’Ivoire is convinced
that United Nations peacekeeping missions can
18/98

22/05/2018

effectively contribute to the prevention of atrocities
against civilians, including by acting as ceasefire
monitors and as facilitators of political dialogue
and national reconciliation, as well as by supporting
transitional justice.
Peacekeeping missions are effective tools for
promoting the rule of law through monitoring, reporting
on human rights violations and supporting the effective
implementation of accountability mechanisms. They
also create favourable conditions for the provision
of humanitarian assistance and the safe, dignified
repatriation of refugees. Peacekeeping operations also
have human and logistical resources that facilitate
preventive tactical deployments in areas with high
potential for violence against civilians. Côte d’Ivoire
is therefore pleased that eight of the 15 peacekeeping
operations deployed around the world have mandates
and components dedicated to the protection of civilians.
On the eve of the twentieth anniversary of its
inclusion on the Security Council’s agenda, the
protection of civilians remains a matter of concern
for the international community. Despite the many
persisting challenges, Côte d’Ivoire shares the hope
expressed by the Secretary-General in his report and
remains attentive to his appeal to States Members of
the United Nations and all actors to step up efforts for
improved protection of civilians in conflict. That is a
noble cause, and it is a part of our responsibility: the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): Allow me
to thank the Secretary-General for his passionate
plea against impunity. I should also like to thank
Director-General Daccord for his passionate plea for
international humanitarian law, and Ms. Edwar for her
passionate plea for humanitarian action. I also thank
the presidency for having organized this debate and for
having invited those excellent briefers. They spoke to
our hearts.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands aligns itself
with the statement to be delivered by the observer of
the European Union, as well as with those to be made
by the representative of Switzerland on behalf of the
Group of Friends on the Protection of Civilians and by
the representative of Qatar on behalf of the Group of
Friends on the Responsibility to Protect.
The Netherlands supports the recommendations
made by the Secretary-General in his latest report on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2018/462).
18-15558

22/05/2018

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

I will focus on three fundamental challenges the
Council needs to address urgently. The first is breaking
the vicious cycle between conflict and hunger, second
is protecting medical facilities and personnel, and the
third is to improve the performance of peacekeeping
operations. I will illustrate the three points with
examples from South Sudan, where we see one of
the most emblematic and dangerous situations in that
context, for civilians and humanitarian personnel alike.
My first point is breaking the cycle of conflict and
hunger. Starving the civilian population as a method
of war constitutes a grave violation of international
humanitarian law. It cannot remain unpunished. In
South Sudan more than 5 million people are suffering
from serious food insecurity caused by more than
four years of ongoing armed conflict. Crises in other
countries show similarly alarming figures. As the
Secretary-General also emphasized in his report, that
is a worrying threat to international peace and security.
The Council therefore has a clear responsibility to act.
In the short term, food insecurity and civilians’
suffering are exacerbated. In the longer term, entire
generations are raised in hunger, thereby hampering
sustainable development and peace. It is therefore
important that the Council condemn starvation
as a method of warfare. Rapid and unimpeded
humanitarian access is essential in that context,
as well as accountability for perpetrators of such
crimes. Compliance with international humanitarian
law and human rights law is necessary for protecting
civilians affected by conflict-induced hunger. In the
Netherlands, we are in the final stages of amending our
own international crimes act. We will include the war
crime of intentionally using starvation of civilians as
a method of warfare, including by wilfully impeding
relief supplies. We would be happy to share our
legislative experience with other States Members of the
United Nations.
My second point concerns the need for the
protection of medical facilities and personnel. A
despicable trend today involves attacks against medical
workers and health-care centres. It is deeply saddening
to see how their protected status under international
humanitarian law is being ignored by some parties to
armed conflict. We express our great appreciation for
all the international and national aid workers who risk
their lives to provide assistance for people in need. The
Council demonstrated its commitment by adopting
a breakthrough resolution in 2016 — resolution 2286

S/PV. 8264

(2016). Yet, thus far, that has not led to any significant
changes on the ground. Let me cite as an example the
attacks on and looting of health centres in South Sudan.
According to the report (S/2017/821) of the SecretaryGeneral on children in armed conflict, in that country,
at least 28 attacks against medical facilities took place
in 2016. Parties to the conflict in South Sudan carried
out those attacks on hospitals in which malnourished
children and pregnant women were being helped. Such
incidents also take place in other countries, including
Syria and Yemen, to name just two.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands therefore
supports the World Health Organization in several pilot
countries to set up a global system for data collection
on attacks on health care. Based on that information,
the international community, including, in particular
the Council, should step up its coordinated efforts to
ensure accountability for such international crimes.
Where national jurisdictions fail, we call for using
the Council’s competence to refer situations to the
International Criminal Court We agree with the plea
that the Secretary-General made to that effect just
moments ago. For the time being, mechanisms need to
be put in place that analyse information and prepare
case files that could be used for criminal prosecution,
such as the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism for Syria and the Investigative Team for
Iraq. As Ms. Edwar just said,
“[T]here must be accountability for all the harm
committed ... by all parties to the conflict”.
We agree, and we need for those crimes to be referred
to a court.
My third point concerns the need to improve the
performance of peace operations. Current conflicts
require increased professional performance related
to the protection of civilians by peacekeepers. We
welcome the initiatives taken by the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan to create a protective
enviornmnet following incidents that took place in Juba
in 2016. Detering sexual and gender-based violence is
of particular importance. As my colleague from Côte
d’Ivoire just said, we welcome the Secretary-General’s
efforts to improve the performance of peacekeepers.
His Action for Peacekeeping initiative deserves the
support of all States Members of the United Nations
following last week’s adoption of presidential statement
S/PRST/2018/10 to that effect. We support his renewed
focus on the accountability of senior leadership

18-1555819/98

S/PV.8264

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

for the protection mandate’s implementation and
his commitment to address underperformance by
peacekeepers in that context.
Of course, training is key. That is why, together
with the United States, Rwanda and the United
Nations, we took the following initiatives this year. We
successfully organized two integrated courses on the
protection of civilians for peacekeeping personnel from
several countries, and we invested in the predeployment
training of other countries’ peacekeepers. Moreover, as
an endorser of the Kigali Principles on the Protection
of Civilians, we join the Secretary-General in his call
for additional signatures. If additional States endorse
the Principles, the professional performance of staff in
implementing the protection-of-civilians mandate in
peacekeeping operations will be improved.
In conclusion, more than 150 years have passed
since the founder of the Red Cross, Henry Dunant, wrote
A Memory of Solferino. Shocked by the suffering that
he saw on the ground, he proposed the establishment of
voluntary relief societies, and he laid the foundation for
international humanitarian law. The book was decisive
in the establishment of the International Committee
of the Red Cross and in concluding the Geneva
Conventions. His testimony of the horrors of war
continues to apply to many current conflicts. We pay
tribute to his legacy. Today’s debate should strengthen
our resolve to ensure that international humanitarian
law is respected. The United Nations was established
to guarantee an international legal order that protects
civilians from the scourge of war. It is up to us to deliver
on that mandate, and up to the Council to ensure that
international humanitarian law is respected and that
impunity not prevail when it is violated.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): First of all, allow me to commend the
Republic of Poland for its skilful leadership since
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of May, and express our gratitude for the
holding of this fundamentally important open debate
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict. I would
also like to take this opportunity to convey our thanks
for the informative briefings by Secretary-General
António Guterres; Mr. Yves Daccord, Director-General
of the International Committee of the Red Cross; and
Ms. Hanaa Edwar, Secretary-General of the Iraqi
Al-Amal Association.
20/98

22/05/2018

The following statement on behalf of the Republic
of Equatorial Guinea is aligned with the statements to
be delivered by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries and by Ms. Fatima Kyari
Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the African Union
to the United Nations.
As previous speakers explained, armed conflicts
are increasingly complex, asymmetrical and posing
new challenges as they expand to urban areas. The
expansion and mobility of terrorist groups, extremists
and organized crime further augment that complexity.
Those new scenarios entail the increased vulnerability
of civilians, which undermine their dignity, humanity
and resilience, and also limit the capacity and work
of Member States, humanitarian personnel and
peacekeepers during armed conflicts. Equatorial Guinea
firmly condemns violent attacks and threats directed
against civilians in armed conflicts, and expresses its
deep concern about the direct and indirect effects of
those attacks on people and their communities. We call
for those responsible for such acts to be brought before
the relevant international judicial institutions to answer
for their crimes.
During 2017, in many armed conflicts, thousands
of civilians lost their lives from the use of high-powered
explosive and chemical weapons. Many survivors
not only suffered serious injuries, but also witnessed
the destruction of their homes, vital infrastructure
and social spaces, which are essential to maintain a
dignified, humane and productive life. Many others fell
victim to the strategic use of sexual violence and hunger
as weapons of war, terrorism, torture and repression.
Children have suffered grave human rights violations,
and it is estimated that more than 65 million people have
been forced to leave their homes and become displaced.
Tragically, many civilians have disappeared without
a trace.
In accordance with the common position of the
African Union, Equatorial Guinea believes that, in
order for Member States to be able to protect civilians
during armed conflicts, it is imperative to support them
in their efforts to prevent or avoid the escalation or
recurrence of conflicts through initiatives that facilitate
their sustainable development and peacebuilding.
That would strengthen their capacity to invest in the
resilience of their peoples and in prevention to better
cope with humanitarian emergencies that result not
only from armed conflicts, but also from, inter alia,
18-15558

22/05/2018

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

unexpected climatic phenomena and the impact of
global financial crises. In that regard, Equatorial
Guinea reaffirms that the protection of civilians in
armed conflict is the primary responsibility of Member
States, and recognizes the vital work of United Nations
peacekeeping operations in supporting Member States
and humanitarian organizations to that end.
With respect to what I previously mentioned, the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea believes that respect for,
and compliance with, the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations must be an essential
condition for the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, especially respect for the national sovereignty,
unity and territorial integrity of the countries where
conflict is taking place. The protection of civilians
must never be politicized. The protection of civilians
is an undeniable responsibility of all parties to conflict;
however, Governments bear the primary responsibility
in that regard.
For that reason, we call on the parties to existing
armed conflicts to comply with their obligations under
international law, as appropriate, and international
humanitarian law, under the Geneva Conventions of
1949 and the relevant obligations under the Additional
Protocols of 1977 and 1999. We therefore also call for
the implementation of resolution 2286 (2016), on the
protection of the wounded and sick and medical and
humanitarian personnel in conflict situations.
Furthermore, we call upon humanitarian
organizations and their personnel to also respect
international humanitarian law and the laws of the
Member States in which they operate, including
respecting the principles of humanity, neutrality and
impartiality, as well as the sovereignty of Member
States, set out in the annex of General Assembly
resolution 46/182. We also call for recognition of the
contribution of the African Union and African countries
to the continental and global humanitarian architecture,
in particular to displaced persons and refugees as a
result of armed conflict and other humanitarian crises,
and call for the catalysing of partnerships between the
United Nations and the African Union to that end.
We welcome the recommendations contained in
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/462) to promote
respect for international law among the parties, as
well as good practices. We completely agree with him
that the best way to protect civilians is to prevent and
end conflicts. We call for exploring how to strengthen

S/PV. 8264

the capacity of peacekeeping operations to support
Member States, at their request, in implementing those
recommendations, within the framework of the reform
of the United Nations peace and security pillar.
Finally, Equatorial Guinea expresses its deepest
solidarity with the victims of armed conflicts and pays
well-deserved tribute to the efforts of Member States
to protect civilians during armed conflict, especially
in developing countries and those most in need. We
furthermore commend the firm commitment, courage
and solidarity demonstrated by the humanitarian and
health personnel of the United Nations, the International
Committee of the Red Cross and the other humanitarian
organizations present here with whom they carry out
that important work. We believe it is of the utmost
importance that this issue remain on the agenda of the
Security Council.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Madam President,
for convening this important open debate to discuss
this essential topic. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing today, as well as
Mr. Yves Daccord, Director-General of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), and Ms. Hanaa
Edwar, Secretary-General of the Iraqi Al-Amal
Association, for their respective briefings.
Today’s topic of debate — the protection of civilians
in armed conflict — is of particular importance to the
international community, especially in the light of the
existence of armed conflicts in many countries of the
world. Economic, political or social reasons give rise to
such conflicts. Unfortunately, they lead to an enormous
loss of innocent human life, even though civilians are
not parties to the conflicts. The report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2018/462) indicates that the situation of
civilians in areas of conflict is alarming. He calls on us
to find a solution to prevent such a loss of human life
and put an end to hostilities, the targeting of civilian
facilities, forced displacements and the use of sexual
violence as weapons of war.
When it comes to putting an end to human suffering,
our responsibility as members of the international
community and the Security Council is even greater.
In order to find a viable solution and end impunity,
countries supporting parties to a conflict, or providing
them with weapons, should play a key role in helping
to end violations committed against civilians. We call
on countries with influence to present their military

18-1555821/98

S/PV.8264

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

support and arms sales contracts in strict adherence
to international humanitarian law and the protection
of civilians.
There is no doubt whatsoever that the continuation
of conflict and lack of lasting solutions increases the
number of displaced persons and those in need of
humanitarian assistance. As those present are aware,
conflict areas are often difficult to reach. We therefore
call on all countries concerned and armed groups to
honour their moral and legal obligations to make it
possible for humanitarian assistance to reach those
areas without any obstacles, especially given that the
number of people in need is constantly increasing.
In the Syrian crisis, for example, as members of
the Council, we achieved the adoption of resolution
2401 (2018) for a ceasefire for a period of no less
than 30 days, without any delay, in order to make it
possible for the United Nations and its partners to
provide humanitarian assistance and evacuate the sick
and wounded, in accordance with international law.
Unfortunately, to date we have been unable to enforce
that resolution. Once again, we call for a halt to all
attacks on civilians and populated areas, as well as
medical centres in Syria.
When it comes to providing humanitarian assistance
to civilians, we are pleased with the efforts of the
international coalition to restore legitimacy in Yemen
to help our brother country. Those efforts continue
through the global humanitarian assistance provided
for Yemen, including the generous contributions from
Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates and the State
of Kuwait, which make up more than 50 per cent of
the contributions announced at the donor conference in
Geneva last April.
Next year, we will commemorate 20 years since
the inclusion of the protection of civilians on the
agenda of the Security Council. It is timely to reflect
on the progress achieved so far. It is very regrettable
that while we are marking that twentieth anniversary,
we have not managed to resolve one of the most longstanding violations against unarmed civilians, that of
our brother people of Palestine. The Palestinian people
are suffering. They are being persecuted by Israel,
the occupying Power, which continues to carry out
systematic and repeated brutal acts against them, such
as those that took place last week against unarmed
demonstrators exercising their legitimate right to
freedom of expression in Gaza. Those abuses resulted
22/98

22/05/2018

in the deaths of more than 61 civilians, including eight
children under the age of 16, and left 3,000 injured.
We want to remind the Council that Palestinians,
including children, continue to be detained in Israel
prisons. We condemn all such violations by Israel as
flagrant breaches of the norms of human rights and of
all international standards. As States Members of the
United Nations, it is our duty to bring an end to an
occupation and a conflict that has persisted for more
than 50 years.
The Charter of the United Nations stipulates that
States and their peoples have a right to enjoy security.
We have to wonder if that is a right for some people,
but not others. If the answer is that all peoples have that
right, then Israel, as the occupying Power, must respect
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law and protect Palestinian civilians. A
few days ago Kuwait submitted a draft resolution aimed
at providing international protection to the Palestinian
people in the occupied territories and the Gaza Strip.
We hope that it will be unanimously adopted by the
Council with a view to ensuring the protection of
civilians during armed conflict.
One regrettable outcome of armed conflicts is
the imprisonment and disappearance of civilians, an
issue that the State of Kuwait pays particular attention
to. We continue to lament the fact that some of our
civilians and citizens are still missing, almost two
decades after the invasion of Iraq. That is why it is
so important that all parties to conflicts all over the
world respect international humanitarian law by listing
the names of detainees, facilitating communication
between them and their families and protecting their
graves so that their remains can be recovered by their
bereaved families. Under international humanitarian
law, detainees and missing persons are included in the
category of those protected during conflicts. We call
on all Members of the United Nations and parties to
conflict throughout the world to respect human dignity
and the fundamental rights of detainees during armed
conflicts, and to provide civilians with legal and judicial
guarantees and the humane treatment they deserve
during detention. We support political solutions and
efforts to realize the legitimate aspirations of people to
live in dignity, safety and peace.
We support the role of the United Nations,
particularly its peacekeeping missions, and urge it
to prioritize the protection of civilians with clear
mandates in accordance with resolution 1894 (2009).
18-15558

22/05/2018

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

We welcome what the Secretary-General has referred
to as a large-scale global effort to reduce the effects
of armed conflict on civilians. We welcome efforts
to encourage military and civilian leaders to be
accountable and ensure that proper training is provided.
We also advocate that all violations perpetrated against
civilians, war crimes and crimes against humanity be
referred to the International Criminal Court.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking the Polish presidency of the
Security Council for taking the initiative to organize
today’s very important debate on the protection of
civilians, presided over by Poland’s Minister for
Foreign Affairs. I would also like to thank the DirectorGeneral of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, Mr. Yves Daccord, and Ms. Hanaa Edwar for
their inspiring briefings. Lastly, I would like to thank
the Secretary-General of the United Nations for his
uncompromising briefing. From Afghanistan to Yemen,
in Iraq, Somalia, the Central African Republic and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, he painted a very
dire picture of threats to mandates for the protection
of civilians. International humanitarian law, which is
designed to save civilians from the effects of hostilities,
is being defied. It is the duty of all States to respect and
enforce respect for international humanitarian law.
I would like to underscore the Council’s
achievements before addressing the progress that
we still need to make in response to the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendations. First, I would like to
highlight the commitment and achievements of the
Security Council with regard to the protection of
civilians. We are not starting with a blank slate. The
Council has improved the protection of civilians in
peacekeeping operations mandates. In addition, in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, analysis of threats
considers both the military and civilian components of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
in order to determine what their integrated response
should be, including by deploying uniformed personnel,
if necessary. The protection of civilians is essential
during elections and the demonstrations that go on
around them.
In the Central African Republic, we have
strengthened the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic. Efforts are under way to provide it with
increased resources and flexibility for protecting

S/PV. 8264

civilians, as the Amoussou report has requested. The
attacks on peacekeeping operations related to protection
are especially intense. Whether the components are
military or civilian, they must have sufficient resources
to meet their objectives, and that goes especially for
human rights personnel, whose early-warning role is
vital to the protection of civilians. But peacekeeping
operations’ operational performance is also essential.
If they are to be able to protect civilians properly, they
must be able to protect themselves with proper training,
preparation and equipment. As the Secretary-General
said, both aspects are inextricably linked.
We have also continued and stepped up our efforts
to protect women and children. Thanks to the efforts
of special representatives, force commanders and
dedicated advisers in the various missions, genuine
progress has been made. Child protection advisers, as is
the case with MONUSCO in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, play a decisive role every day in liberating
children. Their functions must be maintained.
The Security Council has been innovative through
its establishment under resolution 2391 (2017) of the
human rights compliance framework for the Joint
Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel),
whose implementation has been one a factor in the
Joint Force’s success. We commend the commitment
in that regard of the G-5 Sahel countries, the High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the relevant civilsociety stakeholders. Tools such as these, which enable
us to prevent civilian casualties and ascertain how they
have been harmed can serve as an example and be used
in other situations.
Beyond these, what are the efforts that must be
made to improve the protection of civilians? First,
the Council must continue to work to ensure that all
parties in all zones of armed conflict respect their
obligations under international humanitarian law. That
is key. The Council could also strengthen its efforts
to protect civilians in three specific areas. The first is
the protection of medical missions and humanitarian
personnel. In the light of ongoing attacks on medical
personnel, on 31 October 2017 France put forward a
declaration aimed at committing its signatories to taking
concrete steps to implement resolution 2286 (2016).
We welcome Germany, which has just endorsed the
declaration, and urge all States to join our initiative. We
must strengthen our action to protect all humanitarian
workers, especially local actors, who are often on the
front lines of violence.

18-1555823/98

S/PV.8264

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The second area is the protection of journalists.
Attacks on media personnel continue and should not
be tolerated. Protecting them is a priority for France
and deeply ingrained in our DNA. We welcome the
designation of a focal-point network for United Nations
agencies to enable them to ensure the protection of
journalists in situations of armed conflict, in line with
resolutions 1786 (2007) and 2222 (2015). The Security
Council must continue to monitor the issue with special
vigilance. France, in line with President Macron’s
statement to the General Assembly (see A/72/PV.4),
calls for giving the Secretary-General a specific
mandate in that regard.
With regard to the third area, the Security Council
should take the situation of detainees and missing
persons into account. The International Committee
of the Red Cross must be able to exercise its mission
to protect such vulnerable people. France would
like to recall its commitment concerning enforced
disappearances and urges Member States to ratify
the International Convention for the Protection of All
Persons from Enforced Disappearance.
Ultimately, the effective protection of civilians
depends on exemplary efforts by those doing the
protecting and on effective support for the fight against
impunity. It is essential that the people who implement
protection set an example. Sexual violence, like human
rights violations, cannot be tolerated. The credibility
of military and civilian personnel, humanitarian actors
and United Nations staff is at stake. We must ensure that
they too are protected, and it is the Security Council’s
job to ensure that attacks on them are investigated
and prosecuted.
The Council’s contribution to the fight against
impunity must also be effective. We have a responsibility
to support national and international efforts in that
regard. The Council must call for cooperation with
fact-finding missions, commissions of inquiry and
international criminal justice instruments, first among
which, where the most serious crimes are concerned, is
the International Criminal Court.
Lastly, the Security Council must make every
effort to put an end to violations, without hesitating to
resort to sanctions. It is in that spirit that we and our
partners have proposed sanctions on those responsible
for trafficking in human beings within the framework
of the sanctions regime in Libya. We hope to arrive at
24/98

22/05/2018

a speedy consensus that will enable us to deal with acts
that as disgusting as they are destabilizing.
The protection of civilians is primarily the
responsibility of States. But owing to States’
shortcomings, it is the Council’s responsibility to
work tirelessly on this issue. This is not just a moral
imperative; it is also about enabling peoples to survive,
preventing the escalation of violence, opening up spaces
for political dialogue, and recreating the conditions
for lasting peace. I urge the Security Council to come
together around this shared objective and translate it
into action.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank the Polish presidency, especially
Poland’s Minister for Foreign Affairs, for convening
today’s open debate on a priority issue, the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. We appreciate the
important briefings by Secretary-General António
Guterres, Mr. Yves Daccord and Ms. Hanaa Edwar.
As a country, Peru is committed to international
humanitarian law and international human rights law. We
are party to the fundamental international instruments
on both matters, whose provisions are duly reflected,
developed and implemented in our domestic legislation.
At the international level, we actively promote their
progressive development, and in the Security Council
we consider the responsibility to protect civilians a high
priority, in line with international humanitarian law. We
are therefore seriously concerned about the impunity
that we see for violations of international humanitarian
law today, in some cases where the Council is unable to
live up to its responsibilities.
Accordingly, we stress that it is our moral and legal
obligation to act together to put an end to the suffering
that millions of people in various conflicts and regions
around the world are experiencing, for different
reasons. In that regard, we would like to highlight the
fact that 116 States, including Peru and eight other
members of the Security Council, have signed the code
of conduct promoted by the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group, which commits us to acting
in a timely and determined manner to prevent and put
an end to heinous crimes. In that regard, we believe
that every State’s sovereignty implies a primary
responsibility to protect its population, and that when
national authorities fail to protect their populations, the
international community, in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations, must take on that responsibility.
18-15558

22/05/2018

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

We emphasize that a number of peacekeeping
operations deployed in accordance with the decisions of
the Security Council have mandates to protect civilians,
including from the actions of their own Governments’
regular armies. The obligation of every State to comply
with international humanitarian law includes ensuring
the training of its armed forces for that purpose. Peru
has taken various initiatives in this regard that are
reflected in the efforts of our troops deployed in various
peacekeeping operations.
As the Secretary-General reiterated this morning,
prevention is the most effective way to protect, and we
therefore stress the importance of seeing sustainable
peace as a permanent objective, centred on the human
person and on the institutions and processes required
to prevent or resolve violent conflicts. Among other
things, that involves full respect for the rule of law
at the national and international levels. It is therefore
essential that the Security Council, whose primary
responsibility is the maintenance of international peace
and security, pay attention to the root causes of conflict
and the observance of human rights. It is equally
essential to ensure accountability for the commission
of heinous crimes.
The universalization of international criminal
jurisdiction and the predictability of access to justice
should enable more effective prevention of the suffering
that conflicts too often inflict on civilians. In that
regard, we encourage all States to accede to the Rome
Statute and to cooperate with the International Criminal
Court. We also urge that the Council refer situations
to the Court where atrocities have been committed and
access to justice and accountability must be ensured.
We would like to conclude by paying tribute to the
various agencies and humanitarian workers, such as the
Red Cross and the Blue Helmets, who are dedicated to
protecting civilians, often at the risk of their own lives.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Polish presidency for organizing
today’s meeting on the problem of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, a very important issue that
we should be addressing. We would also like to thank
Secretary-General António Guterres, Mr. Yves Daccord,
Director-General of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, and Ms. Hanaa Edwar for their contributions
to our discussion.
We share the Secretary-General’s desire to see us
unite our efforts to prevent conflict and protect civilians.

S/PV. 8264

It is support for the central role played by the United
Nations, international law and traditional spiritual
and moral values that will enable us to make progress
on a unified agenda and overcome our differences.
However, to our great regret, today we are seeing an
extremely damaging trend towards an unprecedented
politicization of the humanitarian arena in international
relations. Despite all our efforts, thousands of civilians
continue to die during conflicts. The fact that a large
percentage of the victims are women, children and the
elderly, medical workers, journalists and humanitarian
personnel is especially worrying. These people’s grief
instantly becomes a backdrop for political strategy
games in which constructive dialogue is subsumed
in a flood of unverified news items and primitive
judgments. Accusations appear and the guilty are
instantly designated. Some do not hesitate to support
their accusations with blatant misinformation from
dubious sources such as the notorious White Helmets,
for example. Hordes of so-called investigators appear
from somewhere with vague mandates from various
bodies, in most cases conducting their investigations
from a distance and on the basis of reports from
specially selected mass media and information from the
Internet. It is the rule for such so-called investigators
to have their own so-called top-secret informants and
sources who under no circumstances can be revealed.
We are simply asked to believe them. Unfortunately,
these games, which we have frequently been compelled
to witness even inside our Organization, contribute
nothing to achieving the noble goals of preventing and
minimizing the suffering of civilians. Such double
standards, alas, have been clearly evident in the
information disseminated about the military campaigns
in Syria, Iraq, Yemen, Afghanistan and other countries.
What is going on right now in Ukraine is
particularly painful for us. We will talk about that in
more detail on 29 May, when the Polish presidency is
planning a special briefing on Ukraine. But given the
topic of today’s debate, I cannot omit to cite the tragic
numbers of civilian casualties, which Poland’s Minister
for Foreign Affairs has also mentioned. As a result of
the armed conflict unleashed by Kyiv against its own
population in south-east Ukraine since April 2014,
more than 2,500 civilians have perished, 105 of whom
died in 2017 and 10 so far this year. As many as 9,000
people have been injured, and hundreds are missing
without trace. There are at least 138 children among
the dead, 109 of whom died in Donetsk and Luhansk.
The intensity of Kyiv’s shelling of residential areas

18-1555825/98

S/PV.8264

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

has noticeably increased lately. A number of Western
countries have played a not insignificant part in this
through their open connivance in Kyiv’s violations of
the Minsk agreements, which are the only legal basis
for a settlement of the situation in eastern Ukraine.
The activities of humanitarian agencies are an
important factor in the protection of civilians. Their
work should be founded on the Charter of the United
Nations and the basic humanitarian principles and
should supplement efforts to political solutions to
conflicts. In that context, two of the fundamental
principles at issue are respect for the sovereignty of
States and non-interference in their internal affairs. We
continue to be seriously concerned about attempts to
freely interpret the norms of international humanitarian
law with regard to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, as well as their association with all kinds of
concepts. Just recently, one delegation on the Security
Council pulled the concept of so-called humanitarian
intervention out of thin air. A missile attack on the
territory of another State was explained by humanitarian
considerations, clearly out of concern for those being
shelled, of course. I would therefore like to reaffirm our
position that using any means of response with the aim
of protecting civilians, particular any means involving
the use of force, is possible only if it is sanctioned by
the Security Council and is in strict accordance with
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.
If I may, I would also like to comment on what the
Polish Foreign Minister said regarding the proposed
initiative to voluntarily give up the right of veto in the
case of atrocities and the most serious crimes. As the
Council is aware, the institution of the veto is a very
important component of the system of checks and
balances in the United Nations, and a core element
of our mechanism for collective decision-making that
encourages Council members to seek compromises. For
those who possess it, the permanent members of the
Council, having the right of veto is not just a prerogative,
it is also a great obligation and responsibility. The use of
the veto has more than once spared the United Nations
from an association with dubious ventures that resulted
in the suffering of civilians. The world frequently still
feels the consequences of such ventures.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would especially like
to thank the Polish presidency for organizing this
important open debate and to express my appreciation to
Secretary-General António Guterres, Mr. Yves Daccord,
Director-General of the International Committee of the
26/98

22/05/2018

Red Cross, and Ms. Hanna Edwar for their important
contributions today.
Sweden aligns itself with the statements to be made
later today on behalf of the European Union and by the
representatives of Norway, on behalf of the Nordic
countries, and of Switzerland, on behalf of the Group
of Friends on the Responsibility to Protect.
In last Thursday’s open debate on upholding
international law (see S/PV.8262), my delegation asked,
rhetorically, how it could be that we succeed in using
the tools of international law in most areas yet fail in
this most critical one — protecting the life and dignity
of our fellow human beings. This morning, the briefers
eloquently and powerfully outlined the consequences
of that failure. They are not abstract. They are lives
shattered and futures erased as a result of a reckless
and unacceptable disregard for international law and
the civilians whom it is there to protect. And we,
the 15 members around this table, have a particular
responsibility, individually and collectively, to reverse
that trend.
The Secretary-General told us again this morning
that preventing conflict and sustaining peace are his
top priority. We welcome his efforts over the past year
and fully support that agenda. Prevention is the most
effective tool to ensure the protection of civilians. It
is our first line of defence. But when prevention does
not succeed, international humanitarian law should
provide a safety net for civilians caught up in armed
conflict. We commend the Secretary-General for his
action-oriented approach to enhancing respect for
international humanitarian law and human rights law
and for promoting good practice.
Despite our efforts, unspeakable crimes continue
to be committed. The use of rape and sexual and
gender-based violence have reached new and horrific
levels. The widespread constraints on humanitarian
access by parties to conflicts and deliberate attacks
against medical personal and humanitarian workers
cruelly deprive civilians of the assistance that they
so desperately need. The protection needs of women,
girls, men and boys often differ. Integrating a gender
perspective into the implementation of international
humanitarian law and our targeted humanitarian
responses is essential. The experiences from Mali,
Iraq, Afghanistan and South Sudan affirm the
importance of integrating a gender perspective across
the operations of United Nations missions, including
18-15558

22/05/2018

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

references to gender in Security Council resolutions
and statements and collecting and analysing genderand age-disaggregated data. In addition, creating a link
between protection, empowerment and participation
can help support sustainable peace and avoid the narrow
perception of women as primarily objects of protection,
as Hanaa Edwar said this morning.
The disproportionate suffering of children as a
result of armed conflict must be highlighted. Boys
and girls are killed and maimed, recruited as soldiers,
as human shields or even as forced suicide bombers.
Schools and health-care facilities are destroyed,
impeding children’s enjoyment of their human rights.
It is essential that we protect children today to prevent
new cycles of violence and conflict tomorrow. The
children and armed conflict agenda is an important
accountability mechanism. Its reporting and monitoring
of grave violations against children in armed conflict
are important elements not only for ending impunity,
but also for engagement with parties to conflict. As
Chairman of the Security Council Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict, Sweden will continue to
insist on action on this agenda in the Council.
The Secretary-General spoke about the need to
break the vicious circle between conflict and food
insecurity. We welcome the ongoing work of the Council
on conflict and hunger, which we hope can lead to the
adoption of a resolution in the very near future.
I would like to focus on three issues at the heart of
the protection-of-civilians agenda.
First, there is an urgent need to advance the
commitments set out in resolution 2286 (2016), on
the protection of health care in armed conflict and on
turning the recommendations of the Secretary-General
into action on the ground. In Syria alone, 112 attacks
against medical facilities and workers took place in
2017. In addition, 645,000 medical items were removed
from inter-agency cross-line convoys. In Yemen, health
infrastructure has deteriorated drastically during the
conflict, and we are witnessing the breakdown of public
institutions, including health-care services that have
to make do with very scarce supplies. In Afghanistan,
women make up the largest group of those unable to
access health-care services as a result of violence.
The international community, including the
Council, can and should act to protect medical care in
armed conflict. International law must be respected, and

S/PV. 8264

violations of international law, including international
humanitarian law, must be addressed.
We need concrete steps to improve monitoring
and reporting mechanisms, as well as data collection.
We are currently looking into how United Nations
peacekeeping missions and military practice could
be improved to more effectively protect health care.
Together with the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC) and the Swedish Red Cross, the Swedish
Government will launch a project aimed at enhancing
the ability of armed forces to meet their obligation to
ensure the protection of and respect for health care in
armed conflict while performing their duties.
Secondly, we welcome efforts to strengthen
the protection-of-civilians mandate of United
Nations peacekeeping missions. While the primary
responsibility for the protection of civilians undoubtedly
lies with the host nation, United Nations missions have
a crucial role to play. In this regard, we need to build
on positive experiences and best practices. We welcome
the newly agreed accountability policy clearly stating
the responsibility of senior leadership for strategically
employing the protection-of-civilians mandate in the
work plans of missions.
Thirdly, at the core of both the Secretary-General’s
and the President of the General Assembly’s agendas
are the global compacts for refugees and migrants.
The number of people displaced by conflict continues
to rise, and today’s levels of forced displacement are
unprecedented. Safeguarding respect for international
humanitarian law, refugee law and international human
rights law in these compacts will be crucial.
In practical terms, close coordination and solidarity
across the international community is essential
to effectively addressing the needs of migrants
and refugees.
We support the recommendations contained in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/462) and are
committed to implementing them. Today the ICRC and
Ms. Edwar have asked us to do more, so it is high time
to step up. Waging war in violation of the rules seems to
come at a very small cost; the cost is borne by innocent
civilians. We must strive to create a world in which no
one, neither Government nor armed groups, believe
that they can violate without consequence the rules that
we have all agreed on to protect civilians caught up in
conflict. The Council has a unique role in changing the
game. It is one we cannot abdicate or ignore.

18-1555827/98

S/PV.8264

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The President: I wish to inform all concerned that
we will be carrying on this open debate right through
the lunch hour, as we have a large number of speakers.
I now give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): Sir, Ukraine deeply
appreciates the initiative of Poland to hold this open
debate, as well as the fact that you personally are
presiding over this meeting. We thank the SecretaryGeneral for presenting his report on the issue of the
protection of civilians (S/2018/462), as well as the
Director-General of the International Committee of the
Red Cross for his presentation.
As I am about to deliver a statement in my national
capacity, I also would like to highlight the fact that
Ukraine aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
by the observer of the European Union.
We welcome the fact that for the first time the dire
situation of civilians in Ukraine affected by the Russian
military aggression in the Donbas region of Ukraine
was referred to in the report of the Secretary-General.
Ukraine shares the Secretary-General’s grave concern
about the situations of armed conflict in many countries
in which the civilian population, in particular women
and children, suffers disproportionately as a result of
active military operations.
However, what is really disheartening is that despite
a near-universal recognition by States Members of the
United Nations of the need for full compliance with
international law, including humanitarian and human
rights law, the issue of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict remains as topical today as it was in
1999, when the Council adopted resolution 1265 (1999).
Almost two decades have passed, and we all continue
to express concern, strongly condemn, urge, call for,
underline and so on. Moreover, we are witnessing
a worrisome trend of new and devastating conflicts
emerging and the agenda of the Security Council
continuing to grow.
In all fairness, many countries and international
organizations, including the United Nations, have
taken very concrete and practical actions to alleviate
the suffering of civilians in numerous armed conflicts.
However, the lack of comprehensive and enforceable
action on an international scale hampers our progress
in this area.
So long as impunity rules the day, so long as some
States Members of the United Nations, including
28/98

22/05/2018

one well-known permanent member of the Security
Council, could not care less about implementing the
decisions of the International Court of Justice, the
Council will be doomed to go in circles around the
issue of the protection of civilians, addressing it but
never really resolving it.
What is the solution, one may well ask. I think that
we have to get real. In the absence of a supranational
body to enforce international law, it becomes the
joint responsibility of us all, meaning that no crime
of aggression or other transgression against the
international rule-based system can be tolerated
under pretexts concocted just to protect one’s own
narrow interests.
In keeping with the request contained in the
concept note for today’s debate (S/2018/444, annex), I
will highlight what my country is doing to provide the
best possible protection for civilians as Russia’s armed
aggression against Ukraine enters its fifth year.
As was mentioned earlier, according to United
Nations estimates, some 3.4 million people from the
Donbas region now require humanitarian assistance
and protection. With 1.5 million registered internally
displaced persons (IDPs) since 2014 — the first year of
the conflict — the Ukrainian State has increased more
than six-fold its budgetary allocations for monthly cash
payouts to those IDPs.
The Ukrainian authorities are doing their utmost
to ensure the continuous functioning in the Donbas
region of objects of critical infrastructure that benefit
the local population. For example, the Donetsk Filter
Station, located in the so-called grey zone, supplies
potable water to almost 400,000 people on both sides
of the line of contact. However, five members of its
service personnel were wounded on 17 April after
their car came under fire from Russian-backed forces.
Ukrainian deminers have cleared mines and ordnance
from more than 1,000 civilian infrastructure facilities
and more than 150,000 explosive remnants of war,
including almost 1,000 improvised explosive devices
purposely set up by Russian-backed forces.
In 2017, an inter-agency commission on the
application and implementation of international
humanitarian law in Ukraine was established with
the aim of identifying the most pressing humanitarian
needs, setting concrete goals, monitoring the
implementation of tasks and assessing efficiency
in addressing the needs identified. All that is just a
18-15558

22/05/2018

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

fraction of what has been done to help civilians during
the ongoing military conflict instigated and fuelled by
Russia, which continues to flood the Donbas region
with its weapons and military personnel. Right now,
the conflict may be in a low-intensity phase, but it is no
less deadly. For example, on 20 February, a Ukrainian
military medic, Ms. Sabina Halytska, was killed when
riding in a vehicle clearly marked with a red cross that
was struck by a Russian antitank guided missile. She
was only 23. What is that if not a direct violation of
resolution 2286 (2016), which the Council adopted
unanimously in 2016?
Back in 2005, during a debate in the Security
Council on the same subject that we are discussing
today, one delegation emphasized the need
“to stress the role played by the International
Criminal Court and to recall the as-yet-untapped
potential of the Fact-Finding Commission created
in accordance with article 90 of the first Protocol
Additional to the 1949 Geneva Conventions on
protecting victims of war.” (S/PV.5319, p. 19)
Despite the fact that I am quoting a representative of
the Russian delegation, I would readily subscribe to
every word. I deeply regret that, unfortunately, the
position of one permanent member of the Council is not
as permanent as it could have been in order to save the
lives of many.
In conclusion, we call on all States and parties to
armed conflict everywhere to respect international
humanitarian and human rights law and to abide by the
orders of the Court in The Hague.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Mr. Raimondi (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank Poland and especially its
Foreign Minister, Jacek Czaputowicz, for organizing
this debate. I also thank the Secretary-General, the
Director-General of the International Committee of
the Red Cross and the Secretary-General of the Iraqi
Al-Amal Association for their briefings. Finally, I
thank all previous speakers for their statements.
We thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2018/462). We appreciate his recommendations and
the three protection priorities he lays out. We must
once again deplore the fact that, according to the
report, civilians continue to be the primary victims in
conflicts. The failure to distinguish between combatants

S/PV. 8264

and civilians results in civilian deaths, injuries and
displacement, as well as serious obstructions to and
even attacks on humanitarian assistance. The Security
Council must therefore remain committed to the
protection of civilians in armed conflict by promoting
full respect for international law, particularly
humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee law,
as well as the fight against impunity.
In that context, we must recall the obligations
arising from the four Geneva Conventions of 1949, their
Additional Protocols of 1977, the Hague Conventions
of 1899 and 1907, human rights law and refugee law,
as well as customary international law. It is also
essential to continue to include and enhance civilian
protection within the mandates of United Nations field
missions, and to ensure that they are clearly formulated
and that the operations have the resources they need
to function effectively and quickly. We also note the
importance of ensuring that peacekeeping operations
themselves comply with international humanitarian
law. The Council’s authorization of robust mandates
and their implementation by peacekeeping operations
must not compromise the fulfilment of their core
mandate to protect civilians, or distract them from
their mission based on the fundamental principles
governing peacekeeping operations. Peacekeeping
operations must have clear mandates and the resources
to implement them effectively and in a timely manner.
With regard to humanitarian assistance, all parties
to a conflict must make every effort to ensure effective
and timely access to humanitarian aid, including
supplies and materials. Such assistance enjoys special
protection under international humanitarian law,
and it is therefore worrying that in many situations
humanitarian access is hampered or even denied. It is
also worrying that, as the Secretary-General’s report
indicates, certain measures in the context of the fight
against terrorism continue to affect humanitarian
activities. In that regard, we reiterate the call made
by General Assembly resolution 70/291 for States to
ensure, in accordance with their obligations under
international humanitarian law, that counter-terrorism
legislation and measures do not present obstacles to
humanitarian activities.
Under international humanitarian law and Council
resolutions, attacks of any kind on civilians — especially
women and children — or other protected persons,
schools, cultural heritage sites or places of worship, as
well as the recruitment of children and the obstruction

18-1555829/98

S/PV.8264

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

of humanitarian access, constitute violations of
international law. We regret that two years after the
adoption of resolution 2286 (2016), we have to keep
reiterating that medical and hospital personnel must
not be targeted and condemn the many cases where that
has occurred. Argentina reiterates its call for resolution
2286 (2016) to be implemented as soon as possible,
and urges States that have not yet done so to adhere
to the Safe Schools Declaration, in support of which
my country had the honour of organizing the Second
International Conference on Safe Schools in March of
last year.
The Security Council must remain committed to
protecting civilians in armed conflict, as it has done
in special cases for children, women and journalists,
and to ensuring respect for international law and
ending impunity for grave violations committed
against civilians. In that context, we underscore the
role the system plays in the area of children and armed
conflict. The system must receive the necessary support
to carry out that task.
Argentina reaffirms the preventive role of
accountability mechanisms. Impartial mechanisms
are essential for the investigation of violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights
law. In that regard, I would like to acknowledge the
work of the International Humanitarian Fact-Finding
Commission provided for in Protocol I to the Geneva
Conventions of 1949, as well as the central role played
by the International Criminal Court. We recall that,
in accordance with the Statute of the International
Criminal Court, the Court has jurisdiction over many
of the attacks on civilian populations mentioned in
the report.
Argentina believes it is essential to continue
the debate on the setting up of new mechanisms to
strengthen compliance with international humanitarian
law and to generate a constructive, transparent and
inclusive dialogue among States and other stakeholders.
We therefore support the work of the intergovernmental
process to strengthen respect for international
humanitarian law, facilitated by Switzerland and the
International Committee of the Red Cross.
The existing regulatory framework for the
protection of civilians must be translated into concrete
results in the field. The Council must strengthen its
efforts to find the best way to make that happen.
30/98

22/05/2018

The President: I now call on the Vice-Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Georgia.
Mr. Janelidze (Georgia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important debate against the
background of a global protection crisis, as outlined
by the Secretary-General in his most recent report
on the protection of civilians (S/2018/462). Record
high numbers of people around the world are in need
of humanitarian assistance and protection, a situation
caused predominantly by conflicts.
Addressing the challenge of the protection of
civilians requires collective action along the entire
peace continuum, ranging from conflict prevention to
strengthening governance and institution-building. The
path to protection provided by the Secretary-General
in his report serves as a valuable guideline for us to
focus on. Therefore, let me echo the three priority
areas, based on respective observations from my
national perspective:
First, respecting international law is at the heart of
resolving the Russia-Georgia conflict and addressing
its humanitarian consequences. While Georgia is
committed to that principle, its disrespect by the
Russian Federation, as the occupying Power, is the
major impediment to settlement of the conflict. Russia
continues to violate the Charter of the United Nations
and the main principles of international law, as well as
up to 39 Security Council resolutions.
Ten years have passed since the Russia-Georgia
war, and the Russian Federation has yet to fulfil
its obligations under the European Union-mediated
ceasefire agreement of 12 August 2008. The only
international security presence — the European Union
Monitoring Mission — is unable to fully exercise its
mandate because it is denied access to the territories
that are under illegal military occupation by the
Russian Federation. According to the fifth point of the
agreement, the Russian Federation has to withdraw its
troops and allow international security mechanisms
to be established on the ground. Those factors have
contributed to the creation of an environment that puts
in danger the lives and basic rights of civilians living in
and along the occupied territories.
Unfortunately, incidents resulting in blatant killings
of civilians still take place. Last year a Georgian citizen,
Giga Otkhozoria, was chased and killed by a so-called
border guard at the Abkhaz occupation line, and earlier
this year another Georgian citizen, Archil Tatunashvili,
18-15558

22/05/2018

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

an internally displaced person (IDP), was brutally
killed while in detention in the Tskhinvali region.
Respect for international law goes hand in hand
with the question of accountability. Georgia, in full
transparency, has cooperated with the International
Criminal Court (ICC), conducted unprecedented
investigations to investigate the crimes committed
during the 2008 Russia-Georgia war and facilitated
the opening of the ICC Office in Georgia. The
non-cooperation and refusal to allow access to the
occupied regions from the other side, however, hinders
further progress in addressing the question of impunity.
Another practice in which Georgia has shown its
constructive approach is the Incident Prevention and
Response Mechanism (IPRM). The IPRM was created
within the framework of the Geneva international
discussions and meets regularly in both the Abkhazia
and Tskhinvali regions in order to prevent and react
to the incidents happening along the occupation
line. However, despite the regular meetings in that
format, responses to the major incidents were not
always appropriate.
In that connection, I would like to thank the
International Committee of the Red Cross for its essential
role in Georgia in preventing disappearances, locating
the whereabouts of missing persons and identifying
and handing over human remains to families. With
the help of the Committee, the remains of 162 people
were recovered from 22 grave sites located throughout
the region.
When it comes to the second priority area, my
main message pertains to the urgency of allowing
humanitarian access. Despite the full determination of
the Government to protect its civilian population affected
by the Russia-Georgia conflict, we are prevented from
extending that protection to the population residing in
Georgia’s occupied regions. The civilian population in
those territories are deprived of minimal safeguards for
their safety and are stripped of their fundamental rights
and freedoms, including, but not limited to, the right
to freedom of movement, the prohibition of education
in a native language, the right to health care and gross
violations of the right to property. No international
monitor is allowed to enter the occupied regions and
provide credible information about the humanitarian
and human rights needs on the ground. That should be
totally unacceptable to the international community
and the Security Council.

S/PV. 8264

The third priority area, on preventing and finding
durable solutions to the issue of forcibly displaced
persons, has special importance for Georgia. While
over 10 per cent of our population has been exiled, we
do our utmost to improve the livelihoods of the IDPs,
including by providing them with housing. However,
the fundamental question of respecting their right to
return and claim their property back home remains
unresolved. As the world suffers from unprecedented
flows of forced displacement, with the number of IDPs
alone exceeding 65 million, how we as the international
community address that humanitarian question is of
immense importance.
Ensuring respect for resolution 2286 (2016) remains
pivotal, but its effective implementation will require
further action by the Security Council, including its
permanent members.
In Georgia, after the 2009 veto on the continuation
of the mandate of the United Nations Observer Mission
in Georgia, we faced a vacuum and a need for the
establishment of international security arrangements
on the ground, which directly affect the protection
of civilians.
Against the backdrop of ongoing conflicts and high
casualties in many parts of the world, be it in Yemen,
Syria, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ukraine
or elsewhere, we must step up our efforts to make a
tangible impact on the ground. In order to prevent the
repetition of those crimes, the international community
must intensify its efforts to combat impunity and use
all available mechanisms to ensure that the perpetrators
are held accountable.
We fully support the Secretary-General in his
endeavour to mobilize the United Nations and its Member
States to strengthen the protection of the human rights
of civilian populations in armed conflicts, and we call
for the implementation of his recommendations to that
end. Georgia stands ready to contribute to those efforts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mr. Akbaruddin (India): We thank the delegation
of Poland for holding this open debate. I also thank
the President for personally being present here today.
We listened attentively to the remarks made by the
Secretary-General on this issue. We also thank the
other briefers for their valuable input, perspectives
and recommendations.

18-1555831/98

S/PV.8264

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Listening to the submissions, there is clearly no
dearth of feeling around the Security Council table with
respect to addressing issues related to the protection
of civilians in armed conflict situations. Yet, judging
from the heart-wrenching narratives that we hear, it is
obvious that there is a crisis facing the implementation
of that concept. While it would be historically incorrect
to say that there was ever a time when civilians were
entirely shielded from the harrowing effects of conflict,
the human toll of conflict today is a tragedy that
requires redress by translating the concept into feasible
actions and operational responses.
Throughout history, ways have been sought to
limit the effects of conflict. Respect for international
humanitarian law and other relevant human rights laws
by all parties to an armed conflict and ensuring safe
and unhindered access for medical and humanitarian
agencies to people in need of assistance are wellestablished norms. Hence it is not the absence of norms
that is the cause of today’s challenges, it is the inability
to abide by established norms that is perhaps the reason
for the dismal situation we face in addressing this
multidimensional and cross-cutting issue.
While the rubric on the protection of civilians
stretches over a vast canvas, in view of time constraints
I will limit my remarks to the application of the concept
to United Nations peacekeeping missions directly
mandated by the Security Council. For if we cannot
set our house in order and address the issues with the
tool that the Council designs and oversees, then broader
endeavours may be more difficult to address.
The need to protect civilians in the context of
United Nations peacekeeping operations has gained
prominence since the 1990s, as armed conflict situations
evolved rapidly within the changing global geostrategic
context from inter-State to more intra-State situations,
often involving non-State actors and terrorist networks,
and that has led to large-scale violence against civilians.
From the beginning, the issue has been a complex
one because of the vastly different nature of the armed
conflicts themselves, possible contradiction with the
long-standing agreed principles of United Nations
peacekeeping and the limitations of the mandates and
the serious inadequacy of the resources made available
for peacekeeping missions. The issue continues to be
debated in the Security Council, which has adopted
several resolutions and other documents focused on the
32/98

22/05/2018

concept. Those efforts have not really helped to address
the main challenges.
The difficulties involved in achieving the aims of
civilian protection are well known. The responsibility
of protecting civilians lies, first of all, with the
national authorities. Yet very little is done in terms
of bolstering the societal capacities for protection.
There is a tendency to assume that protection is about
how civilians can be protected by others — that is,
somebody other than those affected. That somebody
could be the parties to the conflict, peacekeepers and
humanitarian organizations. Strengthening national
and societal mechanisms is of primary importance.
Outside agencies can supplement those mechanisms,
but cannot supplant them.
While nine of the current 14 United Nations
peacekeeping missions include civilian protection
among their mandates, this aspect is only one of many
mandated components. By our count, that is one of,
on average, 10 such mandates that each mission is
individually expected to fulfil. Every time the Council
reviews a peacekeeping operation, it must carry out
a serious examination of whether the peacekeepers
have the ability to do what they are expected to do in
extremely trying circumstances.
It is clear that the expectation that United Nations
peacekeepers can effectively ensure the protection of
civilians in the absence of clear mandates is not realistic.
Therefore, the Council’s membership needs to frame
mandates with clarity and specificity. The responsibility
also lies with those deciding the resources to be made
available to peacekeepers so that they are able to fulfil
the tasks that they are mandated to do. The growing
number of instances of serious attacks on peacekeepers
and the high level of casualties suffered by them in
various missions point to the difficulties of being able
to implement so-called robust mandates in situations
involving rival warring groups mixed with civilian
populations. That also puts at risk the credibility and
the image of the neutral presence of the United Nations
in situations of armed conflict.
Conflicts where peacekeeping operations are
deployed are inherently messy, complex and difficult.
However, those factors should not be taken as an excuse
to accept the devastating impact of conflict on civilians.
A number of courses of action and mechanisms and
processes are available to address the operational issues.
It is up to the Council to harness them in a collaborative
18-15558

22/05/2018

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

effort. For that, it is also useful to consider developing
a normative architecture for civilian protection as part
of a broader endeavour, a framework that is politically
attuned but not politicized or seen as instrumentalized.
It is only then can we move forward with cohesion to
address issues that have exacted the heavy price in
civilian lives.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Rosselli Frieri (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, I would like to thank the Polish presidency
for holding this open debate. We thank the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Poland for his
presence here today. I am also grateful for the SecretaryGeneral’s statement and his report concerning the
protection of civilians and medical care in armed
conflict (S/2018/462). Furthermore, I extend my thanks
to the representatives of the International Committee
of the Red Cross and of the Iraqi Al-Amal Association.
Uruguay associates itself with the statements to be
delivered by the representative of Switzerland on behalf
of the Group of Friends on the Protection of Civilians
and by the representative of Qatar on behalf of the
Group of Friends on the Responsibility to Protect.
The report of the Secretary-General summarizes
the situation that affects millions of men, women and
children in armed conflicts in one sentence. It says
simply, “state of unrelenting horror and suffering”.
The attacks on innocent victims, who are killed or
mutilated, and the selective and disproportionate
bombardments against civilian infrastructure that are
present in all conflicts are part of that tragic litany. In
many cases, such attacks are carried out intentionally
against education and health centres and against the
wounded and medical personnel, which makes them all
the more reprehensible.
I wish to focus on the protection of medical
assistance in conflicts and on the need to achieve the
effective implementation of resolution 2286 (2016).
That resolution is an instrument that has the potential
to improve the protection of medical missions in
areas ravaged by war. However, two years after it
was adopted, indiscriminate attacks and bombings of
hospitals and medical personnel continue to increase,
which represents deliberate aggression against the
basic foundations of international humanitarian law.
The data provided by the World Health Organization,
which recorded 322 attacks in 2017, resulting in 242

S/PV. 8264

deaths and 229 injuries among medical personnel and
patients, is a sad illustration of that.
In order to move towards the necessary
implementation of the resolution, Uruguay believes
that it is essential to conduct independent, impartial
and comprehensive investigations into specific
incidents. The international system has at its disposal
various investigative mechanisms that are not fully
taken advantage of. It was mentioned more than once
in the Chamber today that one such example is the
International Humanitarian Fact-Finding Commission
provided for in Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions
of 1949. The Commission has resources at its disposal
and enjoys a permanent framework and group of
independent experts to investigate grave violations
of international humanitarian law. However, since
its establishment, the Commission has encountered
serious difficulties in its activation when the consent of
States concerned is required.
Once again, in that way, the argument of
sovereignty is used to hide facts and prevent the truth
from being discovered. States and parties to conflicts
must also support the work of fact-finding missions
and commissions of inquiry established by the Security
Council, the General Assembly and the Human Rights
Council. That kind of mechanism is important with
regard to investigating and identifying those responsible
for violations of international humanitarian law and
human rights law.
One such example was the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism (JIM), established by the
Security Council, which proved helpful in investigating
incidents in Syria. Based on its investigations, it was
positively determined that chemical weapons had been
used against the civilian population, and it was also
determined who was responsible for the use of those
chemical weapons. Unfortunately, the Security Council
was unable to reach consensus to renew the JIM
mandate, whereby we no longer have an appropriate
instrument at our disposal to investigate those facts.
Uruguay believes that it is of the utmost importance
to establish a system that collects reliable and detailed
information in specific cases involving attacks on
health care in conflicts and to investigate the facts,
while taking advantage of synergies among existing
investigative mechanisms.

18-1555833/98

S/PV.8264

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Accountability is another important aspect
owing to its deterrent effect and because it makes it
possible to end the culture of impunity surrounding
the commission of such crimes. According to the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court,
intentionally targeting hospitals and places where sick
and injured people are gathered, as well as health-care
facilities, constitutes a war crime. The gravity of such
crimes obliges States not only to investigate, but also to
take appropriate measures to prosecute and punish their
alleged perpetrators.
Uruguay was the first country in Latin America to
fully incorporate the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court into its domestic legislation, and
therefore it calls on all States that have not yet done
so to become parties to the Statute and fully cooperate
with the Court. To our mind, the Council also has to
assume its responsibility to ensure accountability when
confronting such violations. To that end, it must use the
instruments at its disposal, such as the imposition of
sanctions and its power to refer cases directly to the
International Criminal Court when appropriate.
In conclusion, I note that, in Latin America,
concern about the fate of victims of armed conflicts is
nothing new, but that it has been around since the early
days of the struggle for independence of the SpanishAmerican colonies.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mr. Giacomelli da Silva (Brazil): I thank you,
Madam President, for organizing this open debate,
and I extend my appreciation to the briefers for
their presentations.
I wish to begin by reiterating Brazil’s longstanding support for the primacy of politics, conflict
prevention and non-military approaches. Our collective
responsibility does not need to translate into collective
security action in order to be effective. It is crucial
to develop an understanding of what force can and
cannot accomplish. The notion that civilians are more
effectively protected by resorting to military action is
not supported by any real evidence. More often than
not, it exacerbates suffering and leads to negative
humanitarian consequences. In the exceptional
circumstances in which resolutions authorize it,
military action should be limited to the mandate.
The Council should demand enhanced reporting and
monitor the implementation of such resolutions. Those
34/98

22/05/2018

troops might not be wearing blue helmets, but they act
upon the authority and legitimacy of a blue text.
Protecting civilians is a core part of the mandates
of many peacekeeping operations. Missions cut across
diverse areas relating to the protection of civilians,
such as gender affairs, the rule of law, security
-sector reform, community violence reduction and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. A
comprehensive approach to sustaining peace must
start by simultaneously integrating peacekeeping and
peacebuilding objectives, thereby recognizing the role
of peacekeepers as early peacebuilders. We must ensure
that peacekeeping missions have both the capabilities
and the resources that they require.
Non-State actors, including terrorist groups,
deliberately target civilians as a military tactic. Such
violations warrant the strongest condemnation. At
the same time, it is impossible to ignore the fact that
violations of international humanitarian law have also
been perpetrated by national Governments, including
under the claim of protecting civilians. We cannot lose
sight of concerns about the use of new technologies,
in particular armed drones. Such technologies might
be testing the limits of the principles of humanity,
distinction, proportionality and precaution — not to
mention the challenge to general international law
when used extraterritorially outside conflict zones.
It is unacceptable to witness indiscriminate attacks
on civilians, the destruction of cultural heritage and
military action against schools and medical facilities.
Brazil commends those who carry out medical
activities during armed conflicts, while enduring harsh
conditions to save human lives and minimize suffering
on the ground. It is crucial that all parties to armed
conflicts facilitate safe and unimpeded access for
medical and humanitarian personnel.
The nature of warfare might have changed, but the
rules of war have not. All parties to armed conflicts
must comply with their obligations under international
law, including the 1949 Geneva Conventions and their
Additional Protocols. Violations must be investigated
and their perpetrators must be held accountable. In
that regard, Brazil reiterates the central role of the
International Criminal Court and remains a steadfast
supporter of the universality of the Rome Statute. We
need to enhance humanitarian compliance and legal
accountability. We would also benefit from enjoying
a dedicated space for States to discuss international
18-15558

22/05/2018

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

S/PV. 8264

humanitarian law in a voluntary and non-politicized
manner. Brazil calls upon all States to engage
constructively in the intergovernmental process
aimed at finding such a space and promoting valuable
exchanges on international humanitarian law.

are awarded honours by their military commands.
Those crimes continue to be perpetrated in Palestine
and in Indian-occupied Jammu and Kashmir — two of
the oldest disputes on the agenda of the United Nations
and the Security Council.

In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity
to stress the importance of mainstreaming a gender
perspective into all our efforts to protect civilians.

As an inevitable consequence of armed conflict,
the international community is confronted with the
challenge of increasing civilian casualties, as well as
an ever-greater need for humanitarian assistance and
protection for people displaced by it. According to the
Secretary-General’s report on the protection of civilians
(S/2018/462), last year alone the United Nations
recorded more than 26,000 civilian deaths in just six
situations of armed conflict, with 128 million people
in dire need of humanitarian assistance and protection.
Let me underscore five specific points in that regard.

“There will never be peace in the world as long as
women do not help create it”.
Those are not my words. They were voiced by
Bertha Lutz, a member of Brazil’s delegation to the
San Francisco Conference in 1945. We are proud to
co-organize a panel to be held today in the Trusteeship
Council Chamber on the theme “Women and the
Origins of the United Nations — A Southern Legacy”.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Let me start by thanking
Poland for convening this debate. We also thank the
Secretary-General and the Director-General of the
International Committee of the Red Cross for their
insightful briefings.
The rules of conduct of armed conflict are clearly
codified and articulated in various conventions and
legal instruments. Yet the cardinal principles of
distinction and discrimination between civilians and
combatants, military necessity and proportionality
continue to be violated, and warring parties still operate
with impunity. The legal framework is there. It is the
persistent failure to comply with those obligations
and to respect the rules of international humanitarian
law during armed conflict that remains the abiding
challenge. Whether it is plausible deniability or abuse,
the grim reality is, when the beast of conflict roars,
legal regimes fall silent.
Gone are the days when the impact of armed
conflicts on civilians was limited to collateral damage.
Targeted attacks, sexual violence, forced conscription
and indiscriminate killings collectively serve to paint
an extremely bleak picture of the human costs of
modern-day armed conflict. Civilians, who should be
the primary subject of protection, have become the
principal objects of attack. The Geneva Conventions
are violated, respect for human life is also violated,
and civilians are used as human shields in occupied
territories. Worse, perpetrators who commit such crimes

First, the protection of civilians is a system-wide
responsibility, but host countries bear the primary
responsibility for the protection of all civilians
without discrimination.
Secondly, violations are neither inevitable nor
insurmountable. They can be mitigated by the consistent
use of the entire range of national and international
judicial and non-judicial means for promoting
compliance with international humanitarian law and
ensuring accountability. Military training, for instance,
must include familiarization with the principles of
international law governing armed conflict and a full
understanding of the legal implications of commands
issued and obeyed in situations of combat.
Thirdly, the lack of political will to fully respect
humanitarian law and other applicable rules is the
primary impediment to protecting civilians in armed
conflict. Sustained pressure from those with influence
over parties to conflicts can rectify that terrible wrong.
Fourthly, the protection of civilians, wherever
mandated by the Council, is, and should be, a priority
for United Nations peacekeeping operations. Pakistan
is one of the world’s leading contributors of troops to
United Nations peacekeeping, and Blue Helmets from
my country have contributed to many of its success
stories in Africa, from Liberia to Sierra Leone. Our
well-trained and professional peacekeepers have
protected civilians, provided them with much-needed
medical care and helped to rebuild their lives.
Fifthly, the Security Council, as the primary
body tasked with maintaining international peace and

18-1555835/98

S/PV.8264

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

security, should focus on the root causes of emerging
and long-standing conflicts and find inclusive political
solutions. Inaction by the Council in cases of foreign
aggression and occupation produces situations where
such crimes breed.
Finally, let me say that the goal of the protection
of civilians can best be achieved by preventing the
outbreak of armed conflict in the first place. Our
collective efforts need to be geared towards that crucial
goal. Otherwise, we will be treating only the symptoms,
and not the cause.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Colombia.
Mr. González (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): As
this is the first time I speak during Poland’s presidency,
I would like to congratulate your country and you,
Madam President, on convening this debate.
After the statements delivered this morning by the
Director-General of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, by Ms. Hanaa Edwar and by my various
colleagues who preceded me, I can only express
my solidarity with the humanitarian and healthcare personnel who contribute so much, generally in
complex and violent contexts, risking their own lives
to consolidate peace. That is a crucial issue, because,
as the Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/462) reveals,
armed conflict, terrorism and violent extremism are
increasingly taking their toll, with 128 million people
in need of immediate humanitarian assistance.
In May 2017, in this very Chamber, Colombia
underlined how even the barbarity of war has rules
of obligatory compliance for the parties involved (see
S/PV.7951). But when conflict deteriorates, the basic
principles of humanity also deteriorate in attacks on
those in the most vulnerable situations. The continuous
deterioration of the atrocious humanitarian situations,
which have been mentioned here, obliges us to comply
with the pending task of implementing the mandate
of resolution 2286 (2016). It urges us to a greater
political commitment and a duty, before the obligations
emanating from international humanitarian law and
from respect for human rights by everyone, to stop
the barbarism.
The Colombian State has adopted the sacred
mandate to protect all civilians and provide the utmost
respect for and protection to the medical missions that
serve them, with the resolute and effective support
36/98

22/05/2018

of the United Nations. It has not been an easy task
because, as my country has reiterated so many times
here before, in a conflict that lasted more than five
decades and ended with the Final Agreement to End
the Armed Conflict and Build a Stable and Lasting
Peace, international humanitarian law formed the
indispensable basis for achieving that Agreement. At
present, even with obstacles to overcome, we continue
to make progress with the support of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia, as reflected in the
various reports presented to the Council.
The results of that comprehensive approach to the
protection of civilians through peacebuilding efforts are
evident. The objective is obvious if we stop to observe
the positive impact of the implementation of the peace
agreement with the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia, namely, the lowest homicide rate in
42 years, the fewest kidnappings since statistics
have been available, 8,994 weapons surrendered to
the United Nations and 1,238 weapons seized in 205
illegal warehouses.
In the midst of the armed conflict, Colombia
adopted a series of international humanitarian law
instruments that contributed to strengthening its role
in the protection of civilians. Among them, today I
would like to highlight the Anti-Personnel Mine Ban
Convention — an instrument that has contributed to the
decontamination of 33 per cent of municipalities with
anti-personnel mines, which has benefited 2.4 million
people and cleared 6.1 million square metres.
Finally, the consolidation of the rule of law is the
most solid foundation for creating conditions for the
protection of individuals and the full enjoyment of their
individual rights. The best context for that is a country
at peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway.
Mr. Hattrem (Norway): I have the honour of
speaking on behalf of Finland, Iceland, Denmark,
Sweden and my own country, Norway.
We would like to express our gratitude to Poland
for holding this open debate.
Practical measures to increase compliance with
international humanitarian law are of great importance
to civilians caught up in conflict. They can no longer
wait for possible future action. The lack of respect
for obligations under international humanitarian
18-15558

22/05/2018

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

law has long-term devastating effects on individuals
and communities. How people are protected, or not
protected, during armed conflicts has a major impact on
prospects for peace and reconciliation, reconstruction,
the restoration of basic services and civilian structures
and the return and reintegration of displaced people.
I would like to mention a few examples of the
practical initiatives and measures taken to increase
compliance with international humanitarian law and
the protection of civilians, supported by the Nordic
countries. They are all examples of partnerships
among States, practitioners, civil society and
humanitarian organizations.
First, the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) has systematically addressed attacks on health
care through the Health Care in Danger Initiative. It is
an excellent example of building a community of action
in the field, coupled with advocacy and cooperation
at the global level with States and other international
organizations. We encourage all States to support the
implementation of the recommendations emanating
from the initiative. Médecins Sans Frontières,
Geneva Call, the World Medical Association and the
International Council of Nurses all play a key role
in awareness-raising, while also sharing knowledge
and best practices. We urge all States to support the
efforts of the World Health Organization to establish a
single, standardized surveillance system to collect and
disseminate high-quality data on attacks on health care.
As we marked the two-year anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 2286 (2016) earlier this month, we call for
its implementation.
Secondly, in June 2015, 37 States came together
in Oslo to launch the Safe Schools Declaration. It
includes a practical commitment to implementing the
Guidelines for Protecting Schools and Universities from
Military Use during Armed Conflict. That is part of our
commitment to protect children during armed conflict.
Civil-society organizations within the Global Coalition
to Protect Education from Attack played a key role. We
are encouraged that 74 States have now endorsed the
Declaration and that States, international organizations
and civil society are committed to its implementation.
We urge all States to join and implement the Safe
Schools Declaration.
Thirdly, dialogue with parties to conflict is key to
enhancing the protection of civilians. States that are
in a position to influence the situation on the ground

S/PV. 8264

should lead by example in that regard. We would also
like to highlight the work done in conflicts by the
ICRC, Geneva Call and others to engage armed forces
and non-State armed groups in order to make them
understand their obligations and act accordingly by
changing their practices. The Deeds of Commitment,
used by Geneva Call to engage armed groups to protect
civilians, are great examples of practical measures
based on knowledge and experience in the field.
Fourthly, the obligation for States parties to the
Mine Ban Treaty and the Convention on Cluster
Munitions to clear contaminated areas and destroy
stockpiles is a very concrete and efficient way to
contribute to protecting civilians after conflict. A total
of 29 States and one other area are no longer suspected
of being contaminated with landmines since the Mine
Ban Treaty was adopted, in 1997. Close partnerships
between civil society and States concerned about the
use of such indiscriminate weapons made that possible.
Fifthly, we should support the call by the SecretaryGeneral to avoid the use of explosive weapons with
wide-area effects in populated areas and to develop
policies on the use of such weapons to avoid civilian
harm. The report of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs on existing policy and practice
is an operational approach to the issue. We should aim
for a clear international standard of practice. We stand
ready to contribute to developing practical measures
and guidance on the basis of lessons learned.
Sixthly, those who commit atrocity crimes must be
held accountable in order to prevent future violations.
All States have a responsibility to investigate and
prosecute individuals who perpetrate atrocity crimes. In
cases where States are unable or unwilling to prosecute,
the Security Council should refer the situation to the
International Criminal Court.
Lastly, essential to the protection of civilians is the
recognition that women and girls are under particular
threat in armed conflicts and that the participation of
women in preventive action will greatly increase the
effectiveness of such action.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I would like to thank you,
Madam President, for choosing this very important
agenda item.

18-1555837/98

S/PV.8264

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

I would also like to thank my colleague Mr. Jürg
Lauber of Switzerland and to align myself with the
statement he will deliver later today on behalf of the
Group of Friends of Protection of Civilians in Armed
Conflict. He will provide a more comprehensive view
of this very complicated and vast subject. I would also
like to align myself with the statement to be made by
the observer of the European Union.
I would like to echo what many have already so
eloquently stated, including the Director-General of
the International Committee of the Red Cross, namely,
that there is a major gap separating words and action.
Our task is to bridge it. I need not recall the horrific
situation in many countries where civilians are under
extreme strain. We have seen the pictures of events in
Syria, Yemen, Afghanistan, Myanmar, Ukraine and
many other places where human suffering is a daily
occurrence. Again, we must bridge the gap between
words and action.
I very much endorse the remarks made by the Polish
Minister for Foreign Affairs, who stated that there
are three areas on which we must work: prevention,
protection and accountability. There can be no impunity
for those who commit crimes that demonstrate disregard
for the protection of civilians.
With regard to prevention, I would also like to say
that, if elected to the Security Council, Germany will
attempt to ensure that conflict prevention is featured
more prominently on the Council’s agenda.
Turning now to the specific case of the plight of
the Rohingya, I believe that much more could have
been achieved had the international community, in
particular the Security Council, paid attention to the
issue earlier on. We saw it coming. The situation would
not be as disastrous as it is had the global community
paid attention to the situation in Myanmar earlier. A
very important step must now be taken. The Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Pramila Patten, has an opportunity
to visit Myanmar and support a structured dialogue
between the Government and victims, including
assisting the survivors of sexual assault in order to
ensure accountability for those crimes.
To build on Ms. Edwar’s remarks with regard to
Iraq, the second step that should be taken in Myanmar
is that of reconciliation. In that respect, I very much
welcome the decision by the Secretary-General to
appoint a Special Representative for Myanmar, the
38/98

22/05/2018

Swiss diplomat Christine Schraner Burgener. One of
her objectives will be to facilitate reconciliation in the
situation in Myanmar so that the Rohingya can safely
return to their homes.
In addition to prevention, which, again, is an area
where we could have done more, there is also the issue
of protection. In that regard, I would like to refer to what
the Director-General of the International Committee of
the Red Cross said this morning, and what our colleague
from Norway highlighted, namely, the Health Care in
Danger initiative. As health care is a key issue, this is
one of the key initiatives that have to be taken forward.
When we look at the conflict in Syria, for example, it is
clear how much health-care institutions were subject to
attack. That has to stop, and more has to be done.
Also with regard to protection, I would like to
announce that today Germany is endorsing the Safe
Schools Declaration, which we believe is also a very
important initiative. As my Norwegian colleague
rightly said a moment ago, it is key that we protect all
educational institutions from attacks.
Peacekeepers constitute one of the most important
elements in the context of protection. United Nations
peacekeeping operations continue to be essential for
the protection of civilians. In the Central African
Republic, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
in South Sudan, to cite but a few examples, it is
often peacekeepers who stand between the civilian
populations and their tormentors. The protection
mandates that the Security Council assigns to missions
therefore need to be more robust. At the same time,
peacekeepers need to have adequate resources and be
properly trained. And we have to see to it that mandates
are implemented.
I think there is a lot that can be done, as was
highlighted by the Santos Cruz report. The SecretaryGeneral’s proposals are aimed in that direction.
However, I believe that discussions about cutting
budgets for peacekeeping operations are not the right
step forward, especially if the goal is for peacekeepers
to actually fulfil their mandate and protect civilians.
The last point I wanted to make is to highlight that
we think that New York and Geneva should work more
closely together. We sometimes have the impression
that New York and Geneva are not on two different
continents, but on two different planets. For instance,
the Human Rights Council has set up a group of experts
to look into human rights violations in Yemen. I believe
18-15558

22/05/2018

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

S/PV. 8264

that the findings of that group could be highly relevant
for our political discussions here in New York. We
should make use of its results as they are presented.

the face of terrorist threats. We must look into ways to
further improve and coordinate our joint fight against
this scourge in all its forms and manifestations.

In conclusion, we know from listening to debates in
the Security Council that on many political issues there
is a great deal of controversy, and sometimes severe
polarization. But when it comes to the protection of
civilians, I would appeal to the members of the Security
Council to put aside political differences. In our view,
a common objective should be to protect innocent
civilians from harm and persecution.

That effort should also include refraining from
signing documents with non-State armed groups that
will encourage them to use such documents as means
of propaganda to claim legitimacy. We therefore
believe that all international organizations and
non-governmental organizations should refrain from
drawing up any kind of documents, including so-called
Deeds of Commitment, with terrorist organizations.
Instead, reinforcing the legal framework for preventing
and punishing recruitment activities by terrorist
organizations should be the priority.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): I would like to thank you,
Madam President, for organizing today’s important
and timely debate, and the Secretary-General and the
briefers for their insightful statements.
Next year will mark 20 years since the protection of
civilians was placed on the Security Council’s agenda.
In an increasingly disaster-prone and volatile security
environment, civilians are confronted with the most
severe effects of conflicts. More than 26,000 civilian
casualties were recorded in 2017 in just six emergency
situations worldwide. Currently, 65.6 million people
around the world have been forced to flee, which is
an unprecedented number. Among them are nearly
22.5 million refugees, over half of whom are under the
age of 18. Millions of people have been denied access to
such basic rights as education, health care, employment
and freedom of movement. In our world, 20 people a
minute are forcibly displaced as a result of conflict or
persecution. Against that backdrop, as pointed out by
the Secretary-General in his most recent report on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2018/462),
the most effective way to protect civilians is to prevent
the outbreak, escalation, continuation and recurrence
of armed conflict.
First, focusing on prevention or addressing the root
causes of conflicts should be at the top of our agenda.
We possess the adequate tools to address challenges
to international peace and security. We should act
accordingly and translate our legal commitments into
practical actions. A case in point relates to the fight
against terrorism. Terrorist organizations, whose
primary aim is to inflict violence on civilian targets, do
not feel bound by any international legal framework.
Unfortunately, certain members of the international
community fail to implement their commitments in

As indicated by the Secretary-General in his report,
children continue to be disproportionately affected by
armed conflict. It goes without saying that poverty and
the lack of education are among the main drivers of
radicalization. Our prevention efforts should also focus
on those root causes by channelling a sound combination
of humanitarian and development assistance.
Secondly, undoubtedly, the primary obligation
for protecting civilians lies with States. However, the
international community has a shared responsibility
to also help protect civilians in situations where States
fail to do so. We should step up our humanitarian
assistance in order to address the acute needs of people
in emergency situations.
In Syria, where we are witnessing one of the most
dramatic and protracted humanitarian crises, Turkey
will continue to give a hand to those in need. We
will also continue our assistance to, and cooperation
with, the United Nations in the cross-border delivery
of humanitarian aid, which is indispensable for the
survival of hundreds of thousands of affected people.
Through the United Nations, we should spare no effort
to enable safe, unimpeded and sustained delivery of
humanitarian aid and services.
Medical evacuation constitutes another component
of efficient humanitarian action. In 2017, the World
Health Organization recorded 322 attacks in conflictaffected countries across the world. This month will
mark two years since the Security Council adopted
its landmark resolution 2286 (2016), which is solely
dedicated to the protection of medical personnel in
armed conflict. As one of the sponsors of the resolution,
we call for its effective implementation, which has

18-1555839/98

S/PV.8264

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

become increasingly important in view of the continuing
disrespect for international humanitarian law.
Thirdly, hospitality towards those fleeing conflicts
should be a moral and political principle that we should
all uphold. In the face of the surge in forced displacement
around us, we are all confronted with difficult choices
in terms of helping those in need of protection. As a
neighbouring country of Syria, Turkey deeply feels the
multiple effects of the tragedy in that country. As the
largest refugee-hosting country in the world, with more
than 3.5 million Syrian refugees within our borders, we
will continue to mobilize our resources for the wellbeing of these people. We call on the international
community to take responsibility and provide shelter
for, and ameliorate the living conditions of, millions of
displaced people around the globe.
Upholding international humanitarian law and
the protection of civilians are among the primary
responsibilities of the Security Council in the
maintenance of peace and security. Unfortunately,
the Council’s response far from meets expectations,
in particular with respect to the most critical issues,
such as Syria and Palestine. What we have witnessed in
those two parts of the world is a total disregard for all
the values that the United Nations system has striven
to defend for more than 70 years and a clear violation
of the principles of international law. There cannot be
any excuse for targeting innocent civilians. We must
act decisively and establish genuine accountability
mechanisms in order to put an end to impunity.
This week, we will mark the second anniversary of
the first-ever World Humanitarian Summit, which was a
milestone in generating more than 3,000 commitments
to strengthening the protection of civilians and the
promotion of the centrality of protection. Taking this
opportunity, we call upon all Member States and
stakeholders to honour their commitments, which
can make a real difference to the lives of the millions
suffering from crises.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): Protecting
civilians in armed conflict is a universal obligation
under international humanitarian law, not a policy
decision by States. Targeting civilians, health-care
providers, schools or other protected persons or
facilities is a crime, irrespective of considerations of
military necessity. Nevertheless, we have witnessed a
40/98

22/05/2018

gradual and dramatic erosion of respect for the most
basic rules of warfare. It is our collective responsibility
to reverse that trend through the special role entrusted
to the Security Council, at the core of whose mandate
is the protection of civilians.
The large-scale suffering of civilian populations
continues in many ongoing conflicts — in Syria, Yemen,
Myanmar and the Central African Republic, among
other places. The many violations include starvation,
sexual and gender-based violence as a method of
warfare — often also committed against men and boys,
such as in the Central African Republic — and attacks
on medical workers and facilities, which continue
to increase at an alarming rate despite the strong
condemnation by the Security Council in resolution
2286 (2016). The continued lack of implementation of
that resolution should be a call for action to the Security
Council, and the membership as a whole, as the erosion
of the international rule of law is of concern to all of us.
Preventing mass atrocities from occurring in the
first place is the most effective protection of civilians.
We are encouraged by the fact that 116 States have
joined the code of conduct of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group on mass atrocity
crimes. We hope that more States will soon subscribe to
that important political commitment, especially those
that are interested in serving on the Security Council.
We will continue to work towards its consistent
implementation by requesting its application and by
engaging with the United Nations system to that end.
We encourage the Secretary-General to continue to
bring to the attention of the Council situations where
atrocities are committed or where an outbreak of
violence is likely, in line with the powers of his Office
under the Charter of the United Nations.
The situation of the Rohingya in Myanmar is
among the most pressing examples of such situations.
We welcome the recent visit of the Security Council to
Myanmar and Bangladesh. At the same time, the visit has
not inspired a sense of urgency in the Council’s actions.
There is little indication that the Council will address
the accountability dimension of the ongoing crisis.
However, it is clear that ensuring justice is part of the
conditions necessary to allow for the safe and voluntary
return of the forcibly displaced Rohingya population.
It is precisely for such kinds of situations that the
International Criminal Court (ICC) was created 20 years
ago. We commend the Court’s Prosecutor for exploring
the option of investigating the forced displacement of
18-15558

22/05/2018

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

the Rohingya as a crime against humanity. However,
we also continue to believe that the Security Council
should use its competence to refer the situation — and
therefore all crimes committed in the conflict — to the
Court. The Council has so far shown an unfortunate
inclination to separate the justice dimension from the
humanitarian crisis when it seems clear that the latter
cannot be addressed without the former. In our view,
that will not work. That situation remains an’ excellent
illustration of the fact that the Council needs to address
mass atrocities in order not only to protect civilians but
also to do its work effectively.
In conclusion, let me echo the call of the SecretaryGeneral, who this morning asked for the full support
of all States for the International Criminal Court, and
join the many speakers who called for the universal
ratification of the Rome Statute. We would also like to
remind the Council that armed conflict itself poses the
greatest threat to civilian populations. From 17 July,
which is the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court,
the Court will have jurisdiction over an additional
crime — the most serious forms of the illegal use
of force. We therefore call on all States to ratify the
Amendments to the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court on the crime of aggression, thereby
giving the ICC jurisdiction over that crime.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Hungary.
Mrs. Bogyay (Hungary): Today, as the line
between international and internal armed conflicts
becomes more blurred, vulnerable groups are
deliberately and systematically targeted during the
many conflicts facing us. The international community
has the primary responsibility to step up all its efforts
to strengthen respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law.

S/PV. 8264

special attention to the principle of the responsibility
to protect, as it is a core element of prevention. We
must pay persistent attention to the warning signs of
potential atrocity crimes, particularly serious violations
of human rights in certain areas.
Hungary strongly supports utilizing the prevention
mechanism of the Human Rights Council. As a
member of the Council, one of our priorities is to
work towards the prevention of such atrocity crimes
and the promotion of the already existing tools of the
international community. Accountability and ending
impunity are key to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. In that context, we need to set up an effective
accountability mechanism by enhancing the capacities
of national institutions. Our attention must focus on
empowering victims of armed conflicts.
At the international level, Hungary supports the
work of the International Criminal Court, as well as
that of the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011.
As the ultimate guarantor of international peace
and security, the Security Council has a major role in
preventing and in adequately responding to violations
against civilians in armed conflicts. Hungary is
a member of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency (ACT) group. We would like to encourage
all Member States to sign the ACT code of conduct,
which calls for refraining voluntarily from the use of the
veto in the Security Council in cases of mass atrocities,
genocides, war crimes and crimes against humanity.

We would like to thank the Polish presidency of
the Security Council for organizing this very important
open debate.

Hungary attaches great importance to the
protection of women and children. We support
international initiatives aimed at combating sexual
violence in conflict. I would like to stress that women
and girls are especially threatened by rape, forced
marriage and sexual slavery. Their protection, return
and safe reintegration into their communities, as
well as the elimination of any related stigma, can be
successful only in partnership with local communities
and moderate religious leaders. Nor can we forget about
the children born to survivors of rape. Ensuring birth
registration and acceptance by family and community
is key in that regard.

Hungary believes that the best way to protect
civilians is by preventing armed conflicts. We devote

One of the most outrageous violations of
international humanitarian law is the increase in

Hungary aligns itself with the position to be
expressed on behalf of the European Union, as well as
with the statement to be delivered by the representative
of Switzerland on behalf of the Group of Friends on the
Responsibility to Protect.

18-1555841/98

S/PV.8264

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

attacks on civilian infrastructure such as health-care
facilities and schools. Attacks on education, including
on students, particularly female students, teachers and
schools can have a dramatic impact on the lives of
children, dashing their hopes for a better future.
Ensuring respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law, especially as concerns women,
children and their empowerment, is vital in bringing
about long-term stability, peace and reconciliation,
and creating an environment conducive to sustainable
social and economic development.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain.
Mr. Moragas Sánchez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I should like to start by congratulating and thanking the
Polish presidency of the Security Council for having
recalled the special responsibility of the Security
Council in reaffirming the importance of international
humanitarian law and the protection of civilians. I wish
also to thank Yves Daccord and Ms. Hanaa Edwar for
their statements.
Spain aligns itself with the statement to be made by
the observer of the European Union on behalf of its 28
member States, and by Qatar on behalf of the Group of
Friends on the Responsibility to Protect.
Spain attaches the highest importance to the
protection of civilians in its work at the United
Nations. Violations of international humanitarian
law, access-related problems, combating sexual and
gender-based violence in conflict, the protection of
children, the situation of detainees and the need for
accountability are some of the issues to which we pay
the greatest attention.
Today I would like to devote my statement to attacks
against medical personnel and facilities as well as those
that target schools and other educational institutions. In
both cases they affect two pillars of any society: health
and education.
A little more than two years ago, five non-permanent
members of the Security Council came together with
one objective: to put an end to attacks against the
sick and the wounded, medical personnel providing
assistance to them and medical facilities in armed
conflict. As we have reiterated on other occasions, my
country is satisfied with the unique nature of resolution
2286 (2016) because of its scope, the role it grants to
civil society and the procedure followed in its drafting
42/98

22/05/2018

and negotiation. The fact that it was sponsored by 84
Member States also reflects the high degree of support
for its objectives.
However, two years after its adoption, we cannot be
equally satisfied with the degree of compliance with the
resolution. I believe, however, that more and more of us
are raising our voices when an attack occurs to demand
that a prompt, impartial and exhaustive investigation
be carried out, as stated in the recommendations of
the Secretary-General issued a few months after the
adoption of the resolution.
On April 24 and 25, Spain organized the first
annual retreat on international humanitarian law for
the members of the Security Council in order to create
a forum in which the various areas of action of this
normative body could be debated. This year’s retreat
was devoted to the protection of medical assistance
in conflict. The goal was for the various options for
enhancing respect for international humanitarian law
and resolution 2286 (2016), which I mentioned earlier,
to be debated among representatives of humanitarian
organizations, academia and the United Nations system.
During the debate, it became clear that in order
to achieve long-term results, a firm commitment on
the part of all States Members of the United Nations
was necessary. This translates into possible revisions
of our national laws and military doctrines, as well as
the inclusion of the protection of medical assistance in
conflict in our bilateral contacts. The road map already
exists, with the Health Care in Danger initiative of
the International Committee of the Red Cross. In
addition, my country is prepared to recall during its
contacts the potential of existing non-judicial factfinding mechanisms, in particular the International
Humanitarian Fact-Finding Commission.
We wonder, however, what more we can do from
a multilateral perspective. International humanitarian
law and resolution 2286 (2016) make it clear that
certain behaviours are prohibited, but we cannot ignore
the fact that these norms are not being complied with.
We wonder also how we can generate the political
will necessary to achieve a behavioural change in the
various parties to a conflict, and how we can increase
the political or reputational cost to those responsible
for these attacks. We wonder also if the United Nations
should not take on a more prominent role in those cases
in which none of the existing fact-finding systems can
be activated, now that we have initiatives such as the
18-15558

22/05/2018

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

World Health Organization’s Surveillance System of
Attacks on Health Care.
Spain wishes to explore, together with the other
four co-penholders of resolution 2286 (2016), which
options could allow for a greater degree of compliance.
We believe that the General Assembly can play a role
in this respect.
Spain’s concern also extends specifically to the
protection of education in armed conflict. As in the
health sector, it is not only the present but also the
future of any society that is at stake. Today, on the third
anniversary of the Safe Schools Declaration, we know
that attacks against students, schools and universities
and their staff have increased in recent years.

S/PV. 8264

The report paints a very bleak picture of the current
state of the protection of civilians in armed conflict and
respect for the rules of international humanitarian law
and human rights law. According to the report, attacks
against civilians and civilian infrastructure, medical
workers, facilities and humanitarian convoys have
increased since the adoption of resolution 2286 (2016).
Those attacks are taking place in various places around
the world, but they are more prevalent in the Middle
East. We condemn all the attacks that have taken place
against civilians, including medical and humanitarian
staff throughout the world, especially in Palestine,
Afghanistan, Yemen, Syria and Myanmar.

I would conclude by stating that the protection of
civilians is not about positioning oneself on the side of
one or the other; it is about being on the side of civilians,
who need medical assistance, education and, more
generally, protection. Let us translate our words into
concrete action. We cannot afford the cost of inaction.

The new round of repression and the massacre of
unarmed Palestinian civilians in Gaza, including women
and children, is the latest in an old pattern followed
by the Israeli regime over the past seven decades. On
14 May, the world and the Council witnessed the Israeli
army commit yet another war crime in Gaza, killing
more than 60 unarmed Palestinian civilians and injuring
thousands more in a single day. Given the circumstances,
there is no doubt that those vicious attacks and killings
were planned and deliberate. Those criminal acts took
place with total impunity being extended to the Israeli
regime by the United States, the same country that later
tried to prevent the appointment of a commission of
inquiry in the Human Rights Council.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.

The account of Canadian physician Tarek Loubani
is very telling, as he recounts:

Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
outset, I would like to express my appreciation to the
Polish presidency for having organized this debate. I
would also like to thank the briefers for their input into
today’s debate.

“On 14 May, while treating patients with gunshot
wounds in Gaza during the Great March of
Return, I was shot in both legs by Israeli forces.
One medic on my team, Musa Abuhassanin,
was killed while attempting to providing care to
Palestinian protesters”.

We in Spain have just announced our intention to
host the third Safe Schools Conference, in 2019. We
will work to ensure that the Declaration is endorsed by
more Member States, and that, with the help of all, it is
made more operational.

I align myself with the statement to be delivered
later by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
It is most unfortunate that civilians still account for
the vast majority of casualties in armed conflicts. As
the latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/462)
indicates, civilian populations continue to bear the
brunt of armed conflicts across the globe. The report
shows that at least 26,000 civilians were killed in 2017
as a result of armed conflicts in only six countries,
namely, Afghanistan, Iraq, Somalia, the Central
African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Yemen.

That happened with medical staff wearing high-visibility
jackets. When they approached injured Palestinians,
they did so with their hands raised so as to show soldiers
that they were unarmed medical professionals.
More than three years of Saudi-led aggression
against an already impoverished Yemen has claimed
thousands of civilian lives, in particular those ofwomen
and children, and brought about the destruction
of Yemen’s civilian infrastructure — including
hospitals, schools, roads, food factories and power
plants — thereby depriving civilians of their most basic
necessities. Blocking humanitarian access to an already
famine-stricken Yemen has led to further deterioration

18-1555843/98

S/PV.8264

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

in the humanitarian nightmare in Yemen and led to
the most catastrophic humanitarian situation the world
has seen for many decades. That aggression continues
under the watch of the Security Council. Worse still,
this inhumane war enjoys the full military, logistical
and training support of the United States.
We are living in a world with a growing sense of
frustration with regard to dealing with the suffering
of civilians in conflict. No one is winning wars. For
the sake of the millions of civilians who are suffering
around the world, the international community urgently
needs to end current conflicts and to prevent new ones
from erupting.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Skinner-Kleé Arenales (Guatemala) (spoke
in Spanish): Allow me to congratulate your delegation,
Mr. President, for organizing this open debate on a
critical topic, particularly for the Security Council. We
welcome the concept note (S/2018/444, annex) prepared
by your delegation. We also thank the SecretaryGeneral, the Director-General of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, Mr. Yves Daccord, and
Ms. Hanaa Edwar for their informative briefings.
Protecting human life and the safety of all civilians
is at the heart of any Security Council mandate.
However, while there are many relevant resolutions of
the Council, especially under Chapter VII of the Charter
of the United Nations, with a strong international legal
basis, a significant part of civilian populations in
armed conflicts continue to be innocent victims. We
have often witnessed flagrant and deliberate attacks
targeting civilian targets, as well as the indiscriminate
use of explosive devices, and even chemical weapons,
in clear violation of the Geneva Conventions and their
Additional Protocols.
Although many Council decisions have been
taken on the basis of resolutions 1265 (1999) and 2286
(2016), to which the Ambassador of Spain referred, the
reality is that there is a need to develop national and
international regulatory frameworks that clearly govern
the foundations and institutional responsibilities for the
protection of civilians, which will promote respect for
the law and, most important, put an end to impunity for
such atrocious and despicable actions.
With regard to peacekeeping operations, Guatemala
reiterates that it is essential for the Council to bear in
44/98

22/05/2018

mind that its primary and exclusive responsibility is
to forge peacekeeping operations with realistic and
succinct mandates whose key objective is the effective
defence of civilian populations. Unfortunately,
the reality on the ground tells another story. Some
mandates are not adapted to the specific context of
the mission in question, while others do not match the
challenges of the situation. Often mandates are not in
line with operational challenges on the ground, or are
insufficiently supported by political, financial and,
especially, human resources.
With regard to the civilian protection mandate
in the framework of peacekeeping operations, my
delegation regrets that, within the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations, Member States have not
been able to reach a minimum consensus to define
what is meant by protecting civilians. We look forward
to the new policy proposal being prepared by the
Secretariat for the effective protection of civilians, to
be presented in September, with the understanding
that it will include the input and opinions of the entire
membership, including troop-contributing countries.
We also reiterate the important contribution of
peacekeeping operations to the comprehensive strategy
for sustaining peace. Promoting the protection of
civilians in armed conflicts in the context of such
operations has a direct impact in the implementation of
the sustaining peace agenda on the ground.
Finally, my delegation welcomes the recommendation
in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/462)
regarding the most effective way to protect civilians,
which is through prevention. The preventive approach
is a priority that we fully share with the SecretaryGeneral because it is coherent and based on respect
for international law and full observance of human
rights, which in turn will result in better performance
by peacekeeping operations. In that regard, we must be
aware that, by defending and prioritizing the protection
of civilians in armed conflict, we are sending not
only a message of hope but also a clear signal of the
firm commitment of the political will of the Council.
The best way for the Council to act is through shared
decisions that prioritize the responsibility to protect
civilian populations. Otherwise, this principal organ
of the United Nations will not only be prevented from
fulfilling its fundamental mission but will continue to
be criticized worldwide for its contumacious behaviour.
18-15558

22/05/2018

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Mlynár (Slovakia): At the outset, allow me
to thank the Polish presidency and to express my
appreciation for the initiative to convene this important
open debate on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict and on the context of the global state of the
protection of civilians. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing and for his recent
report on the issue (S/2018/462), as well as the other
briefers who enriched the debate earlier today.
While fully aligning ourselves with the statement
to be delivered by the observer of the European Union,
I would like to offer a few additional remarks.
Today’s open debate on this topic is not only of
the utmost importance but, unfortunately, is very
timely as well. Every day we bear witness to an
unprecedented downgrading of the value of civilian life
and human dignity. The Council has an important role
to play — including in this particular context, which
can hardly be overemphasized. Attacks on civilians, as
well as on civilian infrastructure — whether targeted
or accidental — seem to be a common part of warfare.
The inability or unwillingness of States to protect
their own civilians — their own people — is a major
failure of their primary responsibility. That happens
even though we have made considerable progress in the
legislative framework, as its implementation somehow
falters. Therefore, we need to do more to achieve
tangible progress on the ground and, in that regard, I
would like to mention three particular areas of focus.
First, we the Member States must reaffirm our
commitment to the values and principles of international
law, including international humanitarian law and
human rights law. We have to respect and uphold it and
we have to claim and ensure our key role to protect our
people. It goes without saying that violators of these
norms are to be held accountable, whether by national
authorities that have the primary responsibility for
their prosecution or within the international justice
framework. We believe that achieving the universal
jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court would
be the first step.
Secondly, the role of the security sector in the
protection of civilians is also substantial, and Slovakia
is a long-standing supporter of the issue of security
sector reform and governance. A failure of the security

S/PV. 8264

sector often results in security threats and violations
against civilians, as well as human rights abuses.
Security-sector institutions, if well-developed and
representative of the diversity of the population, can
address specific needs of various groups within the
population and thereby play a crucial role in prevention
as well. I would like to place special emphasis on the
word “prevention” here, which is closely linked to the
issue of the protection of civilians.
Thirdly, there is an urgent need to unconditionally
protect the safety and security of humanitarian
aid, whether we are speaking in terms of personnel
or infrastructure. According to the World Health
Organization, 322 attacks targeted health care in
conflict areas in 2017, with the majority of those
being intentional. The fatal impacts of those attacks
are multiplied by the use of explosive and chemical
weapons, often in densely populated areas. The
implementation of the framework set out in resolution
2286 (2016) and the relevant recommendations of the
Secretary-General is imperative in that regard.
Next year we will celebrate the twentieth
anniversary of the Security Council’s engagement with
the protection of civilians through the specific landmark
resolution 1265 (1999). It will be a good opportunity
to look back and reflect on the positive developments
that have been made, but also to redouble our efforts
towards the full and universal implementation of
recommendations put forward in numerous reports
of the Secretary-General and raised during today’s
open debate.
We cannot, so to speak, gamble with the principles
of humanity: our action when protecting civilians
must be decisive and resolute at both the national and
international levels.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium.
Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in
French): Belgium aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered by the observer of the European Union,
as well as those to be made by the representative of
Switzerland on behalf of the Group of Friends of the
Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict and by the
representative of Qatar on behalf the Group of Friends
on the Responsibility to Protect.
I would like to thank you, Sir, for organizing this
debate. I would also like to thank the briefers for their

18-1555845/98

S/PV.8264

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

excellent presentations, which underscored the gravity
of the situation.
A year ago, the Secretary-General had already
highlighted the need to strengthen respect for
international humanitarian law, the rules of which
are increasingly being flouted. In his latest report
(S/2018/462), he again rightly insists on that point and
provides new recommendations. It is in that spirit that
today Belgium would like to present some concrete
measures and suggestions that contribute to the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.
First of all, it must be remembered that the
primary responsibility lies with States. In Belgium, an
interministerial commission for humanitarian law was
established in 1987 to monitor the implementation of
international humanitarian law. We also have the means
to ensure perpetrators are held accountable, including
by establishing universal jurisdiction where permitted
by a sufficient connecting factor.
In addition to States, non-State armed groups must
also be made aware of the need to respect international
humanitarian law. Belgium commends the outstanding
work of Geneva Call in that regard, the results of which
are encouraging, as emphasized by the SecretaryGeneral in his report. However, our efforts would not
be complete if they did not were simultaneously applied
at the international level.
Belgium actively supports and participates in the
intergovernmental process of strengthening respect
for international humanitarian law, facilitated by
Switzerland and the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC). The work of promoting and protecting
international humanitarian law carried out by the ICRC
is more indispensable now than ever before against a
backdrop of flagrant erosion of these rules. It is for that
reason that my country has, for several years, provided
more than €20 million of financial support a year.
When States are unable to cope or are clearly lacking
in their obligation to protect their civilians, action
undertaken by the international community becomes
paramount. The protection of civilians is therefore at
the heart of the mandates of the vast majority of United
Nations peacekeeping operations. In the majority of
cases, that mandate is implemented; however, under
some circumstances the protection of civilians has not
been ensured, with devastating human consequences. It
is on those cases that we must concentrate in order to
prevent their reoccurring.
46/98

22/05/2018

Belgium believes that training is a cornerstone of
the prevention of such atrocities. We therefore decided
to invest in the training of contingents by supporting
the first French-language training in the protection of
civilians, to take place in a few weeks’ time in Entebbe.
We are providing a specialized trainer and have
translated the course materials into French so that they
are accessible to more troop-contributing countries.
Like others, Belgium has made a commitment to
protect civilians through the Kigali Principles. We
welcome the broad adherence to the Principles by troopcontributing countries. That is a positive development.
We encourage more countries to join the movement,
as well as to commit to concretely implementing the
Principles on the ground.
The protection of civilians is also an element that
must be taken into account in mediation efforts to
resolve conflicts. At a seminar at the United Nations
in February, chaired by Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister of Foreign Affairs Didier Reynders, it emerged
that there were sometimes difficulties in converging
the respective objectives of political mediation and
humanitarian negotiation. All too often, the actors
involved in each of those processes operate as though
in a vacuum. Strategic thinking is therefore necessary
in order to make the best choices while taking those
two dimensions into account.
In the face of increasing violations of international
humanitarian law and the fight against impunity — a
source of new conflicts in itself — we also call on the
Security Council to strengthen its support for national
judicial proceedings and hybrid mechanisms. States
that have not yet done so should also ratify the most
recent version of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court in order to ensure that the perpetrators
of atrocity crimes can no longer find refuge and thereby
escape accountability.
Finally, I would like to conclude by recalling the
obligations incumbent on all of us pursuant to resolution
2286 (2016), adopted two years ago by the Council, the
principles of which remain more pertinent than ever.
In that regard, Belgium is pleased to announce that
it is adhering to the principles set out in the political
declaration proposed by France on 31 October to take
concrete measures to strengthen the protection of
medical personnel in conflict zones.
18-15558

22/05/2018

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The President: I now give the floor to the Chargé
d’affaires ad interim of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations.
Ms. Adamson: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Montenegro and Albania, as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves
with this statement.
I would like to thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Republic of Poland, the Secretary-General and
the representative of the International Committee of the
Red Cross for their speeches.
The protection of civilians remains of the
utmost concern for the EU and its member States,
and we welcome this opportunity to speak today.
We also welcome the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2018/462), along with the practical recommendations
contained therein.
One does not need to look to official documents
or reports to be made aware that we are facing a
protection crisis. Every day, news reports remind
us that civilians — including women, children and
persons with disabilities — disproportionately suffer
the consequences of conflict and instability. Schools
and hospitals are regularly attacked, with negative
effects also on the fulfilment of the right to education
and the possibility for children to pursue a better future.
That was a worrying trend throughout 2017, which
unfortunately has continued in the first months of 2018.
I would like to address four areas that are of
particular concern to us and where the EU and its member
States have taken steps to advance protection efforts:
respect for international law; preventing gender-based
violence; reducing restrictions on humanitarian access
and protection of medical and humanitarian personnel.
Only a few days ago, the Security Council,
together with numerous Member States, reaffirmed its
commitment to upholding and respecting international
law (see S/PV.8262). Notwithstanding that, civilian
populations continue to bear the brunt of armed
conflicts across the globe — whether it be as victims
of deliberate or indiscriminate attacks, such as those
suffering from the reverberating and long-term effects
of urban warfare or those forcibly displaced from
their homes.

S/PV. 8264

It is our collective responsibility to ensure
respect for international law, including international
humanitarian law and human rights law, and to hold
those who violate it accountable. It needs to be said
openly that civilian victims of unimaginable atrocities
need elementary satisfaction of the sense of justice. We
are morally obliged to bring perpetrators of crimes to
justice, especially those who commit the most flagrant
violations of international law.
Within the EU, there has been an increasing
number of prosecutions under national legislation
against those who breach the norms of international
humanitarian law. The EU maintains strong support for
international justice and accountability, including the
work of the International Criminal Court, and urges all
States members of the United Nations to do the same.
Let us bridge the gap between what is being said in the
Council and everyday practice.
Secondly, as noted in the Secretary-General’s
report, sexual and gender-based violence continues
to be employed as a tactic of war, terrorism, torture
and repression. It is a common and alarming trend
across various and otherwise diverse crises. The
victims — women and girls, men and boys — are often
those already belonging to the most vulnerable groups.
It is therefore absolutely imperative that a gender
perspective be incorporated in protection efforts,
including humanitarian action. To that end, the EU
and its member States remain committed to, among
other initiatives, the Call to Action on Protection from
Gender-based Violence in Emergencies. We encourage
partners to urgently implement their commitments.
Thirdly, the year 2017 served as a sombre reminder
of the crucial link between the protection of civilians and
humanitarian access — and more often the lack thereof.
Widespread and persistent constraints on the delivery of
humanitarian aid prevented millions of civilians across
the world from meeting their most basic needs. The EU
condemns, in the strongest terms, the use of siege and
starvation tactics as a method of war. Politics have no
role to play in the delivery of life-saving assistance. The
EU also opposes bureaucratic impediments, including
delays in permits or visas, that challenge effective
humanitarian action.
Lastly, mindful of States’ legitimate security
concerns, we oppose the criminalization of principled
humanitarian activities under the pretext of countering
terrorism. Therefore, under the March 2017 European

18-1555847/98

S/PV.8264

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Union directive on combating terrorism, the provision
of humanitarian assistance by impartial humanitarian
organizations recognized under international law does
not fall within the scope of that directive.
Fourthly, and related to my last point, the EU
remains concerned about the safety and security of
humanitarian personnel, including those providing of
medical services in conflict. As facilitator of the General
Assembly resolution on this topic (General Assembly
resolution 72/131), we work tirelessly to strengthen
the protection of those who risk their lives on a daily
basis to help others, including national staff. We are
also fully committed to the continued implementation
of resolution 2286 (2016), adopted by the Council two
years ago, and urge other States to join us in this effort.
Principled humanitarian action, including the provision
of medical services to the wounded and the sick, defines
our humanity and must remain an undisputed priority.
Finally, peacekeeping missions can play a pivotal
role by having the protection of civilians at the core of
their mandates, in line with the Kigali Principles. In
that regard, we must seek a better definition of possible
political strategies for the protection of civilians that
can help to improve implementation on the field, as
well as in the framework of the reform of the peace
and security architecture envisaged by the SecretaryGeneral and its focus on prevention.
In addition, Member States should strive to improve
the gender balance in all components of peacekeeping
operations in order to achieve more equitable gender
representation and to improve the capacity of missions
in reaching all segments of the civilian population.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): I wish to thank the Polish
presidency of the Security Council for organizing this
briefing, as well as the briefers, namely, SecretaryGeneral António Guterres; Mr. Yves Daccord, DirectorGeneral of the International Committee of the Red Cross;
and Ms. Hanaa Edwar, as civil-society representative.
Italy aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union and with those to
be delivered by the representative of Switzerland, on
behalf of the Group of Friends on the Protection of
Civilians in Armed Conflict, and by the representative
of Qatar, on behalf of the Group of Friends on the
48/98

22/05/2018

Responsibility to Protect, which we co-chair. We wish
to add the following remarks in our national capacity.
Civilians suffer enormous consequences from
armed conflicts and insecurity in a wide array of
circumstances, including targeted attacks, indirect
consequences of internal conflicts and urban warfare,
mass displacement and the use of starvation as a
method of war. For those reasons, we strongly believe
that the protection of civilians — in particular women,
children and persons with disabilities — must be at the
core of the agenda of the United Nations system and
of all its activities. We also believe that the protection
of civilians is a fundamental duty and obligation that
each Member State and the international community as
a whole must entirely fulfil.
Essential preconditions to ensure the protection of
civilians must comply fully in all circumstances with
the cardinal principles of international humanitarian
law, in particular the 1949 Geneva Conventions and
their Additional Protocols, human rights law and
refugee law. In that regard, a strong link between
accountability and prevention must be achieved.
On the one hand, serious violations of international
humanitarian law and of the relevant Security Council
resolutions must be thoroughly investigated and
perpetrators brought to justice, including, where
applicable, through referrals to the International
Criminal Court or other international tribunals.
On the other hand, early-warning and early-action
mechanisms for prevention are instrumental in raising
awareness and adopting an atrocity-prevention lens
in possible conflict situations. We fully support
the long-term holistic approach to the protection of
civilians outlined by the Secretary-General in his
latest report (S/2018/462), which consists of addressing
the root causes of conflicts, advocating for respect of
international humanitarian law, including by non-State
armed groups, and ensuring full accountability.
In that context, we recall the landmark resolution
2286 (2016), on the protection of humanitarian and
health-care facilities and personnel. Two years after
its consensual adoption, we still need to see its urgent
and full implementation, as attacks on hospitals and
humanitarian convoys continue unabated. We urge not
only that health-care facilities and personnel not be
targeted in the context of conflicts, but also that safe
and unimpeded humanitarian passage be guaranteed to
18-15558

22/05/2018

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

them as a critical condition for the effective and timely
provision of humanitarian assistance.
Against a backdrop of increasing indiscriminate
attacks against civilians, we are particularly alarmed
by those affecting children, who suffer the most
devastating effects of conflict. Italy condemns, in
the strongest possible terms, attacks directed against
schools, as well as any military use of schools, while
recalling in that regard the Safe Schools Declaration, to
which we urge more Member States to subscribe.
In line with our strong commitment to the
Call to Action on Protection from Gender-based
Violence in Emergencies, Italy believes that a genderoriented approach is key to prevent and respond to
emergency situations.
Finally, peacekeeping missions should effectively
and proactively implement their protection-ofcivilians mandate in line with the Kigali Principles
on the Protection of Civilians, to which Italy has
fully subscribed.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Estonia.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I thank you, Sir, for
convening today’s ministerial-level open debate on a
very timely and critically important topic.
Estonia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union.
As described extensively in the SecretaryGeneral’s annual report on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict (S/2018/462), we continue to witness the
grim reality of growing numbers of civilians killed in
conflicts, as well as ongoing violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law.
Over the years, a number of landmark resolutions
have been adopted, such as 1894 (2009), which
prioritizes the protection of civilians in the context of
the United Nations peacekeeping operations, as well
as 2286 (2016), which is dedicated to the protection
of medical care in conflict situations. We recognize
the progress that has been made, but at the same time
emphasize the need to take further steps in fully
implementing those and other relevant resolutions. We
need full and unimpeded humanitarian access to the
people in desperate need of it, and we need to ensure
that those helping will be safe as well.

S/PV. 8264

The primary responsibility of States is to ensure
the protection of their people. In that regard, I would
like to emphasize the paramount importance of conflict
prevention and peacebuilding. More needs to be done
in addressing the root causes of conflict, finding
avenues to promote political dialogue and creating
truly inclusive societies. Estonia fully supports the
Secretary-General’s reform agenda and the concept
of sustaining peace, as well as placing prevention
and sustaining peace at the core of the work of the
United Nations.
Furthermore, in terms of preparing peacekeepers
and other United Nations staff to be deployed on
missions, education and training in international
humanitarian law has an important role in supporting
efforts to halt and prevent acts of violence, attacks and
threats against the wounded and sick and medical and
humanitarian personnel, as well as medical facilities.
References to mission-specific legal issues prior to
deployment could prove to be valuable and lead to
better application of international law, as well as
complement the overall troop-training procedure and
raise awareness.
For our part, Estonia has ratified the main
instruments of international humanitarian law
with regard to the protection of civilians and has
introduced the necessary domestic regulations for their
enforcement. Every measure has been taken to ensure
that our military personnel do not violate international
law when carrying out their duties and that they are
trained to comply with the obligations to protect
civilians as agreed in the Kigali Principles on the
Protection of Civilians.
Finally, let me emphasize the importance of
accountability. Perpetrators must be brought to justice
and States must ensure that those responsible do not
operate with impunity. In that regard, let me also
underline the role of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) in cases where investigations or prosecutions at
the national level are not possible. We encourage States
to cooperate with the ICC, and the Security Council
to refer matters to the ICC. In cases already referred
to the ICC, further support from the Council is of
paramount importance.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chile.
Mr. Skoknic (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We would
like to thank the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Poland

18-1555849/98

S/PV.8264

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

for convening and presiding over this important debate
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict. We
also appreciate the briefings made by the SecretaryGeneral and the Director-General of the International
Committee of the Red Cross.
This debate could not be more timely, as it is taking
place at a time when the international community is
bearing witness to the suffering of millions of women,
children and men trapped in armed conflicts around
the world. Chile is strongly committed to the agenda
for the protection of civilians in armed conflicts and
recognizes the link between the women and peace and
security agenda and that of children in armed conflict,
which form part of our foreign policy priorities. A clear
example of that is the open debate that we organized on
this topic during our presidency of the Security Council
in 2015 (see S/PV.7374).
The spiral of violence that leads to war,
displacement and abuses against vulnerable groups,
especially women and girls, is not inevitable. Chile,
like the Secretary-General, believes that the best way
to protect civilians is to address the root causes of
conflicts, promote human rights and the rule of law,
strengthen governance and institutions and invest in
inclusive and sustainable development.
We must move from delayed reactions to preventive
actions. The commitment to conflict prevention also
obliges us to deal with illicit and irresponsible arms
transfers, which facilitate conflicts and undermine
protection and peacebuilding initiatives. In that context,
I would like to highlight that only four days ago, on
18 May, we deposited our instrument of ratification of
the Arms Trade Treaty as a clear commitment of my
country to this matter. Consequently, 95 States have
ratified the Treaty.
We fully agree with the priorities set out by the
Secretary-General in his report (S/2017/414) of May
2017 and reiterated in his latest report (S/2018/462),
of 14 May, regarding the need to bolster respect for
international humanitarian law and international
human rights standards, promote good practice among
the parties to a conflict, protect humanitarian and
medical missions, prioritize the protection of civilians
in United Nations peacekeeping operations and prevent
forced displacement, while seeking durable solutions
for refugees and internally displaced persons.
In conclusion, I wish to emphasize that
accountability is a central tenet that ensures that the
50/98

22/05/2018

parties to an armed conflict improve their compliance
with international obligations. Of equal importance are
justice and reparations for the victims of such crimes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Lauber (Switzerland): I am pleased to take the
floor on behalf of the members of the Group of Friends on
the Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict, namely,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, France,
Germany, Italy, Japan, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, the
Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, the United Kingdom,
Uruguay and my own country, Switzerland.
The Group of Friends thanks the Polish presidency
of the Security Council for organizing today’s
open debate. We also thank today’s briefers for
their statements.
It is of paramount importance that the protection of
civilians be discussed by the Council on a regular basis
to advance full respect for, and the implementation
of, the norms related to the protection of civilians, as
enshrined in international humanitarian law, human
rights law, international refugee law and international
criminal law. The protection of civilians is a key
aspect of the maintenance of peace and security, and
we call on the Council to systematically uphold and
include core protection-of-civilian standards in its
deliberations and decisions consistently and throughout
the Council’s agenda.
Doing so is more necessary today than ever. The
latest report (S/2018/462) of the Secretary-General on
the protection of civilians clearly indicates widespread
violations of international humanitarian law and
worrying trends in a number of areas. Indiscriminate
attacks on civilians and civilian objects, including
medical facilities and schools, occur with appalling
frequency in many contemporary conflicts. In some
cases, the wounded and sick, as well as medical
personnel, are intentionally attacked. Detainees are
treated inhumanely, impartial humanitarian actors
continue to face widespread and persistent humanitarian
access constraints and millions of civilians are forced
from their homes into a perilous fate where they face
heightened protection and assistance needs, countless
others are missing, with insufficient attention provided
by States to clarify their fate and inform next of kin of
their whereabouts.
18-15558

22/05/2018

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

There is a continuing trend of the urbanization of
conflicts, with an acute impact on civilians and civilian
objects, due to the indiscriminate use of weapons in
densely populated areas. Children are often the ones
to suffer the most devastating effects from conflicts,
and that is why unlawful attacks directed against
schools must be condemned in the strongest terms,
while taking note in that regard of the Safe Schools
Declaration. The starvation of the civilian population
and its besiegement are increasingly being used as
methods of warfare. On this last issue, we welcome the
ongoing discussions in the context of the Assembly of
States Parties to the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court regarding a proposal to amend the
current legal accountability framework.
Recognizing the heavy civilian toll of today’s
conflicts should not be to the detriment of highlighting
progress and identifying avenues for action. Let us learn
from the benefits of compliance with the norms and
principles of humankind and from positive examples.
Let us be ambitious with regard to protection. It is
within that context that the Group of Friends would like
to stress the following five priorities.
First, enhancing respect for international humanitarian
law is absolutely crucial. We are all called upon to
ensure respect for international humanitarian law
through the Geneva Conventions relating to the
protection of victims of international armed conflicts.
Armed conflicts are regulated by specific rules, which
include those governing the conduct of hostilities,
providing for humanitarian access and protecting
the wounded and sick, including the provision of
medical care to the enemy. In view of widespread
violations, we call on the Council and Member States
to uphold their responsibilities in that regard, notably
by supporting the Geneva-based intergovernmental
process on strengthening respect for international
humanitarian law.
Secondly, accountability for violations of
international humanitarian law is of paramount
importance to demonstrate to actual or potential
perpetrators that violations do not go unpunished and,
equally important, to deliver justice to victims. We
welcome national-level investigations and prosecutions.
In line with the principle of complementarity, when
such national systems are unable or unwilling to act,
accountability should be ensured through existing
international investigative and judicial mechanisms.
We call on all States to ratify the Rome Statute of the

S/PV. 8264

International Criminal Court and fully cooperate with
the Court.
Thirdly, the implementation of resolution 2286
(2016), on the protection of health care in armed
conflict, must remain a priority. In that regard, we
welcome recent initiatives by Member States and
organizations dedicated to mobilizing political
leadership, encouraging the exchange of good practice
and fostering implementation at all levels, in particular
the establishment in Geneva of an informal group of
support to the resolution.
Fourthly, United Nations peacekeeping operations
and special political missions play a vital role in
supporting the transition from conflict to peace in
some of the most fragile regions in the world, and we
would like to thank all of those who contribute to such
endeavours, especially troop- and police-contributing
countries. The destabilizing effects of such conflicts,
particularly the violence and displacement that they
produce, often leave civilian populations vulnerable
to human rights violations and abuses. Peacekeeping
missions contribute to reducing that threat, and
protection-of-civilians activities, including those
carried out by the civilian component of missions, are
rightly at the heart of their objectives, taking note of the
Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians.
The protection of civilians is a core obligation of the
United Nations, but expectations and capability must
converge. We therefore encourage more focused debates
in all bodies responsible for peacekeeping operations,
and we welcome the efforts of the Secretary-General
to mobilize all partners and stakeholders in support of
more effective United Nations peacekeeping, including
through his Action for Peacekeeping initiative.
Fifthly, and finally, there is a need to dedicate
greater attention to the protection of civilians in counterterrorism contexts. Counter-terrorism measures taken
by States must always comply with international
humanitarian law, human rights law and international
refugee law. We call on States to ensure that counterterrorism legislation and measures do not impede
humanitarian and medical activities or engagement
with all relevant actors, as foreseen by international
humanitarian law. We also call on the Council and other
relevant parties to consistently uphold those principles
and consider ways of strengthening protection in
counter-terrorism contexts.

18-1555851/98

S/PV.8264

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Today’s armed conflicts are, first and foremost,
protection crises. Prevention must remain a priority.
We must follow those avenues for action and build on
the initiatives and practical measures highlighted in
the Secretary-General’s report. More must be done to
promote the development of national policy frameworks
on the protection of civilians, engage with non-State
armed groups to enhance the protection of civilians,
facilitate exchanges on good practice and ensure
compliance with the relevant provisions of international
law and accountability for their violation. The Group of
Friends is committed to doing its part and contributing
to global-level advocacy to enhance the protection of
civilians in armed conflicts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, allow me to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council and on your capable steering of the
work of the Council. I thank you, Sir, for convening
this open debate to discuss the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. We appreciate the importance that
the Polish presidency attaches to this topic, which
was demonstrated by the participation of Poland’s
Minister for Foreign Affairs during the beginning of
today’s debate.
In a famous decree, when the caliph of Prophet
Mohammed, Caliph Abu Bakr As-Siddiq, sent an
army of Muslims in a defensive mission in the seventh
century, he gave them rules of guidance that served
as a basis for the protection of civilians at all times.
He stated:
“Do not commit treachery or deviate from the
right path. You must not mutilate dead bodies. Do
not kill a woman, a child or an aged man. Do not
cut down fruitful trees. Do not destroy inhabited
areas. Do not slaughter any of the enemies’ sheep,
cows or camels, except for food. Do not burn date
palms, nor inundate them. You are likely to pass
by people who have devoted their lives to monastic
services; leave them alone.”
With those eloquent words the caliph of Prophet
Mohammed summed up the rules of the protection of
civilians. He did not forget those who devoted their
lives to worshipping. Those are principles and rules
that should be committed to and complied with at any
time and in any place.
52/98

22/05/2018

The bleak reality of today’s world is painful; it
falls far short of the vision of Caliph Abu Bakr. The
protection and integrity of civilians guaranteed by
Abrahamic religions and international law are violated
without fear of accountability or persecution and with
total disregard of humanitarian principles. A few days
ago, we witnessed new carnage that was committed
by Israeli forces in Gaza, claiming the lives of tens of
Palestinian martyrs and wounding thousands.
For seven successive years, the world has witnessed
the bloodshed in Syria, claiming the lives of hundreds
of thousands of civilians through all means of murder
and genocide. In Myanmar, the world is watching
hundreds of thousands of Rohingya Muslim civilians
being expelled from their homes; their homes are being
burnt, their women raped and their children displaced.
In Yemen, Iran-supported Houthi gangs are carrying
out abhorrent forms of torture and humiliation against
civilians, including the recruitment of children, planting
mines in residential areas and using civilians as human
shields, including a 4-year-old child, Jamila, who was
saved by the Arab coalition to restore legitimacy in
Yemen and handed safely back to her family.
It is high time that the perpetrators of such hostilities
against civilians recognize that their crimes will not go
unpunished. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has therefore
endorsed the establishment of a commission of inquiry
for the crimes committed in Gaza, and also supports
the establishment of the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic. We call for the facilitation of
the return of the Rohingya Muslims to their homes and
for those responsible to be held to account for the harm
inflicted upon the Rohingya.
My country, in collaboration with its partners in
the Arab coalition to restore legitimacy in Yemen, is
carrying out a military operation to save the Yemeni
people from the obscurantist Powers that wish to
control and lead the Yemeni people into subversion. We
have exercised the greatest care, caution and restraint
in our operations to ensure the efficient and inclusive
protection of civilians. Occasional and undeliberate
incidents have been given due attention and investigated;
in many cases, we held to account those responsible and
compensated those affected. The measures taken by the
coalition to protect civilians included the following.
18-15558

22/05/2018

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

First, we have worked to identify military targets,
which includes a number of phases, starting with
selecting, analysing and making sure that the target
is a military object by consulting a number of sources
in order to guard against mistakes in the targeting
mechanism. We assume that any site in Yemen is a
civilian site, unless proven otherwise.
Secondly, we continue to assemble a list of
prohibited areas and sites that cannot be targeted,
including, inter alia, civilian areas, places of worship,
diplomatic offices, headquarters of international
organizations and non-governmental organizations
and archaeological and heritage sites. That list is
regularly updated.
Thirdly, coalition forces use guided and pinpointaccuracy weapons, despite the high cost of such arms,
in order to guard against any collateral damage.
Fourthly, we drop warning leaflets in the areas
where we plan military targets before targeting those
objects, in order to ensure that civilians clear the area.
Fifthly, we follow standard operating procedures,
while investigating and evaluating the impact of
air strikes.
Sixthly, we established a unit on the protection of
children and civilians in our Joint Command, and we
enable the technical team of the United Nations to train
the members of that unit.
All of that proves that the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia is committed to the high standards that emanate
from the venerable religion of Islam and the decree of
Caliph Abu Bakr and relevant international law. We
confidently call for those who disregard such rules and
do not admit responsibility for their actions, carrying
out cold-blooded murder, to be held accountable, be
they snipers in Gaza or those using barrel bombs and
chemical weapons in Syria. They are supported by
parties, particularly members of the Iranian regime, who
commit murder through sectarian militias in Lebanon,
Syria and other parts of the world. It is regrettable and
reprehensible that the Iranian representative speaks
about the suffering of civilians in Yemen, given that
that country is the primary cause of such suffering.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Panama.
Mr. Arrocha Ruíz (Panama): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the members of the Human

S/PV. 8264

Security Network, a cross-regional network composed
of Austria, Chile, Costa Rica, Greece, Ireland, Jordan,
Mali, Norway, Slovenia, Switzerland, Thailand, South
Africa as an observer, and my own country, Panama.
The Human Security Network is an informal group
of States that promotes the integration of the human
security approach into policies and programmes at the
regional, national and international levels.
On behalf of the Network members, I would like to
express our appreciation to the presidency of Poland for
convening this open debate on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict, as well as to thank today’s briefers
for their statements and to express our gratitude for
the presentation of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/462).
The protection of civilians in armed conflict is one
of the priorities of the Network, and we have engaged
constructively in Security Council debates on the issue
since 2002. We encourage the Security Council to
continue advancing the protection agenda and separate
this important issue from other political discussions
that could undermine the potential of this framework
of action. The Human Security Network is of the
view that traditional security approaches should be
complemented by a people-centred, holistic approach
to security. That includes a focus not only on the
protection of civilians once a conflict situation occurs,
but also conflict prevention in a broader sense.
The Human Security Network welcomes the latest
report of the Secretary-General. We observe with
growing concern that civilian populations continue to
bear the brunt of armed conflict across the globe, in
particular when explosive weapons are used in populated
areas. In such cases, international humanitarian law is
often insufficiently implemented. We appreciate that
the Secretary-General’s report addresses the issue,
and we encourage Member States to participate in
their respective ongoing talks. We wish to support the
Secretary-General in his call for strict compliance with
international humanitarian law, including the utmost
precaution in the conduct of hostilities in urban settings.
We share the Secretary-General’s view that, in the
long term, the best way to protect civilians is to address
the root causes of conflict, build sustainable peace,
promote human rights and the rule of law, strengthen
governance and democratic institutions and invest in
inclusive and sustainable development. We encourage
the Council to use all the information generated by

18-1555853/98

S/PV.8264

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

the different organs of the United Nations to better
implement the international norms and obligations for
the protection of civilians.
We welcome the continued calls for accountability
for violations of international humanitarian law, which
is vital for the protection of civilians and achieving
sustainable peace. Accountability is a key element in the
protection of civilians. States must comply with their
obligations under international law to hold accountable
perpetrators of crimes committed against civilians.
As the international community, we should do more
to build national capacities to ensure accountability
for violations of international humanitarian law and
human rights.
We value the continued attention that the Security
Council is giving to this important issue, and we further
call on the Security Council to strongly, systematically,
consistently and promptly respond to all violations
of international law in situations of armed conflict.
Neither silence, nor tolerance nor impunity are an
option. That is a message that should clearly emanate
from the Security Council and one that must resonate
with us all.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Observer of the Observer State of the Holy
See to the United Nations.
Archbishop Auza: The Holy See would like to
thank the Polish presidency for organizing today’s
important and very welcome debate.
The Fourth Geneva Convention puts the protection
of civilians at the heart of international humanitarian
law. The 1977 Protocols Additional to the Geneva
Conventions significantly improve the legal protection
covering civilians and the wounded. Yet, despite those
safeguards, one can safely affirm that it has never been
as perilous to be a civilian in the middle of armed
conflict as it is today. Sadly, the Security Council
must listen regularly to testimonies of the most brutal,
barbarous and premeditated instances of the targeting
of civilians and civilian infrastructure as a tactic of war.
Taking into account the atrocities and all the attacks
deliberately targeting innocent civilians in many parts
of the world, the Secretary-General rightly speaks of a
global protection crisis. The current level of preventable
suffering is indeed horrifying and, as Pope Francis
has repeatedly stated, it is utterly unacceptable that so
54/98

22/05/2018

many unarmed persons, including many children, have
to pay the price of conflict.
Essential health services, including hospitals and
the work of medical personnel, play a critical role as
providers of vital life support and sustainers of hope
and trust during conflicts. Any attack on hospitals,
schools and staff deprives entire generations of their
right to life, health and education, as Pope Francis has
noted. The spate of recent attacks on medical facilities
in conflict situations by both State and non-State actors
must be condemned in the strongest terms possible.
They are not only an egregious breach of international
law, but also a betrayal of humankind itself. The culture
of impunity for such crimes must end.
The Security Council’s landmark resolution 2286
(2016) speaks to that imperative by unequivocally
condemning attacks or threats against medical and
humanitarian personnel who are exclusively engaged
in medical duties. The task we have now is to translate
that political resolve into tangible action.
The growing trend of attacks on humanitarian
workers is also a cause of very grave concern. The
politicization and militarization of humanitarian aid,
moreover, is unacceptable. Any party to a conflict
must be held accountable for any act of denying
civilians access to food, water or basic medical care
in order to gain military advantage. Similarly, the use
of humanitarian access as a bargaining chip in peace
negotiations must be rejected.
Above all, the goal of protecting civilians is best
served by preventing the outbreak of armed conflict in
the first place. That entails addressing the root causes
of conflict, finding inclusive political solutions to
disputes and seeking peaceful settlements. A culture of
prevention is, after all, the best assurance that we have
for sustainable and enduring peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belarus.
Mr. Rybakov (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): We
would like to thank the Polish presidency for organizing
what is a very timely open debate given the truly
disastrous current international situation in various
regions of the world. We are being forced to discuss
the issue thanks to a lack of action on the part of States
themselves, and first among them the members of the
Security Council, in preventing international conflicts,
in which civilian populations are the primary victims.
18-15558

22/05/2018

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The Security Council is the key and the sole organ
within the United Nations system with the primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security. Today, unfortunately, it has become a forum
for geopolitical confrontation where genuine conflict
resolution is sacrificed to the promotion of individual
States’ interests.
Dozens of Palestinians, including children, died
in clashes on the border between Gaza and Israel last
week, and hundreds of people were injured. We have
still not received convincing evidence of the use of
chemical weapons in Douma, and yet declarations that
have been made about that here in the Security Council
have been used to justify acts of criminal military
aggression against Syria. To use an expression that
has become commonplace in this Chamber, it is highly
likely that we are dealing with open provocation in that
regard. In a different time, a similar excuse was used to
start a war against Iraq.
As a result of shelling, people continue to die in
south-eastern Ukraine. To date, four years after the
brutal incineration of more than 40 people during
clashes outside the Trade Union House in Odessa, that
crime has gone unpunished. The suffering of civilians,
especially the most vulnerable groups, during armed
conflict is a direct consequence of States’ unwillingness
or inability to sacrifice their political ambitions for the
sake of preventing and resolving conflicts.
I would also like to draw the Council’s attention
to a vulnerable group of professionals who are
always on the scene in danger zones — translators
and interpreters. In extremely high-risk situations
of armed conflict and post-conflict peacebuilding,
translators and interpreters are in serious danger, since
their professional work means that they have to help
establish a dialogue between parties to conflicts and
with civilian populations. In our view, it is long past
time to formulate an international instrument, whether
in the form of an international treaty or a Security
Council or General Assembly resolution, that would
affirm the special status of translators and interpreters
in dangerous situations and improve their protection.
In conclusion, I would like to note that the
Republic of Belarus has never avoided international
efforts to maintain peace and security, especially in
a regional context. Belarus continues to consistently
support a peaceful settlement of the conflict in southeastern Ukraine, contributing to it by holding in

S/PV. 8264

Minsk the meetings of the Trilateral Contact Group on
Ukraine and its subsidiary working groups, including
the subsidiary group on security. We also support
establishing mutually acceptable parameters for the
possible deployment of United Nations peacekeepers
to the region that would satisfy all the parties, without
exception. I want to assure the Council that Belarus
stands ready to continue to work comprehensively
to promote the peaceful settlement of this situation,
including at the regional level.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Rwanda.
Mrs. Rugwabiza (Rwanda): I would like to thank
the Polish presidency for convening today’s debate on
recommitting us to the central responsibility of all
peacekeeping missions, the protection of civilians.
I also thank Secretary-General António Guterres,
Mr. Yves Daccord, Director-General of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, and Ms. Hanaa Edwar for
their briefings.
The protection of civilians is best served, first,
by preventing conflicts and their escalation; secondly,
by resolving conflicts through political means
when prevention has failed; thirdly, by ensuring
accountability for those responsible for crimes against
civilians during armed conflicts; and fourthly and
most importantly, by putting people and the protection
of civilians at the centre of United Nations political
and peacekeeping action. Today’s debate underscores
the pivotal importance of the protection of civilians,
especially as civilians continue to account for an evergrowing percentage of victims in armed conflicts.
Rwanda strongly condemns all attacks on civilians
caught in situations of armed conflict. Civilians are
never casualties of war; they are always victims of war
crimes, either because they are deliberately targeted
or because they are used as human shields by parties
to conflicts.
Rwanda underscores that the protection of civilians
should be prioritized in all United Nations peace
operations in order to effectively prevent and respond
to violations of international law in situations of armed
conflict. In that regard, I would like to highlight four
points on how the Kigali Principles on the Protection
of Civilians address the political commitment to
protecting civilians and improving the effectiveness
of United Nations peacekeeping operations, given the
circumstances that are defining today’s challenges.

18-1555855/98

S/PV.8264

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

First, the Kigali Principles are a set of best practices
aimed at strengthening the protection of civilians in
United Nations-mandated peacekeeping missions. They
are based on lessons learned and represent a concrete
blueprint aimed at shaping the practices of peacekeepers
in accordance with their mandate, including in volatile
situations. Over the past decade, the international
community has vastly increased the demands it places
on peacekeepers and has often asked them to do more
with much less in ever more challenging environments.
A 2014 report of the United Nations Office of Internal
Oversight Services (A/68/787) found that in 507
attacks reported on civilians between 2010 and 2013,
peacekeepers almost never used force to protect those
under attack. The report made three recommendations:
first, enhancing operational control over contingents;
secondly, improving the clarity of peacekeepers’ tasks
at the tactical level; and thirdly, improving the workinglevel relationship between peacekeeping operations and
humanitarian entities. The Kigali Principles directly
address the second recommendation, and I would like
to take this opportunity to commend the peacekeepers
who are effectively implementing them on the ground.
Secondly, I want to emphasize that the Kigali
Principles do not supersede the Charter of the United
Nations, nor do they contradict the principles of United
Nations peacekeeping or go beyond a mission’s mandate.
After all, all United Nations peacekeeping missions’
mandates are decided by the Security Council.
Thirdly, the Kigali Principles do not exclude the
use of force. As stated in paragraph 3 of the Kigali
Principles, we agree
“to be prepared to use force to protect civilians,
as necessary and consistent with the mandate.
Such action encompasses making a show of force
as a deterrent; interpositioning our forces between
armed actors and civilians; and taking direct
military action against armed actors with clear
hostile intent to harm civilians.”
Fourthly, the Kigali Principles were born of a desire
to improve our understanding and implementation
of the protection of civilians. We have sometimes
been the target of criticism and questions about
their origin. I would like to say that the origin of the
Kigali Principles is very clear. The Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Poland visited Rwanda last
month. The origin of the Principles dates back to 1994,
when we Rwandans were left to fend for ourselves.
56/98

22/05/2018

We learned from our tragic history and have since
worked relentlessly to make our humble contribution
to the effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping
with respect to fulfilling the noble and sacred duty
of deterring violence against civilians and protecting
civilians in situations of armed conflict.
Lastly, enhancing the protection of civilians in
armed conflict requires a paradigm shift from conflict
management to prevention. States bear, and will
continue to bear, the primary responsibility to protect
civilians. However, when warring parties specifically
target civilians and that protection is not provided, it
is our collective responsibility as States Members of
the United Nations, particularly the Security Council,
to ensure that the protection of non-armed civilians,
internally displaced persons, United Nations agencies
and humanitarian actors who live and work in complex
and deadly environments remains a priority task for
United Nations peacekeepers when present on the
ground. That is our collective responsibility as United
Nations Members and will continue to inform Rwanda’s
commitment to peacekeeping, both in the African
Union and at the United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Ham Sang Wook (Republic of Korea): I would
like to first commend the Polish presidency’s timely
initiative to convene today’s open debate on the critical
issue of the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
The war in Syria has now entered its eighth bloody
year. To date, more than 500,000 people have lost their
lives, including a disproportionate number of civilians.
And, tragically, I am afraid that Syria is just one of
the many countries where civilians are being killed in
armed conflicts.
At the same time, forced displacement of civilians
in armed conflict is at its highest levels in decades,
with the number of refugees and internally displaced
people — over 65.6 million — now higher than ever
since the Second World War. Armed conflict also
disproportionately affects vulnerable groups, such as
women and children, and compounds their suffering.
Even worse, sexual violence continues to be employed as
a tactic of war and terrorism against those populations.
Under that grim backdrop, the Republic of Korea
supports today’s timely initiative to draw renewed
attention to the essential issue of the protection of
18-15558

22/05/2018

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

S/PV. 8264

civilians in armed conflict. We would like to stress the
following three points.

Member States with a view to protecting vulnerable
people from suffering in armed conflicts.

First, to protect civilians from conflicts, we need
to focus on prevention. As the Secretary-General
has highlighted, prevention is the paradigm-shifting
approach that closes the gap between commitment
and reality. That supports the direction commonly
underscored by the reviews on peace operations, the
peacebuilding architecture and the women and peace
and security agenda. In that sense, I urge the SecretaryGeneral to employ his powers under Article 99 of
the Charter of the United Nations to bring imminent
or unfolding large-scale attacks on civilians to the
attention of the Security Council. I urge the Council
to respond in unity to such calls from the SecretaryGeneral to save lives.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iraq.

Secondly, we must ensure accountability for the
crimes being carried out against civilians in clear
violation of international law. Impunity must be
made unacceptable in each and every corner of the
world. Indeed, it is imperative that violators be held
accountable for their crimes through prosecution in
national and international criminal justice systems,
including the International Criminal Court. Even
in cases where justice systems are not yet available,
we need to collectively prepare for the emergence of
justice and accountability in future. In that regard, the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
for the Syrian Arab Republic serves as a good example.
Thirdly, we must make the most of existing
United Nations peacekeeping missions to enhance
the effectiveness of efforts to protect civilians on the
ground. In resolution 1894 (2009), the Security Council
stressed that mandated protection activities must be
given priority in the use of available capacity and
resources. However, we must also acknowledge that
United Nations peacekeeping missions cannot fulfil
that mandate in the face of the growing number and
complexity of challenges unless they are supported
by appropriately strengthened capacities. As such, we
should continue to explore ways to qualitatively enhance
such capacities by ensuring that peacekeeping missions
are better equipped with essential technologies, such as
unmanned aerial vehicles, Global Positioning System
equipment and other advancements, to facilitate
civilian protection.
In conclusion, I take this opportunity to reaffirm the
Republic of Korea’s commitment to working with other

Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, my delegation welcomes the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Poland,
Mr. Jacek Czaputowicz. We thank him for his excellent
stewardship of the Security Council’s work within the
framework of today’s very constructive debate. We wish
the Polish delegation every success in its presidency of
the Council this month. We would also like to thank
Secretary-General António Guterres for his very
important briefing today. Furthermore, we thank the
Director-General of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, Mr. Yves Daccord, for the important role
that the Committee plays in delivering humanitarian
assistance to various regions, in particular areas that
are made difficult to access by the danger caused by
the presence of terrorist groups. Finally, we would also
like to thank to Ms. Hanaa Edwar, a renowned human
rights advocate who has been particularly active in my
country, the new democratic Iraq.
Our armed forces have achieved major successes in
the liberation of territories that were under the control
of terrorist entities. Our forces — and I would go so
far as to say our heroes — have demonstrated great
professionalism by behaving in line with international
humanitarian law and in respect for human rights.
Those efforts have been welcomed by the entire world
and are the pride of Iraq.
Immense efforts have been made to combat
terrorism. In that regard, we have received welcome
support and assistance from the international
community as well as from friendly and brotherly
countries. They have created humanitarian corridors
for civilians to ensure they are able to leave the most
dangerous areas formerly under the control of terrorist
groups. Safe camps have also been created for displaced
persons where basic services, including food, medical
care and financial assistance, are provided.
The Government of Iraq has mobilized all ministries
and all the means and resources at its disposal in order
to deliver humanitarian assistance, medical care and
drinking water to our citizens in liberated areas in
the Nineveh, Al-Anbar and Salahadin governorates.
We have been supporting those people by all means
possible. Psychological rehabilitation programmes

18-1555857/98

S/PV.8264

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

have been successfully conducted for the benefit of
the population so that they can be reintegrated into
society and national reconciliation achieved, following
the destruction of infrastructure and homes in various
regions by terrorists who have fled.
The Iraqi Government is committed to cooperating
with the United Nations so as to implement resolution
2379 (2017). We have therefore worked to criminalize
the terrorist organization Da’esh. We cooperate with the
United Nations to provide needed assistance to victims
and punish those responsible, who must not enjoy
impunity. Accordingly, Iraq signed a joint communiqué
on 23 September 2016 with the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
which entered into force at the beginning of this year,
thereby enabling us to provide assistance to victims of
sexual violence linked to terrorist activities. We have
also worked to strengthen the capacities of the various
Iraqi institutions that provide support and assistance to
victims. The Prime Minister of Iraq also signed a work
plan with the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict, which is
aimed at rehabilitating children abused by Da’esh.
Moreover, in a letter from High Representative of
the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy Federica Mogherini, on 20 June 2017, the
European Union condemned the crimes committed by
Da’esh in Iraq and qualified them as war crimes, crimes
against humanity and crimes of genocide. Iraq gladly
welcomed the training provided to its security forces,
who are in daily contact with civilians. That training
is provided by United Nations specialized experts, in
line with the memorundum addressed to the office of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict on 16 May 2017. Through
its national legislation and international commitments,
the Iraqi Government is working to hold accountable
the terrorist organization Da’esh, which has committed
numerous crimes, including murder, kidnapping and
human trafficking, all of which must not go unpunished.
We are therefore coordinating our efforts with those of
the international community to that end, not only at the
national, but also at the international, level.
We have established specialized courts responsible
for investigating crimes committed by terrorists, in
particular crimes of genocide and crimes committed
by Da’esh against minorities in Mosul. We have also
conducted investigations into crimes perpetrated
against prison inmates in Badoush prison. The
58/98

22/05/2018

Iraqi Government has also established a high-level
monitoring and reporting interministerial commission
responsible for protecting the rights of children within
the framework of human rights violations during armed
conflict, the establishment of which was approved by
the Prime Minister on 23 November 2017. Currently,
the Minister of Labour and Social Affairs is responsible
for monitoring human rights violations concerning
children who have been deprived of their most basic
rights owing to armed conflict. We have also established
a central commission to compensate victims affected
by military operations and terrorist attacks under Law
No. 57/2015 to mitigate the suffering of citizens caused
by military activities.
We have also set up a common coordination centre
so as to coordinate our work related to managing crises
linked to recent military and civilian activities in order
to provide protection to civilians and guarantee the
delivery of humanitarian assistance to those who are
in need. The Iraqi armed forces are working under our
Commander-in-Chief, who has given explicit orders to
protect civilians in the various regions in which we have
had to confront terrorists. We have worked to protect
infrastructure, which has cost us some time in terms of
military operations. We did not want to move forward
too quickly so that we would not put the infrastructure
in jeopardy and also to protect civilian lives. We have
provided all the necessary information to the air and
ground forces so as to carefully target various objectives
without putting civilians in harm’s way. Our security
forces have also worked professionally to restore the
various civilian organizations that had been used by
Da’esh and sites that were used to train terrorists and
stockpile weapons. We therefore worked to liberate
civilians who had been used by Da’esh as human
shields. We have liberated territories, and today we are
working to rehabilitate the various sites and regions.
Our victory at the military level was followed by
another victory at the civilian level. Through legislative
elections, we have enshrined the principle of peaceful
succession to power by holding parliamentary elections
on 12 May, which strengthened the unity of Iraq. All
Iraqis worked as one to defend their humanity and
their very existence. The entire world stood with Iraq
to end terrorism and extremism in my country, which
must never again return to any part of Iraq. We want
to rebuild our human capital and reassure a dignified
return to our displaced persons and refugees.
18-15558

22/05/2018

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Lastly, we thank the international community and
the United Nations for their work in the areas of the
protection of civilians and the responsibility to provide
support to Iraq against terrorism.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Suárez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): It is an honour for the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to take the floor on
behalf of the 120 States members of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries (NAM).
First of all, on behalf of the States members of the
Movement, we convey our respect to His Excellency
Mr. Jacek Czaputowicz, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of Poland, and, at the same time, express
our appreciation to his delegation for convening this
open debate. We also thank the Secretary-General and
the Director-General of the International Committee of
the Red Cross their invaluable briefings.
We live in a world today that faces multiple
and complex emerging threats and challenges to
international peace and security, some of which are
the result of war or protracted conflicts. In the context
of armed conflicts, we have seen how the suffering of
innocent civilians, in particular the most vulnerable,
caught up in the middle of armed conflicts, can be
further worsened by deliberate, indiscriminate and, in
some cases, systematic attacks, in clear violation of the
norms of international humanitarian law.
During the Movement’s eighteenth Mid-term
Ministerial Conference, held in April in Baku, the
Ministers stressed that the protection of civilians is
the primary responsibility of the host country, while
recognizing that such a task is also mandated in a
number of United Nations peacekeeping operations, to
which they reaffirmed their commitment.
As stated in the concept note (S/2018/444, annex)
for this open debate, the protection of civilians is one of
the core issues on the agenda of the Security Council, as
a result of the significant challenges faced by civilians
in conflict-affected countries, which range from threats
or attacks against them to forced displacement, food
insecurity or the need for humanitarian assistance.
For that reason, this organ must ensure, among other
things, that the norms of international law, including
international humanitarian law and international

S/PV. 8264

human rights law, are upheld and respected at all times,
particularly in the context of armed conflict.
NAM takes this opportunity to call upon all parties
to armed conflict to comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian law, including the principles
of taking precautions in attacks, proportionality and
distinction, by, inter alia, prohibiting the targeting
of civilian populations, civilian property and certain
special property during an armed conflict and obliging
parties to any conflict to ensure overall protection
against the dangers arising from military operations for
civilian facilities, hospitals, means of transportation and
relief materials, and distributing such relief materials.
Moreover, the member States of the Movement
stress the fact that humanitarian agencies and their
personnel must respect international humanitarian law
and the laws of the countries in which they carry out their
work, as well as the Guiding Principles of Humanitarian
Assistance, as set forth in the annex to General
Assembly resolution 46/182, among which figure
humanity, neutrality and impartiality. Furthermore,
they must uphold the principle of non-interference in
the internal affairs of the host countries and respect
the sovereignty, territorial integrity, national unity and
independence of States.
The States members of the Movement would like
to recall that 88 per cent of peacekeeping personnel
deployed in the field come from NAM countries and
are carrying out mandates focused on the protection of
civilians. As we have always emphasized, the fulfilment
of the mandates, among other things, depends upon
effective tripartite coordination among the troop- and
police-contributing countries, the Security Council and
the Secretariat. In any case, the protection of civilians
can be ensured only if peacekeepers are fully enabled
to operate under the highest moral standards at all
times. In that regard, the importance of every measure
needed to ensure their safety and security cannot
be overemphasized.
In conclusion, the 120 NAM member States
categorically condemn all acts of violence, attacks and
threats against civilian populations, which in certain
instances may amount to war crimes, and deplore their
medium- and long-term consequences. They also stress
the importance of ensuring that those responsible are
held accountable before the law, in order to break any
cycle of impunity and send a clear and united message
of zero tolerance for such despicable acts.

18-1555859/98

S/PV.8264

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Romania.
Mr. Jinga (Romania): I would like to commend the
Polish presidency for convening this open debate on the
protection of civilians, a topic that lies at the heart of
the Security Council’s mandate.
Romania aligns itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union. I will now make a few
remarks in my national capacity.
Next year will mark the twentieth anniversary of the
Security Council’s adoption of resolution 1265 (1999),
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict. Since
then, the Council has adopted multiple resolutions on
that topic, enacted a legal framework for strengthening
that protection and mandated peacekeepers to integrate
the protection of civilians into their missions.
However, the recent report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/462) on the protection of civilians in armed
conflicts describes an accurate but sombre reality.
We witness, on a regular basis, attacks on schools and
hospitals, widespread and persistent humanitarian
access constraints and appalling behaviour, such as
sexual violence, which continues to be employed
as a tactic of war. Major gaps remain with regard to
prevention, protection and impunity. At the same time,
we are confronted with new challenges, such as the
urbanization of conflict, asymmetrical threats that
include unpredictable attacks targeting peacekeepers,
and the blurring of differences between combatants and
innocent civilians. As the nature and characteristics of
conflict are evolving, so must our reaction. Bearing
all those realities in mind, allow me to highlight
three points.
First, preventing armed conflict should continue
to be at the heart of international cooperation. In
strengthening the protection of civilians, it is necessary
to start by addressing the root causes of conflict.
Advancing political dialogue, pursuing reconciliation
processes and strengthening security sectors, economic
recovery and social development are therefore
comprehensive means for creating an environment of
sustainable peace.
Secondly, when prevention fails and we confront
the reality of armed conflict, ensuring respect for
international humanitarian law and human rights law is
of paramount importance. In fact, it is our sole guarantor
in ensuring that, even in the face of war, human dignity
60/98

22/05/2018

is still upheld and parties may still find ways to coexist
once hostilities have ended. There is already a consistent
legal architecture in place; we should continue to build
on it. Romania is among the States that endorsed the Safe
School Declaration, the Kigali Principles and resolution
2286 (2016), concerning the protection of the wounded
and sick and of medical and humanitarian personnel
engaged in medical duties. In doing so, we reasserted
our engagement in support of the United Nations
efforts for peace and security in countries affected by
conflict and recognized the essential importance of the
human dimension of protection. We also reaffirm that
the main responsibility in the protection of civilians
lies with the host countries. We consequently invite all
States that have not yet done so to become parties to the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, and
we call upon all Member States to fully cooperate with
the Court.
Thirdly, we strongly support the SecretaryGeneral’s proposal on developing national policy
frameworks on the protection of civilians. In 2007,
the Romanian Government adopted a national strategy
for the implementation of international humanitarian
law, which has a dedicated section on the protection of
civilians. The strategy is designed to be implemented
both at the domestic level and during participation in
international missions. It aims to promote and raise
awareness about the rules of international humanitarian
law among armed forces personnel and other entities
with responsibilities in that field.
Romania has been contributing with troops to
peacekeeping operations since 1991. Currently, we are
participating in two thirds of all United Nations missions
on the ground. So far, we have provided more than
12,500 military, police and close-protection personnel
to United Nations missions, and we will continue
to do so. Romanian contingents attend a rigorous
three-month predeployment training programme, in
which the protection of civilians and respect for human
rights are cornerstone themes.
Finally, the Romanian experience proved to be
beneficial in that it incorporated a gender dimension,
where female members of peacekeeping operations
interacted with women and vulnerable individuals from
local communities. With a long-term commitment to
peace, justice and development, Romania will continue
to advocate and act for the protection of civilians
in armed conflicts, in close collaboration with all
relevant actors.
18-15558

22/05/2018

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Austria.
Mr. Kickert (Austria): At the outset, I would like
to thank Poland for convening today’s open debate on
the protection of civilians. We also congratulate Poland
on its initiative to present a coordinated calendar of
events on the sidelines of the debate.
Austria fully aligns itself with the statements
delivered, or to be delivered, on behalf of the European
Union, the Group of Friends on the Protection of
Civilians and the Human Security Network. In our
national capacity, we would like to highlight four
additional points we deem to be particularly important.
First, I would like to emphasize the importance of
the single most effective and sustainable tool for the
protection of civilians, namely, prevention. Even when
all parties fully respect international humanitarian
law in a conflict, civilians will continue to suffer. We
therefore need to invest more in conflict prevention.
Therefore, we call on the Security Council to strengthen
the prevention agenda, including the importance
or recognizing human rights violations as the early
warning signs of conflict. Whenever conflicts break
out, full compliance with international humanitarian
law is paramount. Austria continues to be a strong
supporter of the intergovernmental discussions in
Geneva on strengthening compliance with international
humanitarian law.
My second point relates to the dramatic
non-compliance with international humanitarian law
we witness in many conflicts. As the Secretary-General
points out in his report,
“[w]hen explosive weapons were used in populated
areas, 92 per cent of the casualties were civilians.”
(S/2018/462, para. 41)
I repeat — 92 per cent. We therefore call on all States to
participate in the development of a political declaration
to address the humanitarian impact of the use of
explosive weapons in populated areas. Nineteen of our
African colleagues have shown us the way by adopting
the Maputo communiqué. Let us follow their lead.
We also share the Secretary-General’s call to improve
and extend civilian-casualty tracking, reporting and
response in order to be able to reduce civilian harm.
Austria is co-organizing side events on those two topics
tomorrow and Thursday.

S/PV. 8264

My third point relates to one of the consequences
of conflicts, namely, forced displacement. We continue
to witness increasing numbers of displaced persons.
This year marks the twentieth anniversary of the
Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement. Let us
use that anniversary to strengthen our work towards
durable solutions in line with the Guiding Principles.
The development of a multi-stakeholder plan of action
for advancing prevention, protection and solutions for
internally displaced people covering the period 20182020 is an excellent first step in that regard.
Lastly, the protection of civilians is now a central
task of many United Nations peacekeeping missions.
Those missions have become increasingly dangerous and
multidimensional. We must ensure that peacekeepers
receive adequate training and the necessary equipment
to fulfil their protection-of-civilians mandate. With
that aim, Austria will continue to offer a United
Nations-certified course to create better awareness of
the protection of civilians on the operational level.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the Group of Friends of the
Responsibility to Protect, which consists of 50 Member
States and the European Union and is co-chaired this
year by Italy and the State of Qatar.
The Group would like to thank Poland for
organizing today’s important open debate. I would
also like to extend our gratitude to Secretary-General
António Guterres; the Director-General of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC),
Mr. Yves Daccord; and the Secretary-General of the
Iraqi Al-Amal Association, Ms. Hanaa Edwar, for their
highly informative briefings.
Today we bear witness to a continuing and pervasive
degradation of respect for civilian lives and an appalling
disregard for the norms and laws that the international
community established to alleviate the effects of armed
conflict. The results are tremendous human suffering
and a high risk of mass atrocity crimes. Although all
States have a responsibility to protect their populations
from genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity
and ethnic cleansing, more than 65 million people are
currently displaced as a result of conflict, atrocities and
persecution worldwide. The commission of systematic,
flagrant and widespread violations of applicable
international humanitarian law and human rights law

18-1555861/98

S/PV.8264

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

22/05/2018

in situations of armed conflict may constitute a threat
to international peace and security. It is within that
context that the Group of Friends would like to stress
the following points.

personnel has taken place every single week since
the adoption of resolution 2286 (2016), with regard to
the protection of medical and humanitarian personnel
and facilities.

First, full and effective compliance with
international law is fundamental to the protection of
civilians. Many civilian deaths, as well as suffering
and displacement, could be avoided if all parties to
conflicts respected international humanitarian law and
human rights law.

Fourthly, the protection of civilians should be
sensitive to gender considerations. Security Council
resolutions on women and peace and security note that
armed conflict and emergencies have a differential
impact on women, girls, men and boys. Women’s needs
must be considered and addressed. The Group urges the
United Nations and other relevant actors to ensure that
affected populations, including women, are involved in
the development of protection-of-civilians strategies
and activities.

Secondly, it is of the utmost importance that States
put in place appropriate legislative and institutional
arrangements to comprehensively address violations
of international humanitarian law and violations and
abuses of human rights and hold those who commit
such violations and abuses accountable. Accountability
for serious violations of the law of armed conflict and
human rights violations and abuses not only helps
provide justice for victims, but also deters future
violations and abuses.
States have the primary responsibility to
investigate and prosecute crimes committed within
their jurisdiction. National accountability efforts
should be encouraged and supported, including through
the strengthening of judicial cooperation among States.
International investigative and judicial mechanisms,
including fact-finding missions, commissions of inquiry,
international courts and hybrid tribunals, including the
International Criminal Court in circumstances that are
properly within its jurisdiction, provide complementary
avenues to enable accountability when and where
national options prove insufficient.
Thirdly, we are witnessing widespread attacks
directed against civilian infrastructure, such as
health-care facilities and schools. Let us not forget
that deliberate or indiscriminate attacks against
medical facilities and civilian infrastructure, such as
schools, as well as on the civilian population, including
humanitarian workers, may amount to war crimes.
There has been a pattern in recent years of attacks
on schools, students, teachers and other education
personnel by State security forces or non-State armed
groups. The United Nations was able to verify 753
attacks on schools and hospitals in 2016. From May
2016 to date, the ICRC has recorded more than 1,200
incidents of violence against health-care facilities
or personnel in just 16 countries. Approximately one
incident of violence against health-care facilities or
62/98

Lastly, journalists play an important role in bringing
attention to conflict situations and in mobilizing action
in situations where atrocity crimes are committed.
Independent reporting can put pressure on political
actors to find solutions to conflicts and can contribute
to promoting accountability. According to Reporters
without Borders, more than 1,000 professional
journalists were killed in the past 15 years, an average
of two deaths per week, while more than 24 have
already been killed in 2018. Member States should
create and maintain a safe and enabling environment
for journalists reporting in conflict situations.
Far too many civilians are killed, in both direct
and indiscriminate attacks, in today’s complex and
protracted conflicts. The international community
should make every effort to assist civilians caught up in
conflicts. The members of the Security Council should
take timely and decisive action aimed at ending and
preventing atrocities, and not hinder credible efforts to
that end.
Finally, the surest way to protect civilian populations
is by investing in the prevention of conflicts and the
peaceful settlement of disputes, based on the principles
of justice and international law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ghana.
Mrs. Pobee (Ghana): My delegation joins others
in thanking the Polish presidency for convening
today’s all-important open debate on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. A word of appreciation
also goes to Secretary-General António Guterres, the
Director-General of the International Committee of
the Red Cross, Mr. Yves Daccord, and the civil society
18-15558

22/05/2018

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

representative, Ms. Hanaa Edwar, for their highly
informative briefings.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
on behalf of the Group of Friends of the Responsibility to
Protect, just delivered by the Permanent Representative
of Qatar.
The protection of civilians in times of conflict is at
the core of the work of the United Nations. Today’s open
debate provides an opportunity for Member States to
consider concrete measures to deal with the continued
flagrant disregard for international humanitarian law
by some States and non-State armed groups in their
deliberate targeting of civilians in conflict situations.
It is a disturbing fact that more than 65 million
people worldwide are currently displaced as a result of
conflicts, atrocities and persecution. In the past year
alone we have witnessed tens of thousands being killed
or maimed and millions forced to flee their homes as a
direct result of conflict. The United Nations is seemingly
unable to protect populations from horrifying reported
instances of mass atrocity crimes and crimes against
humanity perpetrated in various parts of the world,
with women and children bearing the brunt of such
crimes. This alarming trend should be of concern to
the international community and cannot be allowed to
go unchecked. We must do more to enhance respect for
international humanitarian law and safeguard the lives
of civilians caught up in far too many conflicts across
the globe.
Ghana condemns the use of starvation as a method
of war and the use of civilians as human shields. Other
reprehensible acts, such as obstructing medical care
and destroying facilities and infrastructure essential for
human survival, and such acts of terror as indiscriminate
shelling or bombardment of cities, must be condemned
by the international community. We need be reminded
that those acts amount to war crimes under customary
international law and a number of international
treaties, including the Geneva Conventions and their
Additional Protocols. States in armed conflict must
observe protocols governing the conduct of war and,
in line with their primary responsibility to protect
their citizens in times of armed conflict, must abide by
norms of international humanitarian and human rights
law in order to minimize civilian death, suffering
and displacement.
and

It is also the responsibility of States to investigate
prosecute crimes committed within their

S/PV. 8264

jurisdiction and to bring to justice perpetrators of
atrocity crimes and crimes against humanity. My
delegation therefore wishes to urge Member States
to incorporate international law into their domestic
law by enacting appropriate national legislation and
putting in place appropriate institutional frameworks
to comprehensively address violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law and hold
perpetrators accountable.
Ghana supports the view that the international
community should make use of all the tools at its
disposal to uphold its collective responsibility to protect
civilians where national Governments are unable or
unwilling to do so. We wish to reiterate the point made
on behalf of the Group of Friends of the Responsibility
to Protect that international investigative and judicial
mechanisms,
including
fact-finding
missions,
commissions of inquiry and the International Criminal
Court (ICC), provide complementary avenues to
enable accountability when and where national options
prove insufficient.
Accountability is key and should be enforced if we
are to make progress in this matter. In that regard, Ghana
commends the ICC for its work in bringing perpetrators
to justice. Considering the workload of the Court and
the several cases that need to be investigated and
addressed, we are of the view that serious consideration
must be given to the effective implementation of the
principle of complementarity as a core principle of the
Roman Statute of the International Criminal Court and
a tool in trying crimes within the jurisdiction of the
Court. My delegation calls for capacity-building at the
national level to equip domestic court systems with
the required skills and knowledge and enable them to
take ownership of some of those trials. Certainly, the
independence of national courts should be paramount
in their capacity-building efforts.
Cooperation at the regional and subregional levels
as a means of sharing best practices and ensuring
adherence to international law in respect of human
rights will assist in those efforts. It is gratifying to
note that, in the West Africa region, the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) has
made significant strides in strengthening regional
integration and the maintenance of peace and security
by adhering to internationally acceptable standards in
its peacekeeping and regional security mandates. That
subregional collaboration also includes the training of
defence and security personnel in basic principles of

18-1555863/98

S/PV.8264

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

international humanitarian law, with emphasis on the
protection of civilians and international human rights
law, which have been incorporated into the training and
operations of the ECOWAS Standby Force.
Ghana has endorsed the Kigali Principles, which
provide a blueprint for strengthening the international
community’s resolve to effectively protect civilians
during armed conflict. The Principles provide practical
measures that emphasize training and preparedness for
peacekeepers, vigilance in monitoring and reporting
human rights abuses and signs of impending violence,
avoidance of delays in protecting civilians, and other
steps to enhance the implementation of civilianprotection mandates. We commend Member States that
have endorsed the Principles and urge them to duly
operationalize them in international peacekeeping.
In conclusion, we wish to call on the Security
Council to re-examine peacekeeping mandates
and operational procedures to ensure that they are
matched with the requisite resources that contribute
to the protection of civilians in armed conflict. We
must ultimately invest in conflict prevention and the
peaceful settlement of disputes. We must promote
respect for international law and justice for all. We
must act collectively and decisively to end and prevent
atrocities. The protection of civilians in armed conflict
is our urgent duty and responsibility as States Members
of the United Nations, and we must live up to the letter
and spirit of the Charter.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ireland.
Mr. Tierney (Ireland) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Madam President, for convening today’s
important debate.
We align ourselves with the statements delivered
earlier on behalf of the European Union and the Human
Security Network.
(spoke in English)
The facts revealed in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2018/462) are stark. Over the past 12 months,
tens of thousands of civilians were killed or injured and
millions were forced to flee their homes as a direct
result of armed conflict. Last year, the United Nations
recorded the death or injury of more than 26,000
civilians by deliberate or otherwise indiscriminate
attacks in just six countries. Furthermore, the report
64/98

22/05/2018

highlights that more than 50 million people are
impacted by conflict in urban warfare today.
International humanitarian law, in particular
the principles of distinction, discrimination and
proportionality, and the obligation to take precautions
in attacks, must be adhered to by all States engaged
in armed conflict. Of particular concern is the use
of explosive weapons having area-wide effects in
urban areas. The use of such weapons, which strike
both military objectives and civilians and civilian
objects without distinction, have long-term negative
humanitarian impacts that far outlast the conflicts in
which they are used. Beyond the immediate injuries and
deaths caused, the destruction of crucial infrastructure,
housing, schools, hospitals and water and sanitation
systems means that civilian populations suffer long
after the conflict has ended.
More than 32,000 civilians were recorded killed
or injured in 2016 by explosive weapons, with Syria,
Iraq, Yemen, Afghanistan and Turkey having the
highest numbers of civilian deaths and injuries. In
total, incidents of explosive violence took place in
70 countries. Explosive weapons also have specific
impacts on women due to damage to homes and
the societal disarray in the aftermath of bombing
and shelling.
We need a renewed political commitment to
the protection of civilians. We require enhanced
compliance through more effective operationalization
of the relevant provisions of international humanitarian
law into military doctrine and practice. Protection and
access to humanitarian assistance must be ensured for
those affected by crisis, including women, children,
persons with injuries, persons with disabilities and
the most vulnerable. We welcome the continued
calls for accountability for violations of international
humanitarian law, which is vital to the protection of
civilians and to achieving sustainable peace.
(spoke in French)
Peacekeeping is an essential tool for the protection
of civilians. Ireland supports the Kigali Principles on the
Protection of Civilians and believes that the Principles
can and must underpin the work of peacekeeping
operations on the protection of civilians. As a major
troop-contributing country, Ireland strongly supports
the notion that peace operations be provided with the
necessary means to fulfil their mandates, including the
protection of civilians.
18-15558

22/05/2018

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

(spoke in English)
Training and leadership are also key. Ireland has
put at the disposal of United Nations partners a range
of courses that will meet a variety of identified training
needs. Ireland will also ensure that the Irish personnel
deployed on overseas peacekeeping missions operate to
the highest standards in accordance with international
humanitarian law and human rights law and that our
peacekeepers seek to ensure the security and protection
of civilians in accordance with their mission mandates
and rules of engagement.
We have also adopted a whole-of-government
approach to the institutionalization of the United
Nations voluntary compact on the elimination of
sexual exploitation and abuse. Much has been done on
that appalling issue at the level of the United Nations.
However, it is important to consistently reiterate that
it is impossible to have credibility in discussing the
protection of civilians if civilians are suffering abuse at
the hands of their supposed protectors.
As my colleague from the Human Security Network
so eloquently said earlier, we also share the SecretaryGeneral’s view that, in the long term, the best way to
protect civilians is to address the root causes of conflicts,
that is, to build sustainable peace, to promote human
rights and the rule of law, to strengthen governance and
democratic institutions and to invest in inclusive and
sustainable development.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Muhammad Bande (Nigeria): I thank the
presidency of Poland for organizing this important
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
Our appreciation also goes to the Secretary-General,
Mr. António Guterres, and the Director-General of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, Mr. Yves
Daccord, for sharing their perspectives on this very
important subject.
Nigeria aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
It is indeed a matter of grave concern that conflict
situations expose civilians to killing, kidnapping,
torture, sexual exploitation, trafficking and other
dangers. That is particularly so when non-State armed
groups are involved. Their complete disregard for
international law and international humanitarian law

S/PV. 8264

serves to underscore the challenge that they pose to the
protection of civilians in conflict situations.
It is also an unfortunate reality that women and
girls are the most affected in conflict situations. They
face sexual violence, sexual enslavement, trafficking
and other forms of exploitation and degradation. In
that regard, we acknowedge the Security Council’s
commitment to the protection of women and girls in both
conflict and post-conflict situations, as exemplified
by the adoption of resolutions 1325 (2000), 1960
(2010) and 2122 (2013), among others. We believe that
those resolutions provide suitable frameworks for the
Security Council to enhance the protection of women
and girls in both conflict and post-conflict situations.
We strongly support community engagement in
promoting the protection of civilians. Community-alert
networks and community liaison assistants are vital
to understanding threat perceptions at the community
level, including how communities seek to reduce risks
and how peace operations can address them. We would
like to see the international community recognize
those imperatives.
As Member States are aware, the Boko Haram
insurgency in Nigeria has led to a humanitarian crisis
in north-eastern Nigeria. It is to be noted that, of the
estimated 14.8 million people affected by the insurgency,
of which 1.7 million people are internally displaced,
the most adversely affected are women and children. In
response to that situation, the Government of Nigeria
has taken decisive steps to ameliorate the plight of
civilians, particularly women and girls, living in rural
areas. A robust social protection initiative and a second
national action plan to fully implement the provisions
of resolution 1325 (2000) have been instituted by the
Government to protect civilians, particularly women
and children, from the ravages of conflict.
Nigeria was also among the first group of States
to endorse the Safe Schools Declaration in Oslo,
thereby making a pledge to protect schools during
armed conflicts by, inter alia, using and promoting the
Guidelines for Protecting Schools and Universities from
Military Use during Armed Conflict. The Declaration
complements and strengthens Nigeria’s national Safe
Schools initiative, established in 2014 as part of the
response by the Federal Government to promote safe
zones for learning.
Such initiatives reflect the Government’s commitment
to ensuring the security of women and children during

18-1555865/98

S/PV.8264

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

armed conflicts and to enhancing their active and direct
participation in conflict prevention and peacebuilding.
To that end, the initiatives also complement the
implementation of the Buhari Plan, which provides a
blueprint for comprehensive humanitarian relief and
socioeconomic stabilization of the north-eastern part
of country, as well as for the return and resettlement of
displaced persons.
We are collaborating with our neighbours — Chad,
Cameroon, the Niger and Benin — within the framework
of the Multinational Joint Task Force in order to defeat
the Boko Haram insurgency, which targets civilians,
particularly women and children. It is heartening
to note that more than 1,000 kidnapped women and
children have been rescued and that all the territories
once controlled by the group have been recovered.
Indeed, our experience in the Lake Chad region
today is evidence that, with determined international
collaboration, terrorism can be defeated.
In addition, the Government of Nigeria adopted
a multinational and multi-agency approach, named
Operation Safe Corridor, in order to effectively handle
the deradicalization, rehabilitation and reintegration
back into society of Boko Haram members who have
voluntarily surrendered. So far, many insurgents
have willingly surrendered to the military, while
approximately 700 others have indicated an interest in
doing so. We have also taken steps to cater to victims of
Boko Haram terrorism — whether they are victims in
terms of rape, sexual violence or other violations — by
providing humanitarian relief and financial, economic,
educational and psychosocial support.
Despite the tremendous efforts being made at
the national level, we acknowledge that protecting
civilians in conflict situations remains a critical
challenge not only for the United Nations but also for
the entire international community. We therefore call
for continued collaboration and assistance among the
international community to address the issue. On that
note, we pay tribute to our security forces, peacekeepers,
humanitarian workers, non-governmental organizations
and other stakeholders for their hard work, often in
difficult circumstances, to ensure the safety and the
security of civilians.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Observer of the Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): At the outset, I thank
the Polish presidency for convening this important
66/98

22/05/2018

and timely debate, which has particular significance
for the State of Palestine against the backdrop of the
violent repression by Israel, the occupying Power, of
peaceful civilian protests in the Gaza Strip over the
past few weeks.
For decades, the Palestinian people have appealed
to the international community for protection in
accordance with the rules and norms enshrined in
international law, in particular humanitarian law. For
decades now, our people have suffered a protection
crisis, compounded by the length and depth of the
Israeli military occupation and the impunity enjoyed by
Israel, which has emboldened its commission of grave
violations of the United Nations Charter, international
law and United Nations resolutions.
Only such blatant impunity can explain how Israel
dared to open fire from hundreds of metres away on
peaceful protesters with live ammunition in a deliberate
and wilful manner, killing more than 100 Palestinian
civilians, including children, and wounding thousands
of civilians in broad daylight.
International law is clear as to the protections to
which civilians are entitled. An occupying Power
cannot claim the right to security at the expense of the
right to the security, protection and well-being of the
occupied people, nor can it do so at the expense of a
people’s right to self-determination.
Equally, there is no right to security that justifies
permanent occupation or the illegal acquisition of land
by force and its colonization. There is no right to security
that justifies a blockade imposed on 2 million people
for 11 years. There is no right to security to justify the
unlawful use of force, notably the use of lethal force
against peaceful protesters. International law draws
a clear line between legal action and war crimes and
crimes against humanity, and we call upon all States
not to accept any justification for the commission of
such crimes.
In that connection, the State of Palestine today
submitted a referral to the International Criminal Court
regarding war crimes, especially the ongoing war crime
of settlements.
The international community, including the
Council, has made lofty commitments to protect
civilians, and the obligations on all are clear. There
cannot be one standard for the entire world and another
for Israel. Impunity is the greatest threat to civilians,
18-15558

22/05/2018

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

while accountability is the greatest shield protecting
them, deterring and preventing the recurrence of crimes.
Are the Palestinian people entitled to protection
under the provisions of the United Nations Charter,
international humanitarian law and international human
rights law? The answer must be yes. Is anyone under
the illusion that Israel has any respect for its obligations
under these instruments? Has it not demonstrated time
and time again its contempt for the rule of law, including
the right to life?
There can be no doubt that it is the responsibility
of the international community to bring this situation
of prolonged, recurrent, widespread and systematic
violations to an end. It is also the responsibility of the
international community to provide protection to the
people under occupation for as long as it persists.
Seeking to uphold this responsibility, Kuwait, in its
capacity as the Arab representative in the Council, has
in recent days begun consultations on a draft resolution
on the protection of Palestinian civilians, following the
grave incidents and loss of Palestinian life in Gaza just
a week ago at the hands of the Israeli occupying forces.
We urge Council members to seize this opportunity to
demonstrate that the principles enshrined in Security
Council resolutions on the protection of civilians,
including children, have no exceptions, and to show
their readiness to consistently act in defence of these
principles in the face of such grave violations.
We appeal to Council members to uphold their
Charter mandate and the Council’s credibility and
authority, which is being severely undermined.
Moreover, we call on all States that believe in the rule of
international law to uphold the law in a situation where
its breach has been tolerated for too long, prolonging
the Israeli occupation and its crimes against our people,
prolonging their suffering and the denial of their rights,
and preventing the realization of peace. As the Council
addresses today the critical issue of the protection of
civilians, we call on it to act accordingly and to ensure
that Palestine is not the exception.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Thailand.
Mr. Srivihok (Thailand): Thailand aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the representative of
Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries and that delivered by the representative of
Panama on behalf of the Human Security Network.

S/PV. 8264

Let me offer our thanks to Poland for the
comprehensive concept note (S/2018/444, annex).
We also thank the Secretary-General for his recently
released report (S/2018/462) and for his substantive
briefing today as well as the valuable insights from the
representative of the International Committee of the
Red Cross.
Allow me to highlight the elements we believe
deserve special emphasis in today’s discussion.
First, priority must be given to raising awareness of
and respect for the obligations related to the protection
of civilians under international law, including under
the United Nations Charter. The State has the primary
responsibility to protect its citizens, and all parties to
armed conflict must honour and strictly comply with
their obligations under international law, international
humanitarian law and human rights law. All personnel in
peacekeeping missions need to understand clearly their
protection mandates, priorities and responsibilities.
As an active troop- and police-contributing country,
we continue to support the delivery of consistent and
coherent training. We firmly believe that intensive
predeployment and periodic in-mission training, on
both operational tasks and other protection-related
elements, is vital. We hold all of our peacekeepers to a
high standard of conduct and are pleased to have recently
signed the voluntary compact on the elimination of
sexual exploitation and abuse.
Secondly, we need stronger partnerships to
strengthen the protection of civilians. This requires an
integrated approach among military, police and civilian
components. They must, in turn, coordinate with
national authorities, local communities and the relevant
humanitarian organizations in the field. In sum, all
stakeholders must exchange information on frank
and clear situational assessments that are supported
by adequate capabilities and resources and further
underpinned by practical and achievable expectations.
Thirdly, it is essential to reduce threats to
sustainable peace and development and to build and
sustain a protective environment for civilians. We
support the Secretary-General’s view that the most
effective way to protect civilians is through a longterm process and a comprehensive approach applied
before, during and after conflict. Sustaining peace
requires us to view peacebuilding more holistically as
part of the peace continuum from conflict prevention to

18-1555867/98

S/PV.8264

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

22/05/2018

conflict resolution to laying down the foundations for
sustainable peace and development.

unwillingness to discharge its responsibility to protect
all civilians on its territory.

Our peacekeepers are trained, as a standard
procedure, to assist the local population in their
efforts to prevent any relapse into armed conflict and
to promote sustainable development. By sharing best
practices in agriculture, health care and water-resource
management with local villages in Timor-Leste, Haiti
and Darfur, our assistance has resonated well with an
emphasis on the prevention of backsliding into conflict.

That is why, during her address during the general
debate of the seventy-second session of the General
Assembly (see A/72/PV.14), our Prime Minister, The
Honourable Sheikh Hasina, urged creating safe zones
in Myanmar’s Rakhine state to protect civilians under
the auspices of the United Nations or the relevant
regional partners. In the absence of such safeguards,
the forcibly displaced Rohingya in Bangladesh continue
to remain in sheer uncertainty about the prospects for
their voluntary, safe, dignified and sustainable return
to Rakhine state. To further compound the situation,
humanitarian access has remained restricted and the
Rohingya who ventured to stay behind have been denied
of food supply and medical care. Despite some verbal
assurances, there has been no credible investigation
or prosecution by the national authorities concerned
for the alleged atrocity crimes committed against
the Rohingya.

We must also remember the incredible role of
women, especially when it comes to building trust and
ensuring protective environments. The reach and impact
of women within their local communities has long been
underestimated. We are proud to say that our current
contribution to United Nations peacekeeping operations
includes more than 20 per cent female personnel.
Durable peace is not tenable if civilians lack security
and are not safe. Let us redouble our investments in
practical measures that address that lack of security
comprehensively and for the long term.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): We thank the
Polish presidency for organizing this open debate
and for the concept note (S/2018/444, annex). We also
thank the Secretary-General and the other briefers for
highlighting some key areas of concern from conflict
situations around the world — from Palestine to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We see merit in
efforts to identify good practices in compliance with
international humanitarian law and human rights law
in armed conflicts, as well as in the call upon Member
States to develop national policy frameworks on the
protection of civilians. We would be willing to explore
such initiatives further in the context of our own
national international humanitarian law committee.
The latest Rohingya humanitarian crisis has
once again revealed to us the total abdication by the
authorities of the State concerned of their responsibility
to protect civilians irrespective of their status or
treatment. For months together, the world witnessed
the forced expulsion of a persecuted minority, which
the authorities of the State concerned continue to claim
as the work of a fringe extremist group. Even if that
narrative were to be accepted, it would mean that the
State concerned has acknowledged its inability or
68/98

The reason we highlight those issues yet again is
not to level criticism against a neighbouring country,
but only to reiterate the fundamental yet complex
issues that need to be addressed in order to create a
situation conducive to the safe and dignified return of
the Rohingya and other displaced communities to their
homes in Myanmar.
Guided by the unfolding Rohingya crisis, we wish
to take this opportunity to stress five points, which
have also been made by many other delegations.
First, there needs to be greater emphasis on
strategic analysis and assessment by the United Nations
and other independent actors on the ground of threats to
civilians. The United Nations field management should
develop the capabilities to detect early-warning signs
and a sense of accountability to report on palpable
threats to civilians. The Organization’s enhanced
role in conflict prevention and sustaining peace can
be best exemplified through its evidence-based and
unvarnished reporting of facts, including through
consultations with the national authorities concerned.
Secondly, safe and unhindered passage for
humanitarian personnel and supplies for civilians in
need must be ensured by all parties to armed conflicts.
Medical facilities, educational institutions, especially
schools, and places of worship should be kept out
of harm’s way in the planning and carrying out of
hostilities. Respect for humanitarian assistance and
18-15558

22/05/2018

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

medical care in armed conflict needs to be promoted
both during peace and conflict.
Thirdly, Member States have a responsibility
to ensure that arms and ammunition transferred to
any other national authorities are not used for the
commission of atrocity crimes against civilians or other
grave breaches of international humanitarian law. Those
with influence over State authorities concerned and
other conflicting parties should work towards resolving
the conflicts instead of further instigating them, while
giving primacy to the protection of civilians. There
needs to be a shared commitment to avoiding the use of
explosive weapons with wide-area effects in populated
areas, considering their dire humanitarian impact.
Fourthly, the global norms for ending violence
against women and children in armed conflicts need to
be translated into action. The Rohingya humanitarian
crisis has brought to the fore the issue of children
born as a result to sexual violence. There is also a
pronounced need to take account for missing persons
and detainees, and address trauma among family and
community members affected by sexual violence,
illegal detentions, enforced disappearances and other
human rights violations.
Fifthly, ensuring accountability and justice for
serious violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights law is crucial for enhancing their
compliance and for shattering a culture of impunity
for the commission of atrocity crimes against civilians.
The Security Council should make appropriate use of
the tools at its disposal to that effect, including through
duly considered options for imposing sanctions and
referrals to international criminal justice mechanisms.
As a lead troop- and police-contributing country,
Bangladesh takes a pragmatic approach to the
protection-of-civilians mandate in both practice and
preparedness while adhering to the principles of
peacekeeping operations. As part of most of the highly
challenging United Nations peacekeeping missions, we
have seen the relevance of the protection-of-civiliansmandate at first-hand on the ground and, in a number of
cases, tackled it with professionalism and some degree
of creativity — even when the mandate was not laid out
in clear and specific terms. We remain committed to
further mainstreaming the protection of civilians into
the peacekeeping training programmes designed for
our troops and police.

S/PV. 8264

We reiterate, however, that protection-of-civilians
mandates need to be backed by viable strategies and
adequate resources so that they do not fall through when
faced with belligerence from the parties to the conflict
or the lack of will or capacity of the host Governments to
cooperate. The Security Council has a responsibility to
ensure that the protection-of-civilians mandates given
to peacekeeping missions are vigorously supported by
meaningful political processes to prevent conflicts and
sustain peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Indonesia thanks the Polish
presidency for convening this open debate on a highly
important topic. We also thank the Secretary-General,
the Director-General of the International Committee
of the Red Cross and the representative of the Iraqi
Al-Amal Association for their briefings.
Indonesia strongly believes that the protection of
civilians in armed conflict should always be one of
the core aims of the Security Council. We support the
Council’s attention on safeguarding innocent people in
conflicts. Yet it is deeply disturbing that attacks against
civilians have increased in recent years — especially in
2017 — as well as attacks on peacekeepers, which hinder
them in discharging their duty to save human lives.
Furthermore, attacks against humanitarian
workers, medical missions and civilian assets have
reached an unprecedented level. In a number of cases,
State authorities have been unable to prevent, counter
or investigate them properly. A lack of capacity is one
important factor behind that. Everyone needs to be
reminded of the clear obligation under international
humanitarian law to differentiate between civilian
populations and combatants. Everything must be
done to avoid attacks on civilians, civilian objects and
medical personnel, along with their facilities. Allow
me to share some additional points pertaining to our
topic today.
First, since the protection of civilians is the primary
responsibility of each Member State, capacity-building
by States and related support by the United Nations
and other partners are vital. The promotion of a culture
of peace with a rights-based approach and requisite
laws during peace time are therefore very important.
Lessons learned and best practices should be shared.
We share the Secretary-General’s view on the need
for all Member States to develop national policy

18-1555869/98

S/PV.8264

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

frameworks on the protection of civilians. There should
be clear institutional authorities and responsibilities for
safeguarding civilians.
Secondly, considering the very serious challenge
of non-compliance by non-State actors, who are active
in most conflicts today, the Security Council should
explore innovative ways to secure their respect for
global norms against harming civilians.
Thirdly, there needs to be improvement in medical
care to respond to emergency situations. United Nations
peacekeeping missions in several conflict areas have
experienced challenges in responding consistently to
medical emergencies and in evacuating casualties. We
stress the need to ensure the swift and safe passage
of injured, wounded or sick peacekeepers along with
medical and humanitarian personnel who are engaged
exclusively in medical duties.
Fourthly, Indonesia underlines the increasingly
important role of women in peace processes as well
as the protection of civilians. Regrettably, women
and children suffer the most in conflicts. Women
understand what is needed to create and deepen peace
in communities. There should be more system-wide
action to help empower women’s roles in societies,
including as an indispensable force for peacebuilding,
protecting civilians and sustaining peace.
While reiterating the fundamental role of Member
States in protecting civilians in armed conflict, it is
critical that, together with United Nations agencies, the
Council facilitate measures to strengthen countries’
capacities to protect civilians as well as sustain peace.
The imperative to protect civilians must be embedded
throughout the peace continuum — from conflict
prevention, resolution, mediation and peacekeeping to
peacebuilding and long-term development.
I should like to conclude by reiterating the
determination enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war. Our task through the United Nations is
to save and protect civilians wherever they may be from
the evils of war.
Indonesia stands ready to play its part in advancing
the agenda of protecting civilians in armed conflicts
concretely by contributing peacekeepers as well as in
shaping and sharing norms. As stated by the Indonesian
Foreign Minister on several occasions, our collective
efforts in resolving conflicts should always be aimed
70/98

22/05/2018

at ending all forms of violence, restoring security and
stability and protecting all persons. Everyone and every
country should be engaged in that noble cause. No
civilians should be left behind or left unprotected.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Montenegro.
Ms. Pejanović‑Đurišić (Montenegro): First, let me
thank the Polish presidency for organizing this timely
and important open debate on the protection of civilians
in armed conflicts and for preparing an informative
concept note (S/2018/444, annex).
My country fully associates itself with the
statement made by the observer European Union. I
would, however, like to make some additional remarks.
In the past few months we have been witnessing
increasing numbers of civilian casualties and worsening
trends when it comes to the protection of civilians.
Deliberate targeting, indiscriminate attacks, including
sexual and gender-based violence, against civilians and
the increasing use of siege and starvation as a method of
warfare are just a few examples. When attacks against
civilians take place and suffering happens, especially
when women and children are involved, people across
the world look to the United Nations for reassurance and
protection. This always results in further introspection
as to what more could be done in terms of prevention
and how parties to armed conflict with a military
advantage could be expected to respect international
humanitarian law.
Montenegro welcomes the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2018/462), which describes the state of
large-scale destruction and suffering affecting millions
of children, women and men. It is clear that it is our
joint duty to be more decisive to make our commitments
real so as to protect civilians in armed conflicts and the
refugees who have fled them. We are convinced that
there is more that the United Nations can do to prevent
conflicts and, when that fails, to end armed conflicts
through negotiated and inclusive settlements.
Montenegro supports international efforts to
implement resolution 2286 (2016). We call on other
Member States to take action on the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendations, which will allow for its
full implementation. No country can be justified in
standing in the way of a resolution designed to allow
civilians access to food and medical assistance. All
18-15558

22/05/2018

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Member States, not only those that are parties to armed
conflict, have a responsibility to take action.
Montenegro remains committed to the joint
initiative led by Switzerland and the International
Committee of the Red Cross on increasing compliance
with international humanitarian law. We underline
the
importance
of
strengthening
inter-State
cooperation and States’ cooperation with international
jurisdictions to fight impunity. An important role of
the Security Council entails ensuring accountability
for such violations, including through referrals to the
International Criminal Court. Montenegro strongly
believes that human rights mechanisms could
contribute to preventing atrocities. In that regard,
increased engagement between the Security Council
and the Human Rights Council is instrumental. We are
convinced that the veto must not be used when there is
a clear responsibility to protect civilians. Montenegro
therefore endorsed the French-Mexican initiative and
the code of conduct of the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group. We call on all countries to
follow suit.
Montenegro continues to promote and build a
robust understanding of international humanitarian
law within its own institutions. Through a number
of projects and initiatives, along with support from
United Nations agencies and other international
organizations, we are ensuring that the Montenegro
army receives training on the fundamental provisions
of international law pertaining to the protection of
civilians and medical missions. Those who have been
on the ground in Afghanistan, Mali, Western Sahara or
in other peacekeeping missions already have significant
knowledge and experience, and they promote activities
aimed at raising awareness about the protection of
civilians in armed conflict as well as in peacekeeping,
on the basis of the Kigali Principles on the Protection
of Civilians.
However, protecting civilians is not only the
responsibility of peacekeepers and men and women in
uniform, but also the primary responsibility of States.
Therefore, we should use the authority of the Council to
ensure that States deliver on their primary responsibility
to prevent conflict and minimize suffering. Civilians,
as well as non-governmental organizations and the
communities, play an important role. States should
regularly engage them in all their activities aimed at
protecting civilians.

S/PV. 8264

Protecting civilians from the ravages of conflict is
vital to the mission of the Security Council. It remains
our main common goal and collective responsibility.
Although the challenges we face are huge, we have
to take concrete steps in strengthening the role of
the protection of civilians in the overall context of
maintaining international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Latvia.
Mr. Mažeikks (Latvia): I thank you, Madam
President, for organizing this annual debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. I also thank
the Secretary-General, the Director-General of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and
Ms. Edwar, an Iraqi civil-society representative, for
their briefings.
Latvia aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union.
Innocent civilians, including women and children,
often constitute the vast majority of victims; often they
are deliberately targeted by parties to armed conflict,
illegal armed groups or terrorist organizations. The
increased incidence of armed conflict in urban areas
has taken a devastating toll on civilian populations
and has damaged civilian infrastructure. The use of
explosive weapons and, what is more deplorable, the
use of chemical weapons, in populated areas, forced
displacement, as well as sexual violence, starvation,
sieges and the denial of much-needed humanitarian
assistance as methods of warfare have become daily
news and do not seem as outrageous as they really are.
Latvia is deeply concerned about attacks on
humanitarian and health-care facilities and personnel
in armed conflict, which continued at a high rate last
year. Overall, we are concerned about the growing
sense of fatigue when it comes to disregard for
humanitarian principles in present-day conflicts.
Impunity for widespread violations on the ground must
not be tolerated. It cannot be emphasized enough that
all State and non-State parties to conflict must respect
international law, humanitarian law and human rights
law. Innocent civilians should be spared the effects
of hostilities, not robbed of their lives, health, future
prospects or homes.
We thank the Secretary-General for his recent
report (S/2018/462) on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, which analyses progress in three focus

18-1555871/98

S/PV.8264

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

areas. It is clear that much more needs to be done to
translate progress at the normative level into more
effective country-specific measures to protect civilians.
States bear the primary responsibility to protect their
populations, including from atrocity crimes.
Promoting the protection of civilians in all United
Nations activities is essential, starting with the conflictprevention agenda. Latvia considers the protection of
civilians in armed conflict as an important part of the
Security Council agenda. However, greater efforts by
the Security Council are needed to address situations
of concern, act promptly in order to prevent or stop
a conflict and to demand accountability. Existing
challenges to the protection of civilians in diverse
conflict-affected areas, including Syria, Afghanistan,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Ukraine,
as underscored by the report of the SecretaryGeneral, should be addressed with a sense of urgency.
We call on the permanent members of the Security
Council to refrain from using the veto in situations of
atrocity crimes.
The protection of civilians is an important
component of United Nations peacekeeping mandates.
Local communities expect United Nations peacekeepers
to protect them. However, the effective implementation
of protection mandates remains a challenge. Our work
to make peacekeeping operations more adaptable
and relevant to the current complex challenges must
continue. Better planning, equipment, situational
awareness and training are essential to improved
performance, effective mandate delivery, the protection
of civilians and security of peacekeepers. We also
recall the importance of the Kigali Principles on the
Protection of Civilians, which Latvia endorsed in 2016.
Lastly, I would like to emphasize the importance
of accountability for serious violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law. We are
concerned about the overwhelming lack of proper
investigation and prosecution of perpetrators. Latvia
is of the view that, where national action is lacking,
international legal mechanisms can step in to provide
justice for victims. We cannot expect future perpetrators
to take the United Nations and its Security Council
seriously as long as the current perpetrators act with
impunity. It is a fundamental legal obligation and in our
common interests to promote and ensure the effective
protection of civilians.
72/98

22/05/2018

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United Arab Emirates.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): Allow
me to express my appreciation to Secretary-General
Guterres, Mr. Daccord and Ms. Edwar for their
thoughtful briefings earlier today.
The Secretary-General rightly pointed out that the
most effective way to protect civilians is to prevent and
end conflicts. The failure of the Security Council to
respond decisively in some key conflict areas of the
world has exacted a profound human toll. Therefore,
the United Arab Emirates calls today for re-energized
unity of purpose within the Security Council and
renewed action for the maintenance of international
peace and security.
In my own region, with the conflict in Syria now
entering its eighth year, we are experiencing at first
hand the challenge of multiple armed conflicts, which
have severe implications for civilian communities. In
many instances, those conflicts have been worsened
and prolonged by the Security Council’s failure to act.
For too long, the Syrian people have been denied
humanitarian assistance, in large part because of the
inaction by the Security Council to adopt any resolution
on Syria since 2011 and the failure to implement the
resolutions that have been adopted. If that were not
already intolerable, the Syrian population has also had
to endure the horrors of chemical-weapons attacks.
The United Arab Emirates calls for the unobstructed
delivery of aid to those in need and for accountability
for all chemical attacks against civilians, which are in
clear violation of international humanitarian law.
If
we
apply
the
Secretary-General’s
prevention-focused view to Palestine, we can conclude
that simply ignoring the root causes of conflict will
inevitably lead to further bloodshed. The situation
in Palestine and Israel’s disregard for civilian life
and international law endures as the longest-running
tragedy of our region. Israel’s actions at the Gaza fence
over the past month have included attacks on doctors
and paramedics, in clear violation of the protections
for medical personnel assisting wounded civilians
guaranteed under the Fourth Geneva Convention and
customary international law. Israel’s actions cannot be
condoned or ignored by the international community;
they cannot become the new norm. We call on Israel
to abide by its responsibilities as the occupying
18-15558

22/05/2018

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Power to extend basic human rights and protections
to Palestinians.
When the United Arab Emirates calls for
accountability in Syria or Palestine, it is not only a
question of seeking justice; it is also vital in order to
prevent such violence in future. Unfortunately, casting
doubt on precise facts and figures has proved to be an
effective tool for Governments seeking to stymie any
attempt to hold them accountable for their actions.
The only way to counter that is to create agreed-upon
mechanisms to collect data that is beyond dispute, so
that the international community can react appropriately
and responsibly to major developments.
In that regard, we commend the recent Security
Council visit to Myanmar, organized by Kuwait, Peru
and the United Kingdom. The visit is an excellent
example of the Council taking steps to fulfil its
mandate. Nonetheless, we remain gravely concerned
by the plight of the Rohingya Muslim minority in
Myanmar. We hope to see the Security Council follow
through on the outcomes of the visit.
With regard to Yemen, as a member of the Arab
coalition supporting legitimacy in that country, we are
taking our own responsibility very seriously when it
comes to international humanitarian law and protection
for civilians. As I outlined previously, there are grave
consequences when the Security Council fails to act.
But there can be equally damaging consequences when
the Security Council fails to follow through on its own
resolutions. The failure of the Council to enforce its
resolutions pertinent to Yemen is part of the cause of
the protracted nature of that conflict.
Nonetheless, we look forward to continuing to
cooperate with the United Nations to resolve the conflict
perpetrated by the Houthis and their Iranian backers.
We have worked closely with the United Nations to
ensure that our military doctrines and practices are in
line with international best practices and have worked
diligently to rectify problems as they have arisen. We
will also continue to work closely with the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs on ensuring the delivery of much-needed
humanitarian aid to affected areas. We look forward to
working with the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy
for Yemen, Mr. Martin Griffiths, in his efforts to create
a road map for sustainable peace.
However, the Houthis in Yemen are a clear example
of the problems that non-State actors pose more generally

S/PV. 8264

in our region and around the world. More often than
not, it is the civilian populations of the States that those
groups have infiltrated that suffer the consequences.
That moral hazard is magnified when those groups
receive State support. Iran’s decision to arm various
non-State actors with weapons, including ballistic
missiles, in order to avoid sovereign accountability
for its actions has pushed the entire region towards a
profoundly dangerous precipice.
We would therefore call on the Security Council
to take creative and bold steps towards countering the
threat posed by non-State actors to better address the
nature of the challenges we are most likely to face in
the twenty-first century. Critically, that must include
taking resolute action against the State financiers
and supporters of those groups. Such States can no
longer be absolved of responsibility when they provide
support to non-State actors that then proceed to violate
international law. If anything, we believe that States
such as Iran that continue to act in this manner must
be held to even greater account because of their blatant
attempts to violate international law and their continued
violations of Security Council resolutions.
In conclusion, there is much more to be done with
respect to the protection and welfare of civilians in
conflict, especially for the most vulnerable. In addition
to the recommendations made by Mr. Daccord and
the Secretary-General, the United Arab Emirates
emphasizes the importance of mandatory policies within
security and aid agencies to mainstream gender, age and
disability in identifying unique needs and responses,
as well as establishing accountability mechanisms for
those policies, to implement them across all pillars of
the United Nations and to publicly report those scores.
We call on the Security Council to mirror those efforts
and implement corresponding policies.
We also call on the Security Council and fellow
Member States to join us in our commitment to protect
civilians and uphold international law by focusing on
prevention and address the root causes of conflict,
while recognizing that the world’s regional conflicts
will require regional solutions and reinvigorating the
Security Council to ensure that it both takes action in
response to conflicts and follows through on its existing
resolutions in order for the Security Council to uphold
its mandate to maintain peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kenya.

18-1555873/98

S/PV.8264

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Ms. Grignon (Kenya): Allow me once again
to commend Poland on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of May and on
convening this important meeting of equal magnitude
to the meeting convened last week on the rule of law
(see S/PV.8262). I also wish to express my delegation’s
sincere gratitude to Secretary-General António
Guterres and the Director-General of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, Mr. Yves Daccord, for
their comprehensive briefings this morning.
Civilians are protected persons under international
law, and the parties to a conflict have a legal obligation
to protect them from the effects of conflict. However,
we continue to witness many civilian casualties,
with thousands of survivors becoming refugees and
internally displaced persons in conflict zones. The
Security Council’s continued consideration of this
agenda item is a welcome indication of its commitment
to protecting civilians, who are the people most at risk
during armed conflict.
Despite the various achievements in this field,
there still remain considerable challenges: genderbased violence and sexual exploitation and abuse,
inadequate mandates, the absence of a common doctrine
and resource gaps risk undermining protection-ofcivilian efforts.
Gender-based violence continues to be used as a
weapon of war, more so in those conflict situations that
are characterized by extremism and terrorism. This is
not only a human rights issue, but it also contravenes
international law. Additionally, sexual exploitation
and abuse by some of those entrusted to protect
civilians should be condemned by all. We commend
the Secretary-General for his zero-tolerance policy on
sexual exploitation and abuse. As a troop-contributing
country, Kenya is committed to the implementation of
resolution 2272 (2016), which seeks to hold accountable
the troop-contributing countries that fail to credibly
deal with allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse.
Mission objectives should be explicit and take
into full consideration the fundamental tasks of
peacekeepers and the situation on the ground. Any
attempt to have peacekeepers carry out tasks that may
pose a risk to the credibility of the mission without
necessarily contributing to reducing violence against
civilians should be avoided. Equally, caveats imposed
on peacekeepers and the divergent views on what
constitutes the protection of civilians, coupled with lack
74/98

22/05/2018

of a common applicable doctrine, may complicate the
efforts to integrate the diverse sets of military, police
and civilian actors who are involved. Uniting efforts
is vital; the effectiveness of the protection of civilians
largely depends on the ability of different actors to
work together for the common good of those at risk.
The primary responsibility for the protection of
civilians rests with national Governments; the United
Nations becomes involved to offer support or when
national Governments fail. Each protection-of-civilians
situation is unique. Adequate information on situations
is therefore critical for success. It is important for
mission leaders to conduct assessments to understand
the dynamics of the conflict, the civilian threats
and vulnerabilities.
The lack of adequate capabilities and resources
pose the greatest challenge to the protection of civilians.
Peacekeepers have other primary objectives. Therefore,
additional tasks related to the protection of civilians,
especially when the number of those at risk surges,
and the strain exerted on already limited resources can
jeopardize the objective of protecting civilians.
My delegation believes that, for mandates to be
effectively executed, there is an urgent need to develop
a common doctrine on the protection of civilians to
guide those mandated to execute the task. Components
mandated to protect civilians need to be well trained,
better resourced, properly equipped and have the
capabilities to enable them to efficiently implement
their mandate of protecting civilians in conflict and
post-conflict situations.
Mission mandates should be clear, credible and
achievable, with specific objectives on the protection
of civilians, and allow for any necessary room for
manoeuvre, while devoid of unrealistic constraints.
United Nations missions need to develop internal earlywarning systems with a common understanding of
what constitutes threats to civilians. There is a need
for information-management systems that ensure that
early-warning information is widely shared with those
responsible for protecting civilians, to enable them to
make a predictive assessment of the situation on the
ground. Moreover, credible intelligence-processing
systems
are
necessary
to
support
United
Nations missions.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate the importance
of cooperation among international and regional
stakeholders. The involvement of communities is
18-15558

22/05/2018

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

also critical to the success of protection-of-civilian
mandates and should be facilitated.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation takes note of the concept note
(S/2018/444, annex) for this debate and of the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2018/462) entitled “Protection of
civilians in armed conflict”. We have some comments
and reservations regarding certain information and
assessments in the report, which we will convey to the
Secretariat in an official letter.
The Syrian Arab Republic believes that the
protection of civilians has been and remains the primary
and most noble purpose that the Governments of the
world have pledged to achieve, saving humankind on
a large scale, without any exception or differentiation,
from the scourges of wars and conflict, while preserving
the fundamental rights and dignity of people. The
practices and policies of some Governments prove that
addressing that noble question is still selective, with
double standards adopted. Such Governments abuse
the issue of the protection of civilians in a cheap and
selfish manner to serve their political agendas, using
the topic as a pretext to interfere in the internal affairs
of other countries.
The principle of the protection of civilians is
genuine only if accompanied by full compliance with
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and the provisions of international law, including
respect for sovereignty, sovereign equality and the
non-interference in the internal affairs of other
countries. The protection of civilians has been and
remains the primary responsibility of the country
concerned, namely, its Government and institutions,
as those are the sole authorities mandated to maintain
peace and stability in their territories.
Based on that, Syria will continue to cooperate
with its allies and friends by fulfilling its duties and
the constitutional right of protecting its civilians from
armed terrorist groups. Such groups are composed of
tens of thousands of foreign terrorist fighters who have
arrived in Syria from more than 100 countries. Those
are not words plucked from thin air; that information is
documented in United Nations committees and working
groups’ reports related to combating terrorism. We
remind the Council, and we will continue to remind the
Council, of those facts.

S/PV. 8264

Today Syria is witnessing a dirty terrorist war in
which intelligence agencies and Governments have
implicated themselves and which they have ignited
by creating armed terrorist groups, training and
providing their elements with financing and weapons
and facilitating the influx of foreign terrorist fighters
to Syria. The worst type of deceit is that focused on
concealing the truth. However, facts are blown out of
proportion when United Nations reports are politicized,
lack information and depend on sources that are openly
linked to armed groups or supported and financed by
the Governments of countries involved in supporting
and sponsoring terrorism. In that regard, I wish to touch
upon the so-called White Helmets, which are active in
areas under the control of the Al-Nusra Front, a group
that is classified as a terrorist entity by the Council, and
are one of thousands of examples.
The United Nations bodies and working groups that
are carrying out activities in the humanitarian field in
Syria have documented that those armed terrorist
groups have turned medical facilities and schools in
all the areas of Syria under their control into military
bases and headquarters from which they can launch
mortar and missile attacks after they have looted and
destroyed their contents, including advanced medical
equipment. United Nations working groups have
seen the warehouses that were under the control of
armed terrorist groups in Aleppo, eastern Ghouta,
Homs and other areas with their own eyes, which
were filled with thousands of tons of food supplies
and other medical equipment and material. Those
supplies were monopolized by those groups for their
own elements and families, preventing civilians from
benefiting from them — those same civilians used as
human shields — or sold at inflated prices. However,
regrettably, those documented reports, issued by the
United Nations, were and remain lost and have never
reached the Secretariat.
Some permanent members of the Council use
the topic of this debate to practice and exercise their
political hypocrisy or as a pretext to interfere in the
internal affairs of other countries. I would also like to
remind the Council that the United Nations mission to
assess the situation in Raqqa documented in a recently
issued report that the city has been almost completely
destroyed by the illegitimate international alliance,
including medical facilities, schools and infrastructure.
There is a legal and moral crisis facing
international entities that work under the umbrella of

18-1555875/98

S/PV.8264

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

the United Nations. Some Governments take no issue
with defending the continued Israeli occupation of
Palestinian territories, the Syrian Golan and parts of
Lebanon; they take no issue withconcocting pretexts
and explanations for Israeli violations of international
law, international humanitarian law and international
human rights law; and they take no issue with protecting
Israel from accountability for cold-bloodedly killing
unarmed civilians. The killing of more than 60 innocent
Palestinians and injury to more than 3,000 others is proof
of the Security Council’s failure to provide protection
to civilians owing to the position of the United States,
which prevents the Council from exercising its mandate
for maintaing international peace and security.
The Security Council’s open debates on this
issue can be consequential and effective only if their
objectives constitute a serious attempt to promote
safeguards for protecting civilians. However, if these
debates are just a means for political polarization and
deepening differences, then we would like to stress that
the Charter and international law are clear. Those who
want to protect civilians must start by addressing the root
causes of their suffering, including foreign occupation,
the threat or use of military force, the supporting and
financing of terrorism and interference in the internal
affairs of and destabilization of other countries.
I remind the Council that the founding Members
of the United Nations assigned the Governments
of Member States with one sacred duty — that of
preventing armed conflict, aggression and war.
However, some countries with political, military and
economic influence use that influence to support and
finance terrorism; they contribute to igniting war and
conflict all over the world while assuming the role of
firefighters and police officers — the corrupt kind .
In conclusion, and in response to the allegations
made by the representatives of Saudi Arabia and the
United Arab Emirates in their statements, we wish to
stress that those countries are the first that must submit
to questioning and be held accountable for the lack of
protection of civilians. Oil money will never shield them
from accountability. We remind them that the people
of Syria will not forget that most of the money that
sponsors terrorism in Syria came directly from them or
through donations to suspicious charity organizations
that work under the guise of religious or humanitarian
charity work. I would like to remind the regimes of
those two countries that they lack the sufficient morals
and religion to speak about the protection of civilians.
76/98

22/05/2018

Historically, the blood of Syrians and Yemenis has been
on their hands.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Yemen.
Mr. Alyemany (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate you, Madam President,
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of May. We thank you, Madam, for convening
this open debate on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. We are particularly invested in this topic, as it
directly impacts Yemen, which has suffered the scourge
of war due to Houthi militias. I also wish to thank all
of our friends at the United Nations who have warmly
congratulated us on the twenty-eighth national holiday
that is being celebrated today in Yemen.
Yemen underwent one of the richest experiences
of the peaceful transition of power within the context
of the Arab Spring. The culmination of that transition
was to hold presidential elections, under the auspices
of the United Nations and the Security Council, and
the National Dialogue Conference that tackled all the
difficulties experienced by the country. The movement
for change in Yemen, launched within the framework
of the initiative of the Gulf Cooperation Council and
its Implementation Mechanism, has become a model
for peaceful transition process in Yemen which aims to
build a new Yemen — a Yemen that all Yemenis want
to become a free and democratic country, putting an
end to dictatorship and exclusion. Indeed, dialogue
and civilized trends have prevailed with the adoption
of our new Constitution, which was the result of the
conclusion of the national dialogue.
However, the Houthi militias, supported by Iran,
took advantage of the fragile situation and occupied the
capital in september 2014, putting a bloody end to the
peaceful political transition in the country. The elected
President led the country during the peaceful transition,
making concession after concession to protect the
country, community-based peace and civil peace from
the scourge of armed violence. However, the Houthi
rebels have destroyed the country; they have attacked
cities and villages, killing unarmed civilians in cold
blood and destroying the infrastructure to further Iran’s
expansionist agenda in the region. In fact, the launch
of missiles provided by Iran targeted not only Yemen,
but also Saudi Arabia, randomly targeting Yemeni and
Saudi Arabians civilians as well as civilian structures.
18-15558

22/05/2018

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The main duty of the national army and the
Government is to protect the people and infrastructure
of our country. For the past three years we have
spared no effort to accept all United Nations peace
proposals — especially those submitted to Kuwait in
August 2016 — in order to seek lasting peace based on
three points of reference, namely, the Gulf Cooperation
Council initiative and Implementation Mechanism
agreement; the conclusions of the national dialogue; and
Security Council resolutions on the matter, particularly
resolution 2216 (2015).
Those efforts are being made to put an end to
the Houthi rebellion and ensure the withdrawal of all
weapons and missiles, in order to achieve stability and
security for Yemen and the region, as well as to put
an end — once and for all — to the Iran-sponsored
terrorist networks.
Our capital has been taken hostage. It is within
approximately 20 kilometres’ range of the national
army. We have full capacity within the army to target
any spot therein. However, in order to safeguard the
lives of citizens who are in the capital, the army has not
launched any attack on it.
In contrast, however, the city of Taez is being held
hostage under the blockade of the militias who have
targeted this most populated Yemeni city, the civilians
and infrastruccture on a daily basis. There have been
thousands of victims: victims whose fate is the very
subject of this open debate, victims of the worst forms
of crimes perpetrated by the militias for more than
three years. The Houthi militias have committed the
worst violations of human rights in Yemen, which have
even affected children in indiscriminate shootings.
Children have been indoctrinated and recruited as
soldiers. Women have also been subject to violations.
They are either imprisoned or targeted in peaceful
protests organized by the mothers of missing persons.
The Yemeni Government calls upon the international
community to undertake all the necessary measures
to protect Yemeni civilians, including by providing
logistical support to protect and rehabilitate children
indoctrinated and recruited by the militias; liberate
those who have been arrested and find those who have
been subject to enforced disappearance, or have been
detained. We highly appreciate the cooperation and
support we receive from Member States to protect
civilians. We also look forward for that support to
overcome the current stalemate. That can be done by

S/PV. 8264

encouraging international organizations that protect
civilians in conflict through the provision of medical
and psychological support to victims.
The Iranian representative spoke of the deplorable
humanitarian situation in Yemen, while Iran is in fact
the State responsible for that situation. Iran provides
the militias with missiles and landmines. Iran is
responsible for the murder of Yemen’s children. My
Government relies on the Council and the international
community to strengthen the protection of civilians in
times of armed conflict. Pressure must be placed on the
Houthi rebels, supported by Iran, to surrender arms and
listen to the voice of reason and dialogue to put an end
to the fighting that has caused hundreds of thousands of
deaths in my country.
It is necessary to put pressure on the militias to
prevent them from targeting civilians, especially women
and children. We must stop them from using women
and children as human shields and preventing their
access to schools, hospitals and civilian institutions,
using them as barracks and missile launch bases and for
other military purposes. That endangers all civilians
and constitutes a flagrant violation of all the relevant
norms as well as international law and international
humanitarian law, which makes it an offence to target
civilians in armed conflict.
In conclusion, we declare that the conclusions of the
national dialogue and relevant international decisions
are a sure solution to protect the lives of civilians
and build a united and democratic Yemen. We, the
Government, are convinced that the peace so strongly
desired by the Yemeni people, one that safeguards
their civil and constitutional rights, is envisioned by
those conclusions. That will spare us further cycles of
conflicts and wars and will also enable us to meet the
aspirations of the Yemeni people.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Zaayman (South Africa): Let me commence
by extending our congratulatory remarks and
appreciation to the Polish presidency for the excellent
work undertaken by your delegation, Madam President,
during the period of your term.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

18-1555877/98

S/PV.8264

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

We wish to begin by commending troopcontributing countries and the sacrifices of their
personnel, as well as international organizations such
as the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, the United Nations
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
UNICEF, the International Committee of the Red Cross
and Médecins Sans Frontières, which are at the forefront
of monitoring, mobilizing resources and assistance to
the civilian populations affected by conflict.
The theme of this debate is particularly important
and timely, given the unfortunate events in recent
weeks that have further illustrated in graphic detail
the dangers that civilians face all around the world in
conflict situations.
The Security Council, created following a
catastrophic world war that saw millions of civilians
being killed, has the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. All of
us therefore have an obligation to work together to end
the scourge of war, which is deeply felt by the civilian
population in armed conflict.
It is for that reason that the failure of the Council to
act on the situation in Gaza, where a civilian population
was deliberately targeted by a military force, is a matter
of the utmost concern. It was left to the Human Rights
Council to initiate an investigation due to the failure of
the Security Council to carry out its mandate. We fully
support that independent inquiry.
We stress that the Security Council must uphold
and respect the norms of international law, including
humanitarian law and human rights law. While it is
recognized that the primary responsibility for the
protection of civilians lies with the host country, United
Nations peacekeeping missions are often mandated
with that task. Since 1999, the protection of civilians
has become one of the central concerns of United
Nations peacekeeping operations, yet neither policy
nor practice have evolved quickly enough to achieve
full and effective protection for civilians. South Africa
has argued, in line with resolution 1894 (2009), that,
in order for United Nations peacekeeping operations
to effectively carry out their protection-of-civilians
mandates, they require the resources and capabilities
necessary to assume a robust posture to implement
their mandate.
78/98

22/05/2018

South Africa also sees a glaring violation of
international law by armed groups in deliberate attacks
on medical personnel, hospitals and installations.
Such practices not only plunge civilian populations
into crisis, but further threaten the mission of the
Health Care in Danger project by endangering the
lives of health workers, destroying their equipment,
obstructing access to civilians in need of medical care
and preventing the provision of other basic amenities
for life. It must be stressed that creating conditions
conducive to delivering humanitarian assistance
remains a core responsibility of mandated institutions
and of the host country. Any act of aggression towards
medical personnel and humanitarian workers is an act
of war, and such violations need to be accounted for.
I would like to conclude by commending all
personnel involved in peacekeeping missions, as well
as civil-society groups, for the service they perform.
They are often inadequately resourced for the enormous
challenges that they face on a daily basis. South Africa
will continue to interact closely with them to allow
them to perform their vital international role.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Hoshino (Japan): This month marks the second
anniversary of the unanimous adoption of resolution
2286 (2016), on health care in armed conflict, on
which Japan was a co-penholder. The resolution was
sponsored by more than 80 Member States. I would
like to express my gratitude to Poland for holding this
ministerial-level open debate and thereby providing
an occasion to draw the attention of the international
community to this important issue once again.
Resolution 2286 (2016), the first-ever Council
resolution addressing attacks on health services,
reconfirmed that all parties to armed conflicts have
obligations under international law to protect civilians.
We welcome the fact that subsequent Council resolutions
refer to resolution 2286 (2016).
Since then, however, as fighting born of conflict is
increasingly taking place in densely populated areas,
the state of the protection of civilians is bleaker. We
witness increased use of air strikes in urban areas,
resulting in large numbers of civilian casualties. We
have also been hearing continuous reports of attacks
against health-care providers and facilities. This
deplorable reality underscores the urgent need to
18-15558

22/05/2018

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

promote respect for international humanitarian law by
all parties to a conflict.
When Japan was a member of the Council, we
worked hard on humanitarian issues in Syria as a
co-penholder. It is regrettable that fighting continues
in many cities in Syria; humanitarian access is often
hindered or blocked; medical workers are regularly
attacked and even medical evacuation is perilous. While
we know the differences in position among Council
members and the wider United Nations membership, it
is nonetheless the Council’s responsibility to emphasize
the importance of protecting civilians, thereby
delivering a clear message to parties to conflict that
they must respect international humanitarian law, even
in a war against terrorism.
Japan welcomes the latest report of theSecretaryGeneral (S/2018/462), which provides practical ideas for
the implementation of resolution 2286 (2016), including
the urgent necessity of enhancing compliance by
non-State armed groups. The Council should commit to
enforcing the resolution and to seek ways to encourage
Member States to take concrete actions to implement it.
Japan will be closely watching the development of the
implementation process and will continue to engage in
the full implementation of resolution 2286 (2016) within
the broader context of conflict prevention, namely, by
assisting political processes towards conflict resolution
and promoting peacebuilding.
Japan has been undertaking efforts to alleviate
the suffering of people living in various conditions,
including during conflict and in post-conflict
situations. By viewing individuals as the foundation
of a country and community, we see the importance of
investing in people. We would like to emphasize once
again the importance of promoting human security
through the empowerment and protection of people
in all circumstances, including, and especially during
armed conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jordan.
Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the delegation of your
country, Madam, for presiding over the Security
Council during this month and for Poland’s tireless
efforts in organizing this open debate and placing this
important topic on the agenda of the Security Council.
I wish you every success.

S/PV. 8264

I would like also to express my gratitude and
appreciation to Secretary-General António Guterres
for his informative briefing and for his latest report
on this topic (S/2018/462). I would also like to thank
the Director-General of the International Committee
of the Red Cross and the Chair of the Iraqi Al-Amal
Association for their briefings.
I also wish to express my condolences to the
bereaved families of the victims of the unjustifiable,
illegal and inhumane Israeli violence against innocent
civilians who recently protested against the Israeli
occupation of the Gaza Strip.
Two years ago, the Security Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2286 (2016), on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict, to deter any acts of
violence, attacks or threats facing civilians — as well
as medical and humanitarian personnel — in armed
conflicts. Unfortunately, violence and abuses continue
to be perpetrated against civilians and civilian
infrastructure such as hospitals and schools, with no
deterrence sufficient to put an end to such violations of
international law.
Israel used excessive force against unarmed
Palestinians in the Gaza Strip, mostly women and
children, who were exercising their legitimate right to
peacefully protest against oppression and occupation.
Israel killed more than 61 Palestnians, including eight
children, over the past two months. This is a new crime
that is pushing the region towards violence.
Peace cannot be built on the debris of the legitimate
aspirations of peoples or on bloodshed or violence or
perpetual occupation and siege. Peace can be built only
by recognizing the right of all peoples to live in dignity,
to independence, to freedom and their inalienable
rights. Peace and security will materialize in the region
only when the occupation comes to an end and when
the independent State of Palestine is established along
the borders of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as its
capital. We stress in that regard that Jerusalem is key to
peace and harmony in the region.
We call upon the international community to
shoulder its ethical and legal responsibilities and take
all measures necessary to ensure the protection of the
Palestinian people falling victim to the arrogance of
the illegitimate Israeli occupation, which disregards all
of the relevant Security Council resolutions and insists
on its practices, which undermine any opportunity
for peace. We reiterate our support of the Human

18-1555879/98

S/PV.8264

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Rights Council resolution regarding the establishment
of an independent mechanism for investigating
the incidents in Gaza and the Israeli violations of
Palestinian rights. We look forward to the outcomes
of that mechanism to secure accountability of those
responsible for committing those crimes in violation to
international law.
The violence and violations against the Palestinian
people perpetrated by the Israeli occupation should
come to an end. The international community should
shoulder the responsibility to protect the Palestinian
people before history. We reaffirm our principled
position regarding support for the Palestinian people
and their inalienable rights. Within the framework
of helping our Palestinian brothers in Gaza, King
Abdullah II has instructed the General Command of
the Jordanian Armed Forces to enhance the capacities
of the Jordanian field hospital in the Gaza Strip and to
equip it with all the personnel and equipment necessary
to provide the health care required by our Palestinian
brothers and sisters due to the violations perpetrated by
the Israeli occupation.
Jordan attaches great importance to the enforcement
of international law, international humanitarian law
and international human rights law. We fully comply
with the implementation of all the relevant provisions
enshrined in various areas. Our security agencies
fully understand these laws; no violation has ever been
attributed tothem. That also applies to the Jordanian
troops who contribute to United Nations peacekeeping
operations in several places. They place the protection
of civilians as their top priority.
We reaffirm the importance of applying all
measures that aim to improve the protection of
civilians, including health-care facilities and workers,
as well as humanitarian workers, and to operationalize
all procedures for prevention, protection and
accountability. A continuous lack of accountability and
the scourge of impunity would exacerbate the dangers
against civilians and embolden the perpetrators to
commit further violations. That will deepen despair,
which will eventually lead to violence and extremism.
We must gear our efforts towards fighting terrorism
and violent extremism and the extreme transborder
ideologies that accompany the same.
It is important to execute the Secretary-General’s
agenda for building and sustaining peace, which places
protection at the core of the work of the United Nations
80/98

22/05/2018

in conflict prevention. Once again, we reiterate that the
root causes of conflicts should be addressed. Progress
must be made also in human rights work and sustainable
development, as well as the peacekeeping and
peacebuilding efforts, especially given the increasing
level of armed conflicts and increasing numbers of
refugees, as well as military acts and wars that have
reached their peak since the Cold War.
Putting an end to armed conflicts is part and
parcel of protecting civilians from the scourge of war
and conflict. It is also an integral part of the avenues
towards development, humanitarian, diplomatic and
security actions that we must continue to follow. In that
vein, we reiterate that building and sustaining peace
and the administration of justice is a common priority
for the entire world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development charts a road map to that end. Sustainable
development is key in the prevention of conflicts and is
a main pillar for efforts towards achieving sustainable
peace and the administration of justice, particularly
by focusing on people themselves; fighting poverty
and marginalization; robust education; socioeconomic
development; the creation of hope and prospects for
progress, prosperity and dignified life.
Special importance should be attached to the
protection of women, girls and children in armed
conflict, given the unprecedented crises in today’s
world. Such crises are attributed to the surge in sexual
violence in conflict, which is one of the most horrendous
tactics of war and terrorism used to intimidate women
and children, threatening security and undermining
any chance for peace. The unprecedented wave of crises
witnessed by the world has exacerbated all forms of
violence against civilians — women, men and children.
This is a threat to security and could undermine the
potential for peace.
Violence has become pervasive all over the
world: Afghanistan, the Central African Republic,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Iraq, Syria
and Myanmar, to name but a few. Violence against
the Rohingya is particularly despicable. This painful
phenomenon requires a coordinated and prompt
response from the international community, including
by meeting the needs of the survivors of violence.
We are all witnesses to the ongoing Syrian crisis and
its political and social consequences, which continue to
cast shadows on neighbouring countries hosting Syrian
refugees. In that context, Jordan has proved its respect
18-15558

22/05/2018

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

S/PV. 8264

for international law by hosting 1.3 million Syrian
refugees. This is out of our belief in the necessity to
protect civilians in armed conflict.

We therefore value the opportunity given to us
today to deliver a joint message that this cannot be
tolerated any longer.

In conclusion, the responsibility to protect civilians
in armed conflict reflects a true commitment by Member
States and the parties to conflicts to work earnestly if
we are to spare ourselves and future generations the
scourge of war and the consequences thereof. This is
especially true given the multiple threats facing us
today, for example, extremism and terrorism, which
threaten the entire globe and which constitute a violation
of international humanitarian law, international human
rights law and all other humanitarian norms.

All parties to conflicts, including non-State actors,
must fully comply with international legal obligations
to protect civilians and to prevent human rights
violations and violations of international humanitarian
law and norms. Those who pay the highest price when
all standards of humanity are disrespected or violated
are those who are most vulnerable, such as children
and women.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Croatia.
Mr. Dogan (Croatia): Allow me at the outset to
thank the Polish presidency for convening today’s
debate on such a pivotal topic. The protection of
civilians in armed conflict should remain at the very
core of the agenda of the United Nations. In that
regard, we welcome the action-oriented report by the
Secretary-General (S/2018/462), as well as increased
efforts by the Security Council towards making a real
difference on the ground.
Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union. I will make some
additional remarks in my national capacity.
In the First World War, the ratio between military
deaths and direct civilian deaths was 10 to one; in
the Second World War, the number of civilian deaths
surpassed the number of soldiers’ lives lost on the
battlefield. That remains the case in almost every
war that has been fought since. War is becoming
increasingly urban in character, making the victims of
modern armed conflict much more likely to be civilians
than soldiers.
It is truly disheartening that, in some contemporary
armed conflicts, due to the disproportionate and
indiscriminate use of force in populated areas, more
than 90 per cent of casualties are civilians. Equally
alarming is the fact that we are witnessing an increasing
trend in the number of attacks against hospitals and
schools. Not only is that a clear and blatant breach of
international humanitarian law in times of conflict, but
it also leaves lasting consequences on societies, which
are unable to provide their children with safe spaces for
the fulfilment of their right to education.

Most important, there must be no impunity for
perpetrators of atrocities such as war crimes, crimes
against humanity, and genocide. No State can be
absolved of its primary responsibility to investigate and
hold perpetrators accountable, with a higher cause of
providing victims of atrocities with a sense of justice.
Justice for victims is, beyond doubt, an indispensable
precondition in achieving peace and reconciliation.
Furthermore, there is an inextricable link between
efforts to protect civilians and ensuring unhindered
humanitarian access. We are disturbed by practices of
limiting humanitarian access and the delivery of aid as
methods of war. We call on all States to ensure that
impartial humanitarian organizations face no obstacles
in fulfilling their mission, as well the safety and
security of those risking their lives to help others.
The dire humanitarian situation of refugees and
internally displaced persons in Iraq, Syria and their
neighbouring countries is of our utmost concern,
as is the situation of the Rohingya in Myanmar and
Bangladesh. As a country that has experienced conflict
on its own territory, we strongly advocate that all efforts
be made to ease their enormous plight.
Croatia is still in the process of establishing the
fate of 1,945 Croatian citizens and 150 citizens of other
neighbouring countries who remain missing since
the Homeland War in the 1990s. We view the issue of
missing persons in armed conflict primarily through a
humanitarian lens, and wish to convey support to the
four-year project of the International Committee of
the Red Cross, as also highlighted in the report of the
Secretary-General.
We must continue to place prevention at the
core of all our efforts to protect civilians and ensure
the integration of protection objectives at the core of
peacekeeping mission mandates. We must also bear in

18-1555881/98

S/PV.8264

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

mind the reform of the peace and security architecture
envisaged by the Secretary-General. In that respect,
Croatia ascribes great importance to, and is glad to
organize courses for, predeployment education and
training for both military and civilian personnel in
United Nations peacekeeping missions.
It is similarly of paramount importance to focus
on further integrating a gender perspective in United
Nations peacekeeping efforts, particularly in the
context of sexual and gender-based violence, which
continues to be widely used as a tactic of war and
torture. We therefore strongly support a more genderbalanced composition of peacekeeping operations,
which would undoubtedly strengthen their reach and
impact on the ground.
In conclusion, we encourage the Security Council
to continue keeping the protection of civilians in
armed conflict high on its agenda. We must translate
our normative and policy progress into concrete action
to protect human life and reaffirm the principles
of humanity.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the African Union.
Ms. Mohammed: I would first like to express our
appreciation to your delegation, Madam President,
for convening this open debate on the crucial topic of
the protection of civilians. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General and the Director-General of
the International Committee of the Red Cross, as
well as the representative of civil society, for their
valuable briefings.
The African Union (AU) is fully committed to the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, and continues
to strengthen its normative and legal framework for
enhancing that protection. Over the past decade, the
AU has responded to many situations in which civilians
are caught up in the middle of fighting or directly
targeted by negative forces or terrorist groups.In that
regard, it should be recalled that the African Union’s
transition from the Organization of African Unity in
2002 was marked by a paradigm shift from a doctrine
of non-interference to one of non-indifference to
human suffering. As a result, the AU’s peace support
operations in Africa have been increasingly tasked with
the protection of civilians. Almost all peace support
operations authorized by the Peace and Security
Council since 2003 have faced protection challenges
to a greater or lesser degree throughout the course of
82/98

22/05/2018

their deployment and have utilized various strategies to
address those challenges.
In that context, I want to highlight the experience
of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM),
which remains one of the best illustrations of the
African Union’s growing commitment to the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. Over the decade that
has elapsed since its deployment in 2007, AMISOM
has achieved undeniable security and political gains
in Somalia, while using its active military operations
there to ensure that the Somali civilian population has
been protected from the terrorist threat.
Our efforts to ensure the highest standards of
transparency, professional conduct and discipline and
to uphold international law are further reinforced by
the fact that the protection of civilians has become a
central preoccupation of the African Union Peace and
Security Council and the African Union Commission.
In recognition of the importance of the protection of
civilians in the AU’s responses to conflict situations,
at its 326th meeting, held on 26 June 2012 in Addis
Ababa, the Peace and Security Council decided that the
protection of civilians must form part of the mandate
of all future AU support operations. Draft guidelines
for this were developed in 2010 and an aide-mémoire
on the protection of civilians was adopted in 2015.
In formulating those policy documents, the AUC
has engaged very closely with the United Nations, in
particular the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, in order to ensure that the protection of
civilians in the AU context is aligned with the United
Nations approach as much as possible.
The importance that the protection of civilians
holds for the AU is further demonstrated by its zerotolerance stance on sexual exploitation and abuse. In
that regard, we have been working very closely with
the United Nations to enhance our compliance with
international instruments in peace support operations.
That is in line with the joint AU-United Nations
strategic framework documents, including the 19 April
2017 Joint United Nations-African Union Framework
for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security, and
is part of the ongoing efforts to secure predictable and
sustainable financing for AU peace support operations.
In conclusion, I want to underscore that the AU’s
field experience has highlighted the importance of the
protection of civilians for the overall success of peace
18-15558

22/05/2018

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

efforts on the ground. The gaps and challenges that
today’s multidimensional peace operations have to
deal with go far beyond the protection debate as such.
The protection of civilians is central to the purpose
and legitimacy of any peace support operations. Any
failure in properly implementing the mandate to protect
civilians runs a high risk of turning populations against
any international military presence, which is especially
detrimental in any asymmetrical threat environment.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Algeria.
Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): I would like to
thank Poland for organizing this open debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, a subject of
enormous importance that is a matter of high priority
and concern for my country, Algeria. I particularly
thank you, Madam President, for your concept note
(S/2018/444, annex), and we fully share your views on
the priority areas that you indicate. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his most recent report,
of 14 May (S/2018/462), and for the shocking picture he
has painted of the suffering of civilians in high-profile
armed conflicts.
When we look at ongoing conflict situations, we
cannot help being taken aback by the numbers of civilian
casualties and the challenges that civilian populations
are facing around the globe. The recent situation of
the people of Gaza, or indeed the Palestinian people
as a whole, is a blatant example of that. Needless to
say, civilians are now the most likely to be the primary
victims, if not the targets, of conflicts, either as direct
casualties or enduring the trials of life as refugees
who have been displaced and are now suffering the
evils of slavery, human trafficking, sexual abuse or
food shortages.
Since the publication of the first report of the
Secretary-General 19 years ago (S/1999/957), some
progress, while it is insufficient, has been made in
strengthening the mandate of peacekeeping operations
and in carrying out disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes. But that is far from enough.
In the most recent report, the Secretary-General
describes the situation as one of immeasurable human
and societal decimation. Let me be clear: everyone must
respect international humanitarian and human rights
law, and in situations of conflict, particularly those
that are on the Security Council’s agenda, protection is
an obligation, not an option. There is also still a great

S/PV. 8264

deal to be done to improve the protection of society’s
most vulnerable members — women, children and
the elderly. Terror attacks on civilians or the use of
sexual violence as a weapon of war cannot and must
not tolerated. Attacks on humanitarian personnel or the
creation of obstacles to the delivery of humanitarian
aid to the civilian population must be rejected and
denounced in the strongest terms.
I would like to share with the Council our vision
of the way forward and in particular how the Security
Council and the United Nations and its Member
States could act in that regard. First, while we have
international legally binding instruments and generally
accepted practices, we still lack a comprehensive,
coherent and specific approach to the issue of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.
Second, we need a broad prevention strategy that
clearly should be focused on tackling the root causes of
conflicts and must encompass areas such as promoting
sustainable development, eradicating poverty and
fostering good governance and a culture of peace,
tolerance and the rule of law.
Third, the protection of civilians must be based
on the principles of universality and non-selectivity,
particularly where conflicts arising from foreign
occupation are concerned. The implementation of
international humanitarian law — and specifically the
Fourth Geneva Convention — is not an option. It is an
obligation that the international community, through
the Security Council, must impose when an occupying
or administrative Power does not respect it.
Fourth, we must address the issue of accountability
with regard to impunity for violations of international
humanitarian law.
Fifth, ensuring more effective coordination among
the United Nations mandated bodies — the Security
Council, the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council — remains vital. The Peacebuilding
Commission also provides an appropriate framework
for such coordination in post-conflict situations.
Sixth, we urge the Security Council and the
Secretariat to strengthen their cooperation, common
approach and interaction with regional organizations
such as the African Union, which has made tremendous
progress in that regard and, I should point out, has
transitioned from a policy of non-interference to one of
non-indifference.

18-1555883/98

S/PV.8264

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Seventh, the Security Council could consider the
systematic inclusion in all peacekeeping mandates
of an obligation to report violations of human or
humanitarian rights.
Lastly, this meeting must be seen as a reaffirmation
of our collective commitment to protecting civilians in
situations of conflict. We hope that at the conclusion of
this open debate the presidency will issue a summary
of the proposed recommendations, with clear steps to
be taken that we can build on in our proclaimed and
shared endeavour.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Ms. Blais (Canada): Let me begin by expressing
my delegation’s sincere appreciation to the Republic
of Poland for convening today’s important and timely
ministerial open debate on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. Canada recognizes the urgent need for
sustained high-level attention to this issue.
At a time when violence and conflict threaten
international security, Canada is joining efforts to build
a more peaceful and secure world while putting the
protection of civilians at the forefront of our actions,
and we are grateful for the opportunity to explain
how. We do this first by consistently advocating for
compliance with international humanitarian law with
a view to strengthening the protection of civilians.
Just last month, under Canada’s Group of Seven (G-7)
presidency, G-7 Ministers for Foreign Affairs committed
to using their support to State and non-State parties to
encourage effective implementation of international
humanitarian law. That will be achieved through
practical measures such as seeking commitments
from partners to enhance respect for international
humanitarian law, helping them incorporate it into their
doctrines, field training and rules of engagement, and
also assisting partners in ensuring that their judicial
structures are capable of effectively addressing their
own international humanitarian law violations, should
they occur. We urge the members of the Council and all
States Members of the United Nations to undertake a
similar commitment.
Canada is outraged that attacks on civilians,
health-care facilities and medical and humanitarian
personnel persist. We call on the Council to clearly
condemn direct and indiscriminate attacks on civilians
and demand that parties to armed conflicts comply with
84/98

22/05/2018

their international humanitarian law obligations and
with Council resolutions.
Secondly, Canada is acting to ensure accountability.
In Myanmar, Canada is committed to working closely
with other countries, international organizations and
civil society to establish lasting peace and reconciliation,
and a clear pathway towards accountability for
atrocities committed in Rakhine state. Specifically,
we are coordinating with international partners to
support existing evidence-gathering efforts and the
Independent International Fact-Finding Mission
on Myanmar. Canada will also explore options for
assisting in investigating and documenting gross
human rights violations and abuses, including sexual
and gender-based violence, especially in Rakhine state.
Additionally, in both Syria and Iraq, Canada is funding
evidence collection, analysis and documentation efforts
to support the future prosecution of members of Da’esh
and other parties for war crimes or other violations of
international law. Let me be clear. In order to achieve
sustainable peace in conflict zones, including Syria,
the transition out of conflict must be accompanied by
an inclusive process of accountability that addresses
serious violations of international law by all parties to
the conflict.
Thirdly, Canada is working to strengthen the
protection of civilians through peacekeeping. United
Nations peacekeeping has helped to provide protection
to millions of vulnerable people affected by conflict.
On the ground, we have peacekeepers in the United
Nations missions in South Sudan and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo who are working tirelessly with
international partners to protect civilians. We will
soon be deploying personnel to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali, another operation where the protection of
civilians is mandated as its top priority.
However, as the nature of conflicts changes, so
too must modern peace operations. Canada is therefore
also promoting innovative approaches to enhancing the
protection of civilians in peacekeeping operations. For
example, last November, we launched the Vancouver
Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the
Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers. They have so
far been endorsed by 62 Member States and are a set
of political commitments that take an assertive stance
on preventing unlawful child recruitment in the context
of peacekeeping operations. Canada also launched
the Elsie Initiative on Women in Peace Operations, a
18-15558

22/05/2018

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

pilot project through which we will develop and test
innovative approaches to increase the representation
and participation of women in United Nations peace
operations. We firmly believe that this will lead to
more effective missions.
(spoke in French)
Lastly, Canada is working to address the needs of
women and girls affected by conflict. The protection
of civilians must take account of gender issues in order
to be effective. That is why Canada’s second national
action plan on women, peace and security includes
measures to protect women and girls from sexual and
gender-based violence in situations of armed conflict,
as well as to prevent sexual exploitation and abuse by
international personnel. We must also remember the
special challenges faced by persons with disabilities
in conflict situations, including their access to
humanitarian assistance. We encourage Member States
that have not yet done so to join the Charter on Inclusion
of Persons with Disabilities in Humanitarian Action.
When Canada last served on the Security Council,
in 1999 and 2000, we fought to put the protection of
civilians on the Security Council’s agenda. Today
those considerations constitute a significant goal for
peacekeeping mandates. That is major progress, but it
is clear that our work is far from over. Today, let us
recommit together to shouldering our responsibility
to prevent conflicts, protect civilians, and hold
perpetrators of serious international crimes to account.
The Council should rest assured that Canada will do
its part.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of New Zealand.
Mr. Cheshire (New Zealand): I join those who
have thanked the briefers for their contributions
and the delegation of Poland for organizing today’s
important debate.
As we have heard, there has rarely been a more
dangerous time than right now to be a civilian in a
conflict zone. Two years ago, New Zealand was pleased
to work with four other non-permanent Council members
to secure the unanimous adoption of resolution 2286
(2016) in response to the horrific escalation in attacks
on medical facilities and personnel in Syria, Yemen
and beyond. It was an important reaffirmation of our
collective commitment to upholding international law
in the face of such atrocities. Yet health-care personnel

S/PV. 8264

and infrastructure continue to be targeted in conflict
zones around the world. Despite the best efforts of
organizations such as the International Committee of
the Red Cross and Médecins Sans Frontières, large
numbers of civilians are unable to access health care.
Medical supplies are blocked, hospitals bombed and
doctors killed. Besieging civilians and denying them
critical health care cruelly exacerbates the suffering
of innocents. Such a lack of respect for international
humanitarian law is totally unacceptable, but we must
not become despondent or dispirited. There are three
areas in which we need greater shared determination to
reverse those trends.
First, we need to see the Council more determined
to discharge its responsibility to maintain international
peace and security. It must make use of all of the tools
available to prevent conflict, defend fundamental
international norms and hold those who violate them
accountable. It should also consider practical measures
such as publicly calling out offending parties and
instituting humanitarian safe zones in areas where
civilians are at risk during heightened hostilities. The
ongoing attacks on health-care workers and facilities
demonstrate the urgent need for the Security Council
to explore additional ways to use its authority to end
attacks and ensure that those responsible face justice.
Secondly, we need to see all Member States
determined to demand universal compliance with
international law from both State and non-State actors.
That is a prerequisite for the protection of civilians and
health-care workers in conflict zones. We cannot let the
erosion of international rules become the new normal.
Respect for accountability must stand. While we
supported the General Assembly’s establishment of the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
for crimes committed in Syria, we regret that it was
necessitated by the Council’s failure to take action. It
is incumbent on all of us to ensure that those rules are
strictly adhered to and that violations of international
law are met with appropriate consequences, including
from the Council, given its unique responsibilities.
Thirdly, we need continued determination from
Member States in support of the Secretary-General’s
ambitious changes to how the United Nations works in
the areas of management, development and peace and
security. Taken together, those reforms promise a world
where we can significantly reduce the risk of conflict.
More directly, the changes to the peace and security
pillar should result in a Secretariat better positioned to

18-1555885/98

S/PV.8264

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

use and collect information to provide early warnings
concerning threats, such as those to civilians and healthcare facilities, and then to act on them. It should also
lead to a more integrated approach to peacebuilding and
sustaining peace across the United Nations architecture,
thereby enabling the United Nations to more effectively
protect civilian interests.
New Zealand is determined to do its part, and we
hope that that determination will be shared by others.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bulgaria.
Mr. Panayotov (Bulgaria): Bulgaria thanks you,
Madam President, for convening this important
debate and commends Poland’s strong commitment
to the topic. Today’s briefers’ valuable presentations
demonstrate that almost 20 years after the adoption of
resolution 1265 (1999), on the protection of civilians,
this agenda item continues to be highly relevant to the
Security Council’s work.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier on behalf of the European Union
and its member States, and I would like to make the
following additional remarks in my national capacity.
We all agree that the best way to protect civilians
is to prevent conflicts from erupting or recurring in the
first place. In that regard, the concept note (S/2018/444,
annex) for today’s debate offers a valuable opportunity
for considering the broader scope, including its
preventive and humanitarian aspects, of the concept of
the protection of civilians. The human costs of armed
conflicts can be seen in all too many places. In order
to address the numerous humanitarian challenges
around the world, we must ensure the basics, which
include respecting and implementing international
humanitarian law. Sieges, starvation and unacceptable
restrictions on humanitarian access are clearly
unlawful. When compliance fails, accountability must
be ensured. If the States involved do not want, or are
not able, to bring those responsible to justice, we have a
very important tool at our disposal — the International
Criminal Court, which can ensure that such crimes do
not go unpunished.
Another basic aspect of the protection of civilians
is prevention. In that regard, Bulgaria shares the view
that implementing the concept of sustaining peace is a
cost-effective way of finding viable political solutions
to armed conflicts by addressing their root causes,
86/98

22/05/2018

reducing fragility in post-conflict situations and
combining humanitarian and development efforts. My
country is following up on its humanitarian development
commitments made at the World Humanitarian
Summit and continues to give financial support to
United Nations-related activities in Iraq, Afghanistan
and elsewhere. We also believe that strengthening
the mediation capacity of the United Nations is key,
and Bulgaria has therefore made another voluntary
financial pledge to the United Nations Mediation Trust
Fund this year.
In the wake of the recent reviews of the peace and
security architecture, United Nations peacekeeping
has evolved, giving priority to the broader scope of
tasks related to the protection of civilians, particularly
the protection of women and children in conflicts. In
that regard, Bulgaria, as a police-contributing country
to United Nations peacekeeping operations, has
endorsed the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping
and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of
Child Soldiers. However, the challenges are many,
and we therefore recognize that there should be better
coordination and greater efficiency and effectiveness
with a view to strengthening the role of the United
Nations. To that end, Bulgaria supports the SecretaryGeneral’s reform proposals for restructuring the United
Nations peace and security pillar and welcomes his
Action for Peacekeeping initiative (see S/PV.8218) and
strong commitment to the zero-tolerance policy on
sexual abuse and exploitation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Maldives.
Ms. Zahir (Maldives): I thank Poland for convening
this important open debate. As many speakers have
already noted, it has been two years this month since
the Security Council adopted its landmark resolution
2286 (2016), which calls for the protection of civilians,
especially where the provision of medical care in
conflict situations is concerned.
The protection of civilians should be the first
objective in managing any conflict. The reality,
however, is that the character of conflicts has
undergone radical changes in recent years. Non-State
actors fighting on their own or on behalf of other States
are replacing States as the key participants in conflicts.
In such situations, respect for and even recognition
of international humanitarian law have been ignored.
That situation requires finding ways to stop attacks
18-15558

22/05/2018

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

on civilians and hold perpetrators accountable. Most
important, we have to start thinking of ways in which
such attacks could be prevented. That is where civilsociety organizations can play an important role in
creating awareness among potential and actual warring
parties of the need to protect civilians and the delivery
of humanitarian aid in particular.
Open debates of this nature are extremely important
for drawing attention to the seriousness of situations,
such as those involving attacks on civilians in conflicts
in various parts of the world, and to offer suggestions
for remedies. But the importance of ensuring that the
Security Council takes immediate action, as required
under the Charter, in protecting unarmed civilians, is
quite another matter. It is unacceptable that the Council
failed to act when unarmed civilians were attacked
and killed in Palestine last week. Every member of the
Council, and indeed every State Member of the United
Nations, has the solemn responsibility to respect and
implement the resolutions both of the Council and the
General Assembly. If any Member decides to ignore
them, it will harm the legitimacy and credibility of the
United Nations, particularly the Security Council.
The Maldives is competing for a non-permanent
seat on the Security Council for the 2019-2020 term at
the elections to be held on 8 June. If we are elected,
the Maldives will work with Council members,
troop-contributing
countries
and
civil-society
organizations to create greater awareness about respect
for international humanitarian law. The primacy of
upholding international humanitarian law should be
a crucial element in the preparation of peacekeepers
and indeed in designing peacekeeping missions, for
they have a significant role to play both in protecting
civilians and providing humanitarian aid.
The Maldives has continued to reiterate its call
for constructing an analytical framework that can
enable the Council to consider essential changes to the
mandates of United Nations peacekeeping missions.
The framework would start by establishing greater
coordination and operational coherence between
peacekeeping operations and the United Nations
country teams on the ground at the level of a mission’s
inception. Peacekeepers can fully execute their
mandate only if they are given the necessary resources.
The Maldives stands ready to be a partner in helping
to save civilians trapped or threatened by conflict. We
will help to craft shared solutions for a shared destiny.

S/PV. 8264

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Kadiri (Morocco) (spoke in French): It is
a pleasure to see you presiding over the work of the
Security Council this month, Madam President,
and we would like to thank you for organizing this
ministerial-level open debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. I would like to take this
opportunity to thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive briefing, taking stock of the current
situation and highlighting the challenges facing the
international community with regard to the protection of
civilians. I would also like to thank Mr. Yves Daccord,
Director-General of the International Committee of
the Red Cross, and Ms. Edwar for their informative
briefings. The regularity with which the Security
Council addresses this important topic is unfortunately
quite justified given the turbulence in the international
arena, which compels us all to work to promote and
respect the principles of international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. Morocco
reiterates its condemnation of all acts of aggression or
intimidation against civilians. I would also like to make
the following comments.
First, we reiterate that the protection of civilians
is primarily the responsibility of States. However, we
are compelled to conclude that in times of conflict,
some States’ ability to execute that task is inadequate
or non-existent. In those cases, the international
community has the responsibility to support them by
strengthening their capacities and providing them with
the means to live up to their obligations.
While the protection of civilians is often at the heart
of the mandates of multidimensional peacekeeping
operations, it is one of the most difficult aspects to
implement, given the scale of the task. The fact is
that peacekeeping operations are often deployed in
unstable areas, making it difficult to carry out their
mandates. The protection of civilians therefore requires
adequate financial and human resources in terms of
Blue Helmets’ numbers, equipment and training. The
expectations of the various parties involved — the
local populations, the host country authorities and the
Security Council — also have to be managed. And the
protection of civilians is not just about mere physical
protection. All of the components of a mission that
is mandated to protect civilians have a part to play,
which is why it is important to clearly delineate each of
their responsibilities.

18-1555887/98

S/PV.8264

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Secondly, humanitarian assistance within the
framework of the protection of civilians should be
clearly separate from political aims and shielded from
any kind of exploitation by any of the parties to a conflict,
in order to improve the protection of humanitarian
personnel and ensure efficient transportation of
humanitarian aid. Missions should deploy appropriate
protection measures to prevent civilians from becoming
targets. It is the States’ task to fulfil their obligation to
combat impunity and prosecute all those responsible
for the commission of genocide, war crimes or crimes
against humanity.
Thirdly, the protection of humanitarian and
medical personnel in conflict situations means
respecting the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their
Additional Protocols of 1977 and 2005, as well as all
relevant international instruments on the protection of
the wounded and sick, and of humanitarian and medical
personnel, when engaged in exclusively medical-related
work. In that regard, we would like to emphasize the
importance of the recommendations in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2018/462), issued in accordance
with resolution 2286 (2016). This kind of protection
requires a comprehensive, multifaceted approach on the
judicial, humanitarian and security fronts and a clear
allocation of mandate responsibilities for humanitarian
and medical personnel, when engaged in exclusively
medical activity and operating in complex situations,
in close coordination with one another.
Lastly, we believe that it is important to focus on
a preventive approach to protecting civilians. That can
be developed by strengthening the capacities of the
countries concerned, promoting the rule of law, ensuring
good governance, entrenching a culture of human rights
and establishing early-warning mechanisms to identify
potential conflicts and ensure that they do not turn into
overt conflicts.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of Morocco shares the
Secretary-General’s firm belief that the protection of
civilians requires the implementation of the provisions
of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. I would like to take this opportunity
to pay tribute to all those who work to protect civilians
in conflict situations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Viet Nam.
Mrs. Nguyen (Viet Nam): At the outset, I would like
to express my appreciation to the Polish presidency for
88/98

22/05/2018

convening today’s important open debate. My thanks
also go to the Secretary-General, the Director-General
of the International Committee of the Red Cross and
the representative of the Iraqi Al-Amal Association for
their informative briefings.
Viet Nam aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
In recent years, conflicts have increased sharply in
number and have severely affected many regions of the
world, causing immense suffering and resulting in abuse
and deaths of civilians. The tragic estimates are that
close to 90 per cent of current casualties are civilians,
the majority of them women and children. We are very
concerned about the fact that, as the Secretary-General
says in his report (S/2018/462), civilians in armed
conflict are living in clearly deteriorating conditions.
They are targeted by the excessive and indiscriminate
use of force, their access to humanitarian relief is
hampered and they are deprived of basic necessities
that they need to survive. We therefore reiterate our
strong condemnation of all acts of violence or abuse
committed against civilians, as well as the use of lethal
weapons to strike civilian facilities, including schools,
hospitals and residential and public areas. Such acts
constitute clear violations of international law and are a
grave threat to international peace and security.
We share the view that it is the primary responsibility
of States to protect their own citizens and prevent
violence against civilians within their jurisdiction.
We call on all parties to conflicts to strictly comply
with their obligations to protect civilians, in line with
international human rights law and humanitarian law
and the relevant Security Council resolutions, notably
resolutions 1894 (2009) and 2286 (2016), while fully
respecting the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence of States.
The United Nations should further enhance its
leading role, in close coordination with regional
organizations and other relevant actors, to help
strengthen a culture of compliance with international
law and promote good examples and best practices in
addressing armed conflict and protecting civilians,
facilitating the delivery of humanitarian assistance to
civilians in need, and assisting countries in their efforts
to resolve conflicts by peaceful means, improve their
national capacity to address the root causes of conflict
18-15558

22/05/2018

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

and advance sustainable development. In that regard,
we welcome and encourage further efforts on the part of
Member States and United Nations bodies to implement
resolution 2286 (2016). It is also of paramount
importance that the Security Council fulfil its
responsibility by collectively responding to the current
serious threats against civilians in armed conflicts and
implementing urgent and concrete measures to protect
civilian infrastructure and facilities essential to the
survival and health of the civilian population.
Viet Nam is concerned about the escalating
violence that has taken place in the Gaza Strip in the
past few days, resulting in many deaths and injuries
among Palestinians. We strongly oppose the use of
force against civilians and urge the parties concerned
to exercise restraint, stop escalating tensions, settle
conflicts peacefully and strive for a comprehensive,
equitable and sustainable solution in order to save the
lives of Palestinians and ensure that the legitimate
interests of the parties concerned and regional peace
and stability are taken into account.
In conclusion, the prevention of conflict and
peaceful resolution of disputes are the best ways
to protect civilians. It is now high time to translate
words into deeds in order to end the suffering of
innocent people.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Myanmar.
Mr. Suan (Myanmar): My delegation would like
to congratulate the Polish presidency of the Security
Council for organizing today’s open debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, a very
timely and pertinent subject considering the current
circumstances of growing security challenges around
the world. I would also like to thank Secretary-General
Guterres for his statement and Mr. Yves Daccord,
Director-General of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, and Ms. Hanaa Edwar for their briefings.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
In 2016, the Security Council adopted resolution
2286 (2016). It constituted a milestone in setting a
course of action for the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. It calls on States and non-State parties
to conflict to respect international law, facilitate safe

S/PV. 8264

access for medical and humanitarian personnel engaged
in medical duties, prevent and address acts of violence
and attacks on medical and humanitarian personnel and
integrate practical measures to protect the wounded
and the sick.
While we recognize that States have the primary
responsibility to protect their citizens, the fact is that
countries in armed conflict often lack the capacity and
institutions they need to implement their obligations.
The primary responsibility for taking action against
the perpetrators of atrocities must rest with the State
concerned. For that, it is essential that States strengthen
their law-enforcement institutions, establish the rule
of law and promote a safer environment for their
citizens. The international community should support
the capacity-building efforts of such countries. At
the same time, we must also address violations by
non-State parties, which often operate outside the
effective control of the Government and deliberately
harm civilians in order to achieve their objectives. The
protection of civilians in conflicts and the provision
of humanitarian assistance should be guided by the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, neutrality, objectivity and respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States. The
politicization of humanitarian issues must be avoided.
Conflicts are the cause of civilian insecurity and
instability, which endanger the social fabric of peaceful
coexistence. For that reason, we should focus on conflict
prevention and resolution, and on building sustainable
peace. In that regard, the peaceful settlement of disputes,
negotiation, mediation and dialogue should be applied
as vital tools to prevent and resolve conflicts. We must
remind ourselves of the important nexus between
achieving peace, realizing sustainable development and
eliminating poverty. Conflicts and instability can have
lasting effects on a country’s development. Without
peace, there can be no sustainable development or
social justice. There can be no lasting peace without
the rule of law, respect for human rights and inclusive
and sustainable development that leaves no one behind.
The greatest national endeavour of Myanmar today
is forging a lasting peace and bringing to an end the
seven decades of armed conflict that have brought
untold suffering to our people since the country’s
independence. Without peace, stability and the rule of
law, we will never be able to realize our ultimate goal
of building a genuine democratic federal union that can
guarantee security, freedom and progress for its people.

18-1555889/98

S/PV.8264

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

To that end, we have initiated a nationwide ceasefire
agreement with various ethnic armed groups. Of some
20 armed groups, 10 have now signed the agreement,
and we continue to work hard to bring the others
on board.
We have embarked on implementing a political
process to tackle the root causes of the conflicts and
achieve sustainable peace. The 21st Century Panglong
Peace Conference was launched in 2016 as a political
platform that brings together all stakeholders in a
political dialogue for peace and to lay the foundation
for our democratic federal union. Two successful
sessions of the Conference have been held, and the
second of them, in May 2017, reached an agreement on
a 37-point agreement known as the Union Peace Accord
Part One, which will constitute part of the basis for a
future democratic federal constitution. Preparations are
now under way for a third Panglong Conference.
Building and sustaining peace is not an easy task.
It requires political will, courage and determination
and cannot be achieved overnight. It is also essential
to advocate for a culture of peace and national
reconciliation. But peace is the only way to safeguard
humankind from violence, conflict and human suffering.
I would like to conclude by reassuring the Council
that Myanmar will continue its efforts to enhance the
safety of vulnerable people caught up in conflicts. We
would also like to express our sincere appreciation
to all our friends around the world and to the United
Nations for supporting our peace process. We will work
unceasingly to fully realize lasting peace and put an
end to civilian suffering due to conflict and strife.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.
Mrs. Pucarinho (Portugal): I would like to
thank Poland for convening today’s debate on a very
crucial topic during its presidency this month. I also
thank the Secretary-General and the briefers for their
comprehensive insights and valuable perspectives, and
for the recommendations that they have shared with us.
Portugal aligns itself with the statements delivered
earlier on behalf of the European Union and the Group
of Friends of the Protection of Civilians. I would like to
make some additional remarks in my national capacity.
Portugal welcomes the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of Council resolutions
on the protection of civilians (S/2018/462) and fully
90/98

22/05/2018

supports the recommendations outlined, whose
implementation will definitely require additional
collective efforts. Once again, the report emphasizes that
prevention is the most effective way to protect civilians.
Despite the fact that the Council put the issue of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict at the heart of
its agenda almost two decades ago and has adopted a
number of resolutions on this crucial topic, every year
we are confronted with alarming rises in the number
of civilian deaths and the destruction and suffering
caused by parties in armed conflict. Civilians continue
to account for the vast majority of casualties in armed
conflict. They continue to be exposed to violence and
are the primary victims of violations of human rights
and of international humanitarian law.
The humanitarian environment faces challenges
that are contributing to shrinking the space for
humanitarian action and jeopardizing protection-ofcivilian obligations under international humanitarian
law and human rights law. Regrettably, in some
instances humanitarian access has been deliberately
blocked, often for political reasons or alleged securityrelated concerns. Although international law requires
that schools and hospitals be treated as sanctuaries,
such facilities continue to be systematically used for
military purposes or are deliberately targeted, thereby
overexposing civilians, especially children, young
people and the elderly, to violence.
We cannot stress enough the need to protect and
promote the human right to health in conflict, and we
will continue to draw the Council’s attention to this
critical issue. I would also like to add in that regard a
specific note on the importance of ensuring adequate
health care for those who are more vulnerable or in
need of special protection, such as women, children
and persons with disabilities, including those related to
mental health.
Health-care providers are crucial humanitarian
agents in conflict situations and deserve special
protection in performing their noble task. Any violence
aimed at them, or at medical facilities and vehicles,
is a humanitarian issue with a widespread and longterm multiplier effect. I want to remind the Council
that the duty to prevent and address acts of violence,
attacks on and threats to medical care in armed conflict
must be honoured, and we must act collectively to
ensure that those in need have access to medical care.
We should mention civil-society organizations in that
18-15558

22/05/2018

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

regard, as they play a vital role in providing medical
and other kinds of essential care to people affected by
conflicts all over the world. It is therefore often crucial
to collaborate closely with them in order to enhance
assistance to those in need.
Any failure to halt violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights abuses, which may
amount to crimes against humanity and war crimes, also
highlights the importance of prioritizing prevention
and the fight against impunity. That can be achieved
only by ensuring accountability and systematic and
impartial investigations of reported violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law, including
attacks on medical convoys and personnel, civil society
and journalists. Whenever national authorities fail to
take the necessary measures to ensure the protection of
civilians and respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law, the Security Council can play a
more active role, as appropriate. In this regard, the
International Criminal Court remains key to fighting
impunity for the most serious violations of international
humanitarian law, in complement to the roles of national
tribunals and some international tribunals, as well.
Although there has been undeniable progress in
integrating a protection-of-civilians component into the
mandates of United Nations peacekeeping missions and
making it a priority in the allocation of capacity and
resources, United Nations peacekeeping missions still
struggle to fulfil their mandates and protect their own
personnel and innocent civilians on the ground. That
trend must be reversed, and for that United Nations
peacekeeping missions must be given clear mandates,
act in full respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law in accordance with the highest
standards of conduct, discipline and accountability,
and be provided with adequate capabilities, including a
human-rights-protection component. They should also
reflect a gender perspective. All of these, including
a more equitable gender representation, have been
shown to contribute to enhancing the performance
of peacekeeping operations. That also applies to
mandatory, standardized and United Nations-certified
training of military and police, notably on the protection
of civilians and children. In this regard, Portugal
reiterates its pledge to continue conducting training
programmes for its national personnel and the members
of its armed and security forces who are currently
assigned to seven international peacekeeping missions.

S/PV. 8264

In conclusion, we believe that only a coherent
and long-term approach, based on addressing the
root causes of conflict, using political diplomacy
for prevention and conflict resolution and bringing
humanitarian, development and peacebuilding efforts
together, can effectively strengthen compliance with
international humanitarian law. That should promote
accountability for perpetrators, improve humanitarian
access to those in need and strengthen international
efforts and the operational response to current realities,
including that of massive global displacement. In that
regard, I would like to mention the global compacts on
migration and refugees currently being negotiated, as
it will be crucial to ensure that those future regulatory
frameworks reflect an approach based on international
solidarity and respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law in order to respond to the global
issues of migration and refugees. All of this should
make an effective contribution to protecting civilians
and building sustainable peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Costa Rica.
Ms. García Gutiérrez (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation would like to thank you,
Madam President, for convening today’s important
debate. We would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral and the Director-General of the International
Committee of the Red Cross for their briefings.
Costa Rica aligns itself with the statements made by
the Permanent Representatives of Qatar and Panama on
behalf of the Group of Friends of the Responsibility to
Protect and the Human Security Network, respectively.
A year ago, we met in this Chamber to discuss the
progress made in the implementation of resolution 2286
(2016) (see S/PV.7951). A year later, we have an even
more devastating situation, where millions of people
are victims of the cruellest consequences of conflict,
forced to abandon their homes and deprived of the
most basic necessities. The urbanization of conflicts
exponentially increases the direct impact on civilians,
which further worsens the landscape we face.
The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/462) confirms that the challenges in this area
are becoming increasingly complex and profound, with
the most vulnerable populations, including women and
children, being the most affected. We agree with the
Secretary-General that the priority in such cases should
always be to prevent conflict and avoid its recurrence

18-1555891/98

S/PV.8264

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

22/05/2018

or escalation, and we support his efforts in this regard.
However, the assistance and guarantee of human rights
protection and basic security guarantees to civilians
in conflict are responsibilities of all parties. We also
reiterate that the protection of medical and humanitarian
personnel, as well as medical facilities and hospitals,
must be a priority.

on their illicit use should be introduced in order to
prevent their unregulated circulation from continuing
to fuel conflicts. We therefore join the call made by the
Secretary-General to States that have not yet done so to
ratify the Arms Trade Treaty as a further measure for
addressing that issue and its terrible consequences for
civilian populations.

It is also imperative that all parties to armed
conflict, including non-State armed groups, make
commitments and take concrete measures to fulfil
their obligations to protect civilian populations, as well
as medical and humanitarian personnel and medical
facilities and hospitals. These obligations derive directly
from international law, international humanitarian law
and international human rights law, and from various
Security Council resolutions. In that regard, we would
like to highlight France’s declaration on the subject,
adopted on 31 October last year. I would like to take
this opportunity to say that my country is pleased to
confirm its commitment to that initiative.

Costa Rica reaffirms its support for SecretaryGeneral’s recommendations in his report. We reiterate
the importance of the Secretary-General continuing to
make use of the tools provided for in the Charter of
the United Nations by remaining vigilant, reporting
regularly to the Security Council and making direct
recommendations in order to protect, but above all to
prevent, attacks and violations of human rights against
the civilian population.

Restrictions on the provision of and access to
medical and humanitarian assistance in situations of
conflict not only contradict basic ethical principles of
humanity, they also constitute a flagrant violation of
international humanitarian law. Similarly, deliberate
attacks on medical personnel, medical facilities and
places of refuge for the sick and injured are considered
war crimes under international law. Parties to conflict
must cease such attacks once and for all, withdraw
from urban centres and refrain from using explosive
weapons in cities and other densely populated areas.
Such attacks not only result in a large number of victims
among civilians but also cause large-scale destruction
of homes, essential infrastructure and basic services,
which further aggravates the humanitarian situation of
people in conflict.
The use of explosive weapons in urban areas is
simply unacceptable and constitutes a huge humanitarian
challenge in current conflicts. We also condemn the
use of improvised explosive devices, in line with the
Secretary-General’s report and the recommendations of
the International Committee of the Red Cross, and we
are deeply concerned about the reports of the ongoing
use of cluster munitions and chemical weapons. In
that regard, we believe that the situation will continue
to deteriorate until there is greater control of the
international arms trade. Legislation on arms exports
must comply with international humanitarian law
and international human rights law, and regulations
92/98

Particular attention should be paid to developing
national regulatory frameworks that establish
institutional responsibilities for the protection of
civilians, as well as to strengthening institutions and the
rule of law, in the context of respect for human rights
and the norms of international law. It is equally vital to
put an end to widespread impunity in such cases. My
country supports initiatives such as the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011. We advocate strengthening the Mechanism by
including it in the Organization’s regular budget.
The Security Council must fulfil its obligation
to protect and see that justice is done for victims. It
is therefore urgent that it begin taking action by
referring crimes of mass atrocities to the International
Criminal Court in order to ensure accountability and
end impunity in cases where the national authorities
do not meet their obligations. In that regard, we once
again call on Council members to implement the code
of conduct promoted by the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group, and we urge the permanent
members in particular to refrain from using the veto,
appealing above all to their sense of humanity and
respect for life.
Mr. Margaryan (Armenia): We thank the Polish
presidency for organizing today’s open debate and
providing the concept note (S/2018/444, annex). We
also thank Secretary-General António Guterres for his
report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
18-15558

22/05/2018

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

(S/2018/462) and its recommendations. We are also
grateful to Mr. Yves Daccord, Director-General of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), and
the civil-society representative Ms. Hanaa Edwar for
their insightful briefings.
Today’s debate is an opportunity for us to recommit
to international humanitarian law, and in particular to
full compliance with the Geneva Conventions and their
Additional Protocols, without reservation, as a crucial
framework for the protection of civilians in all conflicts.
The report of the Secretary-General depicts the
bleak situation of civilians living in conflict-affected
areas through shocking statistics, with tens of thousands
of fatalities in 2017 alone and many more injured. We
note the many alarming developments and threats
faced by civilians in the conflict areas mentioned in
the report. We share the view of the Secretary-General
that the gravity and scale of the current situation
must be matched by robust international protection
mechanisms. In too many parts of the world today, we
are seeing a rise in the ideology of hatred and racial
discrimination in situations where human beings’ right
to life is increasingly threatened. Systematic and gross
violations of human rights, the use of force, economic
coercion and a lack of international protection are some
of the main factors fuelling the increase in such threats.
We strongly condemn violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights
law, including attacks on humanitarian and medical
personnel, as well as violence, threats and intimidation
aimed at journalists and media workers. The perceptions
of the inevitability of civilian losses and civilian
suffering in armed conflicts are equally disturbing.
The principles of the humanity, impartiality,
neutrality and independence of humanitarian action
must be fully respected. Unimpeded humanitarian
access must be ensured in order to prevent the suffering
of civilians caught in conflict. Armenia’s commitment
to promoting the importance of the safety of children
and students in armed conflict is also reflected in
its endorsement of the Safe Schools Declaration.
Promoting the norms of international humanitarian law
and raising awareness in that regard is an important
element in Armenia’s security-sector governance.
International humanitarian law is incorporated into
the curricula of military educational institutions
in Armenia. We also greatly appreciate the ICRC’s
cooperation in implementing training projects and

S/PV. 8264

reaching out to people affected by conflicts who are in
need of humanitarian assistance.
The civilian population of Nagorno Karabakh
and the regions of Armenia bordering it have been
consistently exposed to serious humanitarian risks.
Azerbaijan’s military aggression against Nagorno
Karabakh in April 2016 not only violated the ceasefire
agreement signed in 1994 and the 1995 trilateral
agreement consolidating the ceasefire, it also resulted in
grave violations of international humanitarian law and
human rights law, including barbaric acts equivalent to
war crimes and crimes against humanity. It inflicted
losses on the civilian population, including women,
children and the elderly. Moreover, in clear violation
of humanitarian law, the Azerbaijan authorities have
placed military installations in civilian settlements and
used them as a launch pad for shelling along the line of
contact with Nagorno Karabakh.
By pursuing a policy criminalizing those who
visit Nagorno Karabakh, including journalists
and parliamentarians from all over the world, the
Government of Azerbaijan has shown that it is prepared
to conduct unprecedented mass atrocities in the region.
It is a well-known fact that the perpetrators of crimes
try to limit the flow of information and freedom of
movement in order to better conceal their ongoing
and planned misdeeds. It is also alarming that the
leadership of Azerbaijan continues to incite hatred
against Armenians, a fact that has been affirmed and
condemned by many human rights organizations and
bodies, including the United Nations Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination in its concluding
observations on the 2016 reports of Azerbaijan
(CERD/C/AZE/CO/7-9).
Protecting the civilian population requires full
and unhindered access for the ICRC, the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and United Nations treaty bodies to conflict areas,
including to places of detention, as well as ensuring
the monitoring of conditions of captives in conflict
situations. The Nagorno Karabakh authorities have
cooperated fully with the ICRC mission in Stepanakert,
which has regular access and the ability to verify the
humanitarian situation on the ground. The principles of
humanity, impartiality, neutrality and independence in
humanitarian action must be fully respected. Attempts
to politicize a purely humanitarian issue and refusals to
cooperate with regard to missing persons at the level of

18-1555893/98

S/PV.8264

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

the relevant authorities demonstrate a clear intention to
deliberately impede progress in that area.
An international presence in conflict areas and
monitoring and verification mechanisms are crucial to
the protection of civilians in armed conflicts. Armenia
and Nagorno Karabakh fully support establishing an
investigative mechanism on the ceasefire violations
and expanding the monitoring capacities of the Office
of the Personal Representative of the Chairperson-inOffice of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe. The implementation of those clear-cut
agreements would enable the international community
to investigate and verify all cases of ceasefire
violations and human casualties, as well as to identify
the party responsible.
Placing human life above malicious political
manipulations requires genuine will, free from hatred
and intolerance, which are regrettably currently lacking
in certain places. We firmly believe that, in order to
effectively protect civilians, priority should be given to
early action on warning signs of deteriorating situations
that could potentially result in conflicts or a resumption
of hostilities. It is imperative to recognize and combat
the extremist and fundamentalist ideologies emanating
from certain countries and terrorist or other criminal
groups that encourage hatred and discriminatory
attitudes towards their neighbours, minorities or simply
those with different identities.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Afghanistan.
Mr. Salarzai (Afghanistan): Let me first thank the
Mission of Poland for having convened this ministerial
open debate on the urgent issue of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. I would also like to extend
my delegation’s gratitude to His Excellency the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Poland and to
other speakers for their statements today.
Today’s meeting is of crucial importance for
Afghanistan, a country that has seen decades of
imposed conflict, including terrorism and violent
extremism, leading to a disproportionate number of
civilian deaths and injuries. Recently, we have seen a
significant increase in the number of barbaric attacks
on our civilians, where our schools, mosques, hospitals
and, as of late, electoral registration sites and other safe
spaces that are of a purely civilian nature have come
under attack. By systematically targeting our children,
medical personnel, journalists, commuters and ordinary
94/98

22/05/2018

men and women, the Taliban and other terrorist groups
who have come from outside our borders have sought
to compensate for losses on the battlefield with attacks
on soft targets and by sowing fear and discord in
our society.
Based on our recent estimates, last year alone 2,903
civilian deaths and more than 6,000 civilian injuries
occurred as a result of enemy attacks nationwide,
mainly against civilian targets.
The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) 2017 report on protection
of civilians in armed conflict clearly depicts how the
Taliban and other terrorist groups have used suicide
attacks, including targeted and deliberate killings,
bombs and other explosive devices, abductions and
other arbitrary and extrajudicial punishments against
our civilian population. As we assemble here to discuss
the crucial issue of protecting civilians in conflict, only
a few hours ago another terrorist attack in Kandahar
reportedly killed 16 civilians and injured more than 30
others. The utter disregard for human life demonstrated
in these attacks constitutes a clear violation of
international law.
Against that backdrop, landmark resolution 2286
(2016) reaffirms the Council’s determination to bring
the behaviour of parties to conflict and Member States
alike in line with international humanitarian law. It
also highlights the obligation of the parties to a conflict
to protect and care for the wounded and sick, and to
respect and protect those providing impartial medical
care and to facilitate their mission. In the same light,
prevention and mitigation of harm to the civilian
population remains a key priority for the Government
of Afghanistan.
Our brave defence and security forces, which are
at the forefront of fighting international terrorism,
have valiantly defended our territorial integrity and the
safety and security of the civilian population. We have
also developed and improved a number of strategic,
operational and tactical measures to protect civilians
during conflict.
In October 2017, we endorsed the national policy
on civilian casualty prevention and mitigation and its
implementation plan. This plan consists of specific
guidelines for our security forces to prevent and mitigate
civilian casualties and damage to property. Further, the
plan strictly prohibits any use of civilian facilities such
as schools, hospitals or clinics for military purposes.
18-15558

22/05/2018

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Additionally, our Government agencies have continued
to promptly and thoroughly investigate any possible
violations of the provisions of the policy by any
Government official or agency and take the appropriate
corrective measures, as recommended in the UNAMA
2017 annual report.
We have also ratified the 1980 Convention
on Certain Conventional Weapons, including all
amendments and protocols, in August 2017, which will
result in improved protection of civilians. Additionally,
the Tawhid Center in the National Security Council
has been established to maintain a database aimed at
tracking conflict-related civilian casualties, among
other responsibilities.
We are strongly committed to ensuring that our
security forces operate within national and international
law and regulations to protect civilians during military
operations. Our Ministry of Defence has established an
internal board for investigating allegations of human
rights abuses, including civilian casualties and the
recruitment of children into the armed forces.
In 2010, we established an inter-ministerial
steering committee on children and armed conflict.
The following year, the committee developed a national
action plan to end and prevent the recruitment of
children in our defence and security forces.
Among other reforms, we established 21 childprotection units with the Afghan national and local
police recruitment centres, which have prevented more
than 100 underage voluntary enlistments. Moreover,
NATO training sessions for senior Afghan National
Defense and Security Forces (ANDSF) personnel in
the area of civilian casualty tracking and mitigation is
offered at the strategic, operational and tactical levels.
Furthermore, the Civilian Casualties Avoidance
and Mitigation Board, intended to identify areas
critical to minimizing civilian casualties, meets every
three months and has developed the practical efforts
undertaken by domestic and international military
forces to mitigate casualties.
These measures are a clear reflection of our firm
commitment to the protection of the civilian population.
Our protection measures have had an impact on reducing
the number of casualties attributed to pro-Government
forces during combat operations against terrorists. We
are pleased that this fact was also acknowledged in the
UNAMA report. Moving forward, we will remain fully

S/PV. 8264

committed to continuing to streamline, improve and
increase our measures aimed at lowering the number
of incidents resulting in civilian harm due to ANDSF
operations as much as possible.
Needless to say, the absolute majority of civilian
casualties are the result of the barbaric attacks
conducted by the Taliban and other terrorist groups,
who have no regard for human life and dignity.
Regardless of what we do, so long as their deliberate
tactics of attacking civilian spaces and targeted killings
do not cease, our civilians will continue to suffer. The
continuing attacks on hospitals, medical professionals
and humanitarian workers, among other civilians, as
well as the recent despicable attack in Kabul, where
an ambulance packed with explosives was used, show
their complete disregard for international law, the
Geneva Convention and resolution 2286 (2016). In fact,
these attacks constitute and meet the definition of war
crimes against the civilian population, and stringent
action must be taken against the perpetrators, financers
and planners of such ghastly action.
Terror, violence and insecurity in our country are
rooted in factors that lie outside Afghanistan and have
regional and global dimensions. Hence the goal should
be to address this issue and overcome the structural
drivers of conflict and violence. The Council has a
fundamental role to play in that regard as the United
Nations body entrusted with the maintenance of
international peace and security. We expect the Council
to respond appropriately to ensure the protection
and well-being of Afghan civilians, who are being
senselessly killed and maimed on a daily basis.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Elnour (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I will begin
by congratulating you personally, Mr. Minister, as
well as the delegation of your brotherly country, the
Republic of Poland, for holding this meeting on such
an important topic during Poland’s presidency of the
Security Council this month. We wish also to thank the
Secretary-General, Mr. Guterres; the Director-General
of the International Committee of the Red Cross; and
Ms. Hanaa Edwar, Secretary-General of the Iraqi
Al-Amal Association, for their very pertinent briefings.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2018/462) and its recommendations.
My delegation endorses the statement delivered
earlier by the representative of the Bolivarian Republic

18-1555895/98

S/PV.8264

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries. I would also like to make some points in my
national capacity.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
by the Secretary-General in his condemnation of attacks
against civilians in armed conflicts all over the world.
We reaffirm that the protection of civilians is, first and
foremost, the responsibility of the countries affected by
conflict before it is a mandate and a duty entrusted to
peacekeeping missions. That is why in discharging their
mandates, peacekeeping operations and international
non-governmental organizations active in that area
must respect the sovereignty of the host country, its
laws and its traditions while respecting the principles
of impartiality, integrity and international law in order
to safeguard mutual confidence on an ongoing basis.
After taking action alongside the international
community to settle the conflict in western Sudan,
we came away with some lessons. That conflict came
to a positive end when we saw the establishment of
peace, and I would like to share the lessons we learned
from the experience. First, we want to emphasize
the importance of cooperating with all parties in the
human rights domain — that is to say, international,
regional and civil-society organizations as well as
United Nations entities. Secondly, we must make
collective and unilateral announcements to ensure that
ceasefires are not interrupted. Thirdly, we must teach
our armed forces the principles of international human
law and the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
Fourthly, the various public bodies, the United Nations
and the international community at large should
exchange information so as to have regular institutional
communication. Fifthly, I stress the importance of
establishing a shared political and legal framework
such as the 2011 Doha Document for Peace in Darfur.
We must abide by such agreements and invite those
who oppose them to join us.
There is a panacea for dealing with violations
against civilians — a peaceful settlement through
inclusive, unfettered negotiations. That is what we
used, as the Government of the Sudan, and have
done for years. Furthermore, as part of our regional
effort to protect civilians and promote peace in South
Sudan, we have renewed an agreement to provide
humanitarian access to those affected by war in South
Sudan, using four road and river crossing points with
the cooperation of the World Food Programme and the
Government of South Sudan. Last year, we provided
96/98

22/05/2018

cereals from our own strategic stockpiles to the World
Food Programme and also allowed the Programme to
purchase humanitarian aid items locally in order to
alleviate the impact of the famine in South Sudan. I
would also like to recall that the memorandum of
understanding extending the agreement on the delivery
of international humanitarian assistance to South
Sudan through the Sudan was signed in July 2014. We
renewed that agreement and we have done so each year
to strengthen our efforts to protect civilians affected
by the conflict in South Sudan. We are also hosting
more than 1 million refugees from South Sudan across
our territory, providing them with various services,
such as health care, education and housing. Many of
the refugees we host are from Yemen, Syria and other
African countries.
In conclusion, protecting civilians, promoting
humanitarian action, consolidating peace, making peace
and reconciliation sustainable and fostering sustainable
development are at the forefront of our priorities in the
Sudan, with the cooperation of the United Nations and
the international community. We hope to deliver on
those priorities through that cooperation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Government of Poland for convening
this important open debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. Azerbaijan fully supports
the Secretary-General’s determination to genuinely
contribute to preventing wars and sustaining peace, as
well as his efforts to conduct the reform process with
a view to responding early and effectively to conflicts
and crises.
The increasing brutality and changing nature
of conflicts, as well as the vulnerability of civilians
in wartime, require redoubled protection efforts
worldwide. Those efforts must be free of selectivity and
must address all situations of armed conflict without
distinction, including those of a protracted nature and
with prolonged impact on civilians in particular.
Azerbaijan supports the increased focus on the
problem of internal displacement as a result of armed
conflict. A lack of agreement on political issues does not
and cannot provide any justification for interfering with
the rights of displaced persons and for discriminatory
policies and practices aimed at preventing their
18-15558

22/05/2018

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

return and changing demographics along ethnic and
religious lines.
A pressing issue that requires urgent action is that
of civilians, including women and children, who have
been taken hostage or reported missing as a result of
armed conflict. Azerbaijan is continuing its efforts
to raise awareness of the problem at the international
level, including through the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Commission on the Status of
Women, of which my country is a main sponsor.
The importance of ensuring accountability for
violations is fundamental to enhancing respect for
international law. Where national action is inadequate,
the international community and the Security Council
should play a more proactive role in taking concerted
action. It is critical to ensure that peace and mediation
efforts do not encourage, accept or tolerate under
any pretext situations that have been achieved by the
unlawful use of force or other egregious violations of
general international law, such as war crimes, crimes
against humanity, ethnic cleansing and genocide.
The issue we are discussing today is crucial for the
Security Council, the entire international community
and my country in particular. It concerns the serious
violations of international humanitarian law committed
in the course of Armenia’s aggression against Azerbaijan
and its resulting military occupation of my country’s
territories, including, among other things, deliberate
attacks on civilian objects, killings of civilians, the
taking and holding of hostages, mistreatment and
summary executions of prisoners of war and hostages,
sexual violence, extensive destruction of inhabited
areas and public and private property, and pillaging
and forced displacement. The scorched-earth policy
implemented by the Armenian armed forces involved
the ethnic cleansing of all Azerbaijanis in the seized
territories, as a result of which my country has one of
the largest displaced populations in the world. As of
1 April, 3,875 citizens of Azerbaijan were registered
as missing in connection with the war. They include
710 civilians, including 67 children, 265 women and
326 elderly people. Armenia refuses to cooperate
in establishing these missing persons’ fate, in clear
violation of international humanitarian law.
The impunity still enjoyed by the perpetrators of
these crimes, who include some holding political and
military posts at the highest level in Armenia, not only
prevents progress from being made in achieving peace

S/PV. 8264

and reconciliation, it also aggravates the situation on
the ground. Direct and deliberate attacks by Armenian
armed forces on civilian targets in Azerbaijan situated
along or behind the front lines have continued with
varying frequency and intensity. Moreover, Armenia is
taking purposeful measures to consolidate the results of
the use of force and prevent displaced Azerbaijanis from
returning to their homes and properties. Azerbaijan
will spare no effort to end the unlawful occupation of
the Nagorno Karabakh region of Azerbaijan and other
occupied territories, achieve a political settlement of
the conflict based on international law, and ensure
peace and justice in the region.
In conclusion, we believe it is essential to ensure that
the Security Council consistently maintains its focus on
the protection of civilians and systematically reiterates
its demand that all parties to armed conflicts comply
fully with their obligations under international law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liberia.
Mr. Brown (Liberia): Since I have the special
privilege of being the last speaker today, I would like,
if I may, to thank everyone here for their patience
and time throughout what has been a truly long day.
My delegation would also like to thank the Polish
presidency for convening today’s open debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, welcome the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/462) and thank
the other speakers and contributors for their insights.
Reflecting on what we have gleaned from those
important contributions, we are compelled to confront
an uncomfortable truth. Even as we debate, the
protection of civilians in armed conflict around the
world is anything but ensured, with increasing acts
of violence and brutality being perpetrated against
civilians and causing unimaginable human suffering,
deprivation and carnage. The Secretary-General is
right. This is unconscionable. So too is our continued
inability to act.
When here in the Security Council we fail to
equitably and fairly apply the applicable, agreed-on
tools of international humanitarian law, not because
they do not adequately address the problem of
protecting civilians in armed conflict, but because we
have vested interests in one side or the other; when we
are unable to set our sights high enough to see how such
conflicts lower the standards of our humanity; when
we cannot move beyond our narrow self-interests to

18-1555897/98

S/PV.8264

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

agree to help those who need our help the most, the
victims and unwilling participants in these conflicts,
not only do we fail the innocent women and children,
doctors, nurses and other health-care and humanitarian
workers, we also fail the United Nations and all that it
should truly represent. We fail the common values of
our humanity. And yes, we fail ourselves.
Of course, we have adopted numerous resolutions
calling for the protection of civilians and humanitarian
and health personnel, as well as for compliance
with the obligation to distinguish between civilian
populations and combatants. Yet the atrocities that
shock our collective consciences have continued. Are
the resolutions so ineffective? Or might it be that we
who are adopting them are not really committed to
their implementation? Where a State’s institutions have
clearly collapsed under the weight of the destruction
attendant on armed conflict, is it still reasonable to lay
the burden of the protection of civilians on such a State
and those crumbled institutions? Should we perhaps
also extend the duty to protect civilians in an armed
conflict to the region of the conflict, as well as to other
external supporters who have a vested interest in the
continuation of the conflict? Is it really too difficult for
us to commit to a code of conduct governing how we
wield the enormous powers of the Security Council to
better protect civilians in armed conflicts?
Liberia could not agree more with the SecretaryGeneral that the most effective way to protect civilians

98/98

22/05/2018

is to prevent the outbreak, escalation, continuation and
recurrence of armed conflicts. That is why we support
the new paradigm of preventing conflict and sustaining
peace. However, we must also commit to working
creatively, selflessly and aggressively to end ongoing
conflicts. We can do this. We must do it, for the wailing
mothers and dying children for whom there may be
no tomorrow, and for the humanitarian and healthcare workers who, despite the rising risks to their own
lives, continue to offer hope in desolation, surrounded
by a rising tide of hopelessness. We know that for all
of these people — whose faces we may never see and
voices we may never hear and yet to whom we are all
inextricably connected by the common thread of our
humanity — we could stop the endless debates and
laudable speeches and, instead, collectively recommit
to acting as we know we should.
Of course, we cannot be all things to all people.
But this, too, is who we are — humankind’s best chance
to afford all a right to life, to care for their families,
and to live in peace, security and human decency. In its
purest and most exalted form, that is why our United
Nations exists. We know that we are a confluence of
competing interests and power, but even as we compete
we must never forget that the essence of the United
Nations is that we will be united for peace, security and
human development.
The meeting rose at 7.50 p.m.

18-15558
