"1 indeed appreciate the honour bestowed on me, as
President of the Security Council, to say on behalf of ail its
members how pleased the Security Council is to recommend to the General Assembly that it admit the Republic
of Estonia, the Republic of Latvia and the Republic of
Lithuania to membership in the United Nations.

Resolution 710 (1991)
of U September 1991

The Security Council,
Having examined the application of the Republic of Latvia
for admission to the United Nations, 210

"lt is a pleasure, but it is also a serious matter, for this
is a solemn decision of great symbolic and historie importance that the Council is taking. The wheels of history have
been tuming. The winds of freedom have been blowing
down old structures. We are entering a world where
perhaps there is Jess order, but where there is ever more
hope.

Recommends to the General Assembly that the Republic
of Latvia be admitted to membership in the United Nations.
Adopted without a vote at the 3007th
meeting,

Resolution 711 (1991)
of U September 1991

"The independence of the Republic of Estonia, the
Republic of Latvia and the Republic of Lithuania was
regained peacefully, bymeans of dialogue, with the consent
of the parties concemed, and in accordance with the
wishes and aspirations of the three peoples. We can only
welcome this development, which obviously represents
progress in respecting the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and in attaining its objectives.

The Security Council,
Having examined the application of the Republic of
Lithuania for admission to the United Nations,211
Recommends to the General Assembly that the Republic
ofLithuania be admitted to membership in the United Nations.
Adopted without a vote al the 3007th
meeting,

''To the representatives of Estonia, Latvia and
Lithuania, I should like to say 'Welcome'. The Council
unanimously took the view that your States meet the
conditions laid down in rule 60 of the provisional rules of
procedure for the admission of Members, namely, that
they should be 'peace-loving' and 'able and willing to carry
out the obligations contained in the Charter'.

Decisions

In the absence of any objections, the Council then decided,
in accordance with the recommendation contained in paragraph
3 of the report of the Committee on the Admission of New
Members,212 to have recourse to the provisions of the last
paragraph of rule 60 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure and to depart from the time Iimits set forth in the
penultimate paragraph of rule 60 in order to present its
recommendation to the forty-sixth session of the General
Assembly due to open the following week.

"1 am confident that as new Members of the United
Nations, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania will make a constructive contribution to the efforts to promote and uphold
the purposes and principles of the Charter.
"lt is now for the General Assembly to ratify the
judgement of the Security Council and to enable you
rightfully to regain your place within the community of
nations. Thus this forty-sixth session will see the United
Nations, with 166 Members, progress towards the universality that is one of its fundamental principles."

At the same meeting, following the adoption of resolutions
700 (1991), 710 (1991) and 711 (1991), the President of the
Council made the following statement on behalf of the members:213

THE INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE214

A. Dale of an eleclion lo fi/J a 11acancy in 1"'1 lnltlrnalional Court of Justice

Declslon

At its 3005th meeting, on 28 August 1991, the Council
proceeded with the discussion of the item entitled "Date of an

election to fill a vacancy in the International Court of Justice
(S/22959)". 22

49
