S/PV.9109

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9109th meeting

Thursday, 11 August 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Zhang Jun. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Ms. Koumby Missambo
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mrs. Kamboj
Ms. Moran
Mrs. Toroitich
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Mr. Kvalheim
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. Kariuki
Ms. Jenkins

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-45875 (E)
*2245875*

S/PV.9109

Threats to international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Ukraine to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Rafael
Mariano Grossi, Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Grossi.
Mr. Grossi: It is indeed a great pleasure to have
this opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
situation at the nuclear facilities in Ukraine.
As the Council knows, the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) has been actively assessing the
situation at those facilities since the conflict began in
February. Members may recall that I had an opportunity
to report on the state of affairs back in March (see
S/PV.8986). Since 24 February, the IAEA has activated
its Incident and Emergency Centre, established regular
contact with the Ukrainian authorities and closely
monitored the situation at the facilities, as well as
activities involving radioactive sources and nuclear
material in Ukraine.
I have issued frequent, almost daily, updates
on the IAEA website to ensure that everyone has
updated information. I have also personally led two
missions to provide assistance to Ukraine — one at
the South Ukraine nuclear power plant in March and,
subsequently, a second one at the Chornobyl site in
April. The Agency has also been coordinating offers
of assistance from our member States. It has facilitated
the provision of equipment, monitored the radiation
situation and provided personal protective equipment
and radiation monitors. In total, to date, 12 member
States have offered assistance.
The Agency and I, too, have been in frequent
contact with both Ukraine and the Russian Federation
to make sure that we have the clearest picture possible
2/19

11/08/2022

of the evolving circumstances at this time. The
Agency has conducted nine safeguards missions in
Ukraine — at the South Ukraine nuclear power plant,
the Rivne nuclear power plant, the Khmelnytskyi
nuclear power plant and the Chornobyl site and Kyiv
area — which are under IAEA safeguards, pursuant to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT) Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement that the
Agency has with Ukraine. Those on-site inspections
have enabled the Agency to fulfil its obligatory
safeguards objectives.
Remote monitoring from IAEA headquarters
of other nuclear power plants and the Chornobyl
area are ongoing. Very recently, I had two teams at
the Chornobyl site performing critical safeguards
verification activities. The two expert missions to
Ukraine, which I led personally, as I said, allowed us
to see for ourselves the situation on the ground and
provide technical assistance, that which was already
given and that which is ongoing.
Of course, there are several humanitarian, political
and legal issues, which are within the remit of the
Security Council. However, as members very well
know, our work focuses exclusively on the technical
issues related to safety and security and the safeguards
inspections in Ukraine.
Earlier in the year — and I also had an opportunity
to recall this just a little more than a week ago as I
addressed the ongoing Review Conference of the
Parties to the NPT in New York — I outlined a number
of indispensable pillars — seven of them — which are
cardinal and crucial to ensuring safety and security. I
will not list them all but, in general, they include crucial
aspects dealing with the physical integrity of the plants,
the off-site power supply, which, as members know, is
indispensable for cooling systems in nuclear power
plants, emergency preparedness measures and systems
and so on. The issue is that all seven pillars have been
compromised, if not entirely violated, at one point or
another during this ongoing crisis.
Legally speaking, when it comes to attacks or
the possibility of attacks on nuclear facilities, we do
not work in a vacuum. The international community
took a stance very early on against challenges of that
kind. Additional Protocols I and II to the 1949 Geneva
Conventions prohibit such attacks against, as they
were referred to back in the day, nuclear electrical
generating stations in armed conflict. Furthermore,
there have been several resolutions adopted by the
22-45875

11/08/2022

Threats to international peace and security

S/PV.9109

IAEA General Conference. That is the framework that
must be observed.

concern about the extremely stressful and difficult
conditions faced by the Ukrainian operating staff.

We are all aware — and today’s briefing is taking
place against this backdrop — that the situation at
the nuclear facilities in Ukraine, in particular at
the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant, has been
deteriorating rapidly, to the point of becoming
very alarming.

The Agency continues to monitor the situation to
identify any potential implication that could arise at the
facilities. Based on the most recent information, experts
have preliminarily assessed that there is no immediate
threat to nuclear safety as a result of the shelling or
other military actions.

On 5 August, the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power
plant was subjected to shelling, resulting in several
explosions at within the site. Those explosions took
place near the electrical switchboard of a 750-kilowatt
external power supply that caused the shutdown of
the electrical power transformer and two backup
transformers. Consequently, one reactor unit was shut
down and disconnected from the electrical grid. It is
therefore clear that there is a direct link between these
external intervention attacks and what is happening at
the plant.

However, that could change at any moment. We
certainly can all agree that any nuclear catastrophe
would be unacceptable. Therefore, preventing it
should be our overarching goal. We must all work
together to prevent it. That is our duty and our common
responsibility. In order to help achieve that, I ask that
both sides cooperate with the IAEA and allow a mission
to the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant to proceed as
soon as possible.

The emergency protection system of the affected
unit was triggered, and diesel generators were set into
operation to restore the power supply for that unit. As
we speak, the unit remains disconnected from the grid.
There was also shelling in the area of the nitrogenoxygen station at the plant. Firefighters quickly
extinguished that fire; however, repairs must be
assessed, evaluated and done.
On 6 August, one staff member of the Zaporizhzhya
plant working in the area of the dry spent nuclear fuel
storage facility in the vicinity was injured during a new
episode of shelling, which also caused some physical
damage. Additionally, Ukraine has reported to us that
the plant staff have restricted access to the on-site
emergency crisis centre.
As of today, the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant
has limited access to off-site power — one external
high-voltage line and one high-voltage backup line to
the thermal power plant — due to the damage from the
shelling to which I just referred.
In particular, I remain very concerned about the
situation at the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant, and
I reiterate that any military action that jeopardizes
nuclear safety and security must stop immediately.
Military actions near such a large nuclear facility
could lead to very serious consequences. Even before
these most recent events, I had already expressed great

As has been said many times, this facility is
currently in Russian-occupied territory, so it cannot be
reached by travelling exclusively through Ukrainiancontrolled territory. We need to continue to work
pragmatically with the authorities of both countries
in efforts to obtain access for our experts to the
Zaporizhzhya plant. I am personally ready to lead such
a mission, as I did for South Ukraine and Chornobyl,
leading a team of experts from the IAEA. We have
been preparing for this, and time is of the essence.
I propose — I plead — for the mission to be given a
green light as soon as possible.
Ever since the installation has been under the
control of Russia, the IAEA has received information
from Russia, as well as from Ukraine, indicating the
state of the facility, its operation and the damage
assessed. However, the contents of such statements
are frequently contradictory. And, without a physical
presence, the IAEA cannot corroborate some very
important facts. It is the facts gathered during a site
visit that are needed so that the IAEA can develop and
provide an independent assessment of the nuclear safety
and security risks.
Among other critical activities, what are we
intending to do? We would assess the physical damage
to the facilities. We would determine whether the main
and backup safety and security systems are functional
and evaluate the working conditions of the controlroom staff. The mission to the site will also allow us to
carry out urgent safeguard activities, such as verifying
the status of the reactors and the inventories of nuclear

22-458753/19

S/PV.9109

Threats to international peace and security

material, including fresh and spent fuel storage,
where we currently have no remote data transfer
of surveillance. Furthermore, we need to perform
maintenance on all IAEA safeguards equipment in
order to ensure their remote data transmission and
the maintenance of continuity of knowledge, which is
indispensable after leaving the facility.
I am convinced that admission to the Zaporizhzhya
plant could be beneficial not only for the work of the
IAEA and for the international community’s assessment
of what is going on, but also for the operators and
regulators of the nuclear plant itself. The previous
IAEA missions that I have mentioned on a couple of
occasions — to South Ukraine and Chornobyl — were
proof that being there, establishing the facts, is what is
needed at the moment. Overall, I also believe that our
own site presence will allow us to both carry out the
technical activities I just described and also provide a
stabilizing influence.
I want to underscore that the IAEA has been ready
to undertake such a mission since June, when we were
ready to go. Unfortunately, due to political factors and
other considerations, it was not possible. We have seen
what has happened over the past two months. We cannot
allow such factors to delay us any longer.
I reiterate that military actions that have even
the smallest potential to jeopardize nuclear safety
or security at this nuclear installation must stop
immediately. Those actions could lead to serious
consequences. The IAEA is ready to help avert such an
escalation of the crisis.
I want to thank the Secretary-General, who has
been steadfast in his support for our mission. I had an
opportunity to discuss with him in New York a few
days ago following his statements of support, without
which our work would be tremendously more difficult.
I thank the Security Council for having given me this
opportunity to say, and sometimes to reiterate, that
this is a serious and grave hour, and the IAEA must be
allowed to conduct its mission to Zaporizhzhya as soon
as possible.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Grossi for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
4/19

11/08/2022

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Director General Grossi for
his briefing.
We have repeatedly warned our Western colleagues
that, if they do not talk sense into the Kyiv regime,
it will take the most monstrous and reckless steps,
the consequences of which will backfire far beyond
Ukraine’s borders. Unfortunately, that is exactly what
is happening now. Kyiv’s criminal attacks on nuclear
infrastructure are pushing the world to the brink of
a nuclear catastrophe, comparable in scale to that
of Chornobyl.
In recent days, the Ukrainian armed forces
repeatedly shelled the largest nuclear power plant in
Europe, the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant, with
heavy artillery and multiple rocket launchers. Those
strikes directly threaten the nuclear safety of the plant.
On 5 August, such a strike damaged a number
of facilities important to the Zaporizhzhya plant’s
electricity and gas supply. Pipelines were destroyed;
there was a hydrogen fire at the distribution unit; and
a high-voltage power line was disabled. I would like
to stress that the Ukrainian armed forces shelled the
plant during a shift change of personnel. It is clear
that the aim of the Kyiv regime was to intimidate the
Zaporizhzhya plant’s employees, its own citizens, to
prevent them from going to work, thereby undermining
the normal functioning of the facility.
On 6 August, the Ukrainian armed forces struck
the Zaporizhzhya plant with cluster munitions. Their
shrapnel warheads hit a site in the area of the dry storage
facility for spent nuclear fuel, as well as an automated
radiation monitoring post. One of the plant’s employees
was wounded.
As a result of the shelling by the Ukrainian armed
forces on 7 August, there was a power surge in the mains
supplying the Zaporizhzhya plant. There was damage to
equipment, which led to an automatic shutdown of the
power supply. At Unit 4, which was operating at 10-percent capacity, the power supply to the plant’s protection
control systems failed and the emergency protection
was triggered. Ukrainian Zaporizhzhya plant personnel
were forced to shut down one of the three operating
power units, while the capacity of two other units was
reduced to half the maximum.
Heavy strikes by the Ukrainian armed forces in the
vicinity of Enerhodar caused more than 40 power lines
to be severed and the town to lose power. Among the
22-45875

11/08/2022

Threats to international peace and security

residents of Enerhodar, many of whom are employees
of the Zaporizhzhya plant, there are fatalities and
injuries. It is particularly despicable that a number of
attacks on the plant were carried out at night, when
people were sleeping.
Today the attacks of the Ukrainian armed forces
on the Zaporizhzhya plant and Enerhodar continued.
The strikes were carried out using multiple-launch
rocket systems and heavy artillery from the right
bank of the Dnipro River, the Dnipropetrovsk region,
Nikopol, Marhanets and Tomakivka, controlled by
Kyiv. According to the regional administration, the
Ukrainian armed forces are aiming missiles at concrete
radioactive-waste storage facilities. So far, Kyiv has
failed to hit them and cause serious damage. The
radiation level at the Zaporizhzhya plant is currently
normal. But if the strikes continue, it is only a question
of time. We regularly send reports to the secretariat
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
detailing the situation and such incidents.
What is currently happening at the Zaporizhzhya
plant is the culmination of the criminal actions of the
Kyiv regime against nuclear infrastructure and the
personnel who maintain those facilities, which for
months remained without any international reaction.
Between April and July, Kyiv committed a number
of provocative acts against the Zaporizhzhya plant using
strike unmanned aerial vehicle, including Polish-made
ones. Some were successfully shot down; others, bombladen kamikaze drones, were detonated near critical
infrastructure. It was only by sheer luck that this did
not lead to a disruption of the plant’s normal operation.
Earlier, in February, Ukrainians captured four
Russian specialists who were accompanying the delivery
of nuclear fuel to the Rovno nuclear power plant. They
were subjected to intimidation and pressure, in line
with classic methods in the arsenal of terrorist groups.
On 9 March, Ukrainian saboteurs blew up a power
transmission line feeding the cooling system of the
storage facility for spent nuclear fuel at the Chornobyl
nuclear power plant. It was only thanks to the efforts
of the Russian military that the accident was avoided
by urgently connecting diesel generators and providing
electricity to the plant via an alternative power line
from the territory of Belarus. The sabotage group also
blew up the only bridge that connected the plant to
the town where the power plant engineers live. Shift
personnel could not go to work for a long time. At the

S/PV.9109

same time, they were being worked on by the Ukrainian
special services, threatening them with reprisals for
cooperating with the so-called occupiers. In Kyiv, at
that time, crocodile tears were publicly being shed, and
it was reported to the IAEA that the Russian military
was preventing the rotation of maintenance shifts.
At the tenth Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
currently taking place in New York, representatives
of the Kyiv regime, with the support of a number of
other delegations, are cynically and absurdly accusing
Russia of attacks on the Zaporizhzhya plant. Such
propagandistic spin is picked up by the Western press.
All that is being done contrary to common sense,
since the Zaporizhzhya plant is controlled by the
Russian armed forces. Elementary logic suggests that
our military has no reason to shell the plant, the city
or themselves.
On 4 March, Western countries already convened
a Security Council meeting (see S/PV.8986) on the
issue of the Zaporizhzhya plant, trying to present the
Ukrainian sabotage — the arson of the training-centre
building — as the result of the actions of the Russian
military despite the fact that the plant was under their
complete control by that time. Let me recall that, at
the time, Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo said that
attacks on nuclear facilities violated international
humanitarian law. The representative of Great Britain
said that international law indicated the need for special
protection for nuclear facilities. The representative of
the United States of America said that, by the grace
of God, the world had averted a nuclear catastrophe,
that the attack on the plant was extremely reckless and
that conflicts should not involve nuclear facilities. The
representative of France argued that it was necessary to
ensure the safety of nuclear power plants. Are members
ready to repeat all that now in relation to the Ukrainian
side and to call on Kyiv to stop the shelling?
I want to emphasize that every time the Ukrainian
armed forces struck at the Zaporizhzhya plant, a
catastrophe was avoided only thanks to the selfless
joint actions of plant employees and Russian military
personnel, who provided them with comprehensive
emergency assistance. When necessary, firefighters
and emergency crews, as well as our military personnel,
work hand in hand. That clearly shows that absolutely
normal communication has been established between
our military and Ukrainian specialists at the plant.

22-458755/19

S/PV.9109

Threats to international peace and security

From the very beginning, we have supported the
IAEA’s efforts to ensure the nuclear safety and security
of Ukraine’s nuclear facilities. It was assumed that
the seven principles formulated by Director General
Grossi in that area would form the basis of a trilateral
document in the Russia-Ukraine-IAEA format.
However, the Kyiv regime refused to sign it. Then we
showed flexibility and agreed that such an agreement
should be formalized in the form of two parallel
agreements — Russia with the IAEA and Ukraine
with the IAEA. Kyiv also rejected that option, without
giving any clear arguments about the reasons for the
refusal. However, their reasoning is clear. Even then,
dangerous plans had been hatched in Kyiv to disrupt the
normal functioning of the Zaporizhzhya and Chornobyl
nuclear power plants and to blame Russia for it.
We strictly adhere to the seven principles mentioned
earlier and do our best to ensure that the representatives
of the Agency can be convinced of that with their
own eyes.
As early as 3 June, the Russian side and the
leadership of the IAEA secretariat fully agreed on the
route and schedule of the Agency’s international mission
to the Zaporizhzhya plant. The IAEA Director General,
Mr. Grossi, personally planned to lead the mission,
which included prominent experts from a number
of countries. The mission was assigned exclusively
technical tasks and was to fulfil the IAEA’s mandate
to assess the state of Europe’s largest nuclear power
plant and make an inventory of the nuclear material
located there, as stipulated by the Comprehensive
Safeguards Agreement.

11/08/2022

We hope that the visit of IAEA experts to the
Zaporizhzhya plant will happen soon. We also hope
that in this situation the Secretary-General will
acknowledge the full weight of his responsibility and
will not, via the Secretariat department subordinate to
him or any other links in the United Nations system, do
anything to hinder this mission from being conducted.
For our part, we stand ready to provide all
possible assistance to resolving all organizational
matters. We believe that there is justification for IAEA
representatives to go to the Zaporizhzhya nuclear
power plant as quickly as possible, possibly even before
the end of August. However, not everything depends on
us. At this time, we cannot provide any guarantees that
the trip will take place. It is hard for us to judge what is
currently being cooked up by the Ukrainian leadership,
which for several days in a row has been launching
strikes on the nuclear power plant, even though the
Secretary-General described any attacks on nuclear
facilities as suicide.
We believe that it is unacceptable that the IAEA
mission should take place in conditions of ongoing
shelling by Ukrainian armed forces of the plant and
the territory around the town of Enerhodar. Kyiv
must immediately cease and guarantee that it has no
intention of presenting any threat to the life and health
of international staff.

In the closest cooperation with the Agency, we
managed to resolve all the difficult issues related to the
organization and conduct of such a complex event in the
current circumstances. However, at the last minute, the
Department of Safety and Security at the Secretariat
gave a red light, and the trip was cancelled, and that
was seized upon by the Kyiv authorities to step up their
provocations and shelling of the nuclear power plant.

We call on States that support the Kyiv regime
to bring their proxies into check, compel them to
immediately and once and for all stop attacks on the
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant and the residents of
Enerhodar, and ensure safe conditions for the conduct
of the IAEA mission. We call on the leadership of the
United Nations and the IAEA to demonstrate their
leadership and global responsibility and very precisely
and without diplomatic rhetoric indicate the real source
of the threat to nuclear security of the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant, namely, the strikes by the Ukrainian
armed forces, and to tell the Ukrainian authorities that
such actions are unacceptable. This is the only way to
prevent a major radiation catastrophe on the European
continent, the risk of which is now more real than ever.

We are convinced that cancelling the international
mission played into the hands of the Kyiv regime
and its Western backers, who initially were opposed
to the idea of the trip. They did not want the IAEA
to see that the nuclear power plant was functioning
normally and that the staff was working in a healthy
and normal environment.

If Ukrainian armed forces attacks continue, such a
disaster could take place at any time, and the threat of
radiation contamination would loom over the territories
of Kyiv, Zaporizhzhya, Kharkiv, Poltava. Kherson,
Odesa, Mykolayiv, Kivorhrad and Vinnytsia oblast, as
well as the Donetsk People’s Republic and the Luhansk
People’s Republic, the border regions of Russia

6/19

22-45875

11/08/2022

Threats to international peace and security

and Belarus, and Moldova, Bulgaria and Romania,
and that is according to the most optimistic expert
forecasts. The real scale of a nuclear disaster at the
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant is hard to imagine.
Full responsibility for such an event would lie upon the
Western backers of Kyiv.
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): Let me begin by
thanking Mr. Rafael Grossi, Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), for
his briefing on the deeply concerning situation at the
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant in Ukraine. The
information provided confirms our fears of a growing
risk of a potential nuclear incident with catastrophic
consequences for human lives and their environment
if the indiscriminate shelling of the facility does not
cease forthwith.
Ghana unequivocally condemns the militarization
of the precinct of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power
plant, as well as the deliberate attacks on the power
lines and sensitive units of the facility. It appears that
the attacks are taking place with no due regard to the
deadly consequences that these unacceptable actions
could lead to, particularly the accidental emission of
radioactive material. We also call for the unconditional
withdrawal and removal of all military personnel and
equipment and insist on the return of the facility to its
accredited personnel.
We welcome the public pronouncement of
Secretary-General António Guterres with regard to
the rapidly developing grave situation and hereby fully
endorse his call for immediate access to be granted to
international inspectors from the IAEA so as to enable
an independent assessment of the nuclear facility’s
standards and safeguards. Under no circumstances
should nuclear facilities intended for peaceful purposes
be subjected to such attacks. We call for the immediate
and full respect for the Convention on the Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material and its 2005 amendment
by all armed parties.
The world can ill afford another nuclear disaster.
We cannot too soon forget the horrors of the 1986
Chernobyl accident and the consequent nuclear
catastrophe, which left in its wake the long-term effects
of radiation exposure to many people in Ukraine and
parts of Europe even to date. The warnings of the IEAE
must therefore be soberly reflected on by the Security
Council and should galvanize its members to quickly
deploy every effort in a unified manner to assist the

S/PV.9109

IAEA to mitigate and suppress any risk of accidental
emissions at the Zaporizhzhya nuclear facility.
Ghana believes that, ultimately, the cessation of
the military hostilities, anchored in a complete and
unconditional withdrawal of the Russian Federation
troops from the internationally recognized borders
of Ukraine, is the only acceptable pathway to the
restoration of the peace and security of that country.
In this regard, we continue to strongly urge a pacific
settlement of the substantive security concerns of the
parties in line with the United Nations Charter and
appeal to all other actors to refrain from escalatory
actions and activities that seek only to prolong the
war, perpetuate the tensions and aggravate the security
concerns of the parties.
As this senseless war lingers on, civilians are
bearing innumerable hardships, and human lives are
being lost every day. It is important for the parties
to exercise restraint and halt the use of force in all
areas where there is critical infrastructure, including
nuclear power plants, and to respect their international
obligations to protect human lives and prevent a
potential disaster.
Undeniably, the war in Ukraine continues to have
devastating consequences beyond the battlefield. The
rippling effects, combined with economic disruptions
caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, have
contributed to constraining the fiscal space of many
Governments and led to spiralling food prices that
threaten to push millions into acute hunger and roll
back development gains. The situation of developing
countries appears to be dire and requires urgent
actions on a global scale, including debt forgiveness
and restructuring to assist these countries navigate
the current volatile global economic environment and
preserve their stability. It is hoped that, together with
the international community, the Security Council
could explore new support measures and appropriate
responses to protect vulnerable populations in States
Members of the United Nations.
I conclude by expressing Ghana’s strong support
for the peaceful resolution of this conflict sooner rather
than later. We urge further constructive engagement by
the parties at all levels in the pursuit of their security
interests and the maintenance of international peace
and security.
Ms. Jenkins (United States of America): I thank
Director General Grossi for his briefing on the situation

22-458757/19

S/PV.9109

Threats to international peace and security

at the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant in Ukraine. We
welcome the steadfast commitment of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to addressing the
situation there and to nuclear safety worldwide.
The United States continues to closely monitor
reports on the situation at the Zaporizhzhya facility,
noting the considerable concern with regard to the
risk of a nuclear incident that would endanger the
people of Ukraine, neighbouring States and the
international community. The cause of the situation at
the Zaporizhzhya facility is not a mystery. It is another
tragic result of the Russian Federation’s decision to
further invade its sovereign neighbour, Ukraine. To date,
Russia’s full-scale invasion has resulted in thousands
of civilians being killed or wounded and has violated
the Charter of the United Nations and the principles
of international law. The full-scale invasion has also
contributed to a spike in global food insecurity, driven
energy-market volatility and now heightened the risk of
a catastrophic nuclear incident with consequences that
could be felt in Ukraine and far beyond.
It is especially galling that Russia’s actions are
taking place during the ongoing Review Conference
of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, which is being held just down the hall from
where we sit. Russia’s behaviour could not more directly
undercut the shared interests of the States parties in
strengthening non-proliferation, disarmament and
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The solution for
what is happening at the Zaporizhzhya facility is
straightforward. The United States calls for the Russian
Federation to immediately withdraw its forces from
Ukraine’s territory. That would allow for Ukraine to
restore the impeccable safety, security and safeguards
performance it upheld for decades at the facility.
Russia continues to deploy disinformation to
distract from the realities on the ground — and now
claims that Ukraine is culpable for the situation at the
Zaporizhzhya facility. That completely ignores the real
issue, which is Russia’s illegal presence at the facility.
Russia alone created the risks, and with it launched a
full-scale invasion. It can eliminate those risks now by
withdrawing from Ukraine.
In the absence of such a withdrawal, however,
there are steps we must now take to minimize the risks.
To start, the United States reiterates the importance
of facilitating access for IAEA personnel to address
nuclear safety, security and safeguards concerns at
the Zaporizhzhya facility, as well as at other nuclear
8/19

11/08/2022

facilities across the country, in a manner that respects
Ukrainian sovereignty. That visit cannot wait any
longer. We once again call on Russia to cease all military
operations at or near Ukraine’s nuclear facilities. We
insist that Russia immediately return full control of the
Zaporizhzhya facility to Ukraine.
We are also aware of claims of mistreatment of the
power plant’s Ukrainian staff by Russian soldiers and
note that, if true, such treatment would be inconsistent
with the IAEA’s seven pillars of nuclear safety and
security, which Russia has endorsed. Ukrainian staff
must be allowed to fulfil their important duties free
from the pressure of Russia’s armed forces. The United
States also supports Ukraine’s proposal to create a
demilitarized zone around the Zaporizhzhya plant.
Reports such as those by the IAEA we heard today
underscore the urgency of the situation. However, what
is happening at this nuclear power plant is not the only
alarming situation we face in the areas where Russia’s
forces operate in Ukraine.
Russia has expanded its aims in Ukraine and seeks
to dismantle it as a geopolitical entity, dissolving
it from the world map. We are now getting a clearer
picture of what life is like in an area under Russian
military control. Through intimidation, censorship and
propaganda, Russia is clearly laying the foundation to
try, once again, to illegally annex territory from its
neighbour. None of us should be surprised if Russia
suddenly announces false referendums in those
regions as a pretext to grabbing more of Ukraine’s
sovereign territory.
The many consequences of the conflict, including
the situation at the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant,
will end only when Russia ends the war. Today the
United States demands particularly urgent action to
address the nuclear risks posed by Russia’s most recent
moves. That must be done through the work of the
IAEA and the return of full control of the Zaporizhzhya
facility to Ukraine.
Ms. Koumby Missambo (Gabon) (spoke in French):
I thank the Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), Mr. Rafael Grossi, for
his briefing.
First of all, I would like to express my country’s
serious concerns about the escalation of fighting and
the perpetuation of the war in Ukraine. Since last
Saturday, following the attack on the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant, there is now the considerable risk
22-45875

11/08/2022

Threats to international peace and security

of a nuclear disaster, given the non-compliance with
five of the seven pillars of nuclear safety and security.
The build-up of military activity around the nuclear
plant must stop. The parties are responsible for ending
any activity that could expose the world to the risk of
a nuclear disaster. Any militarization of nuclear sites
is unacceptable. The scale of risks involved should be
cause for concern for the warring parties and for the
international community as a whole. We urge the parties
to comply with current nuclear security rules, halt all
shelling of nuclear sites and avoid exposing the world
to the risk of a disaster with irreparable consequences.
My country calls on the parties to cooperate with
the IAEA to secure potentially dangerous sites in order
to prevent the risk of a nuclear disaster. Furthermore, the
174 containers of spent nuclear fuel must be sheltered
from military activity of any kind. In that regard, an
on-site IAEA technical mission appears to be crucial.
We call on the parties to agree on the modalities of such
a mission, which, in the light of the situation that has
just been described, is critical.
The signing of an agreement just a few weeks ago
to allow grain held at Ukrainian ports to be exported
is a glimmer of hope on the path towards peace. That
momentum should be harnessed in preparation for
negotiations on a ceasefire and the end of hostilities.
My country reiterates its opposition to war and
reaffirms its commitment to a peaceful resolution of
conflict. We encourage all political and diplomatic
efforts aimed at ending the escalation and brokering an
agreement for lasting peace between the parties.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates): I
would like to thank Director General Grossi for his
valuable briefing.
The United Arab Emirates is deeply alarmed by
recent events at and near the Zaporizhzhya nuclear
power plant, including the reported damage to critical
infrastructure, the external power supply system and
radiation sensors. Those developments illustrate the
disastrous ramifications of the ongoing conflict,
not just for Ukraine but for the wider region and the
world. When it comes to nuclear matters, our collective
security is truly intertwined. A miscalculation, mistake
or reckless act could result in a humanitarian and
environmental catastrophe that would affect millions
of lives.

S/PV.9109

In that context, it is crucial that the International
Atomic Energy Agency have full, unimpeded access
to the site in order to assess the damage and ascertain
the safety of the facility. We support the seven pillars
of nuclear safety and security, outlined by Director
General Grossi at the beginning of March, and remind
the parties of their importance in maintaining the safe
operation of the Zaporizhzhya plant and other facilities
that may be caught up in the conflict.
Furthermore, we recall the special protections
for nuclear power facilities under international law,
including article 56 of Additional Protocol I to the
Geneva Conventions, which makes clear that works or
installations containing dangerous forces, including
nuclear generating stations, shall not be made the
object of attack, even where those objects are military
objectives. Those facilities are protected under
international law for a reason: not only are they critical
civilian infrastructure, but there are also immense risks
to human life when nuclear facilities become vulnerable
due to conflict. Ensuring the safety of nuclear facilities
is therefore of the utmost importance and is a critical
issue for the United Arab Emirates.
With the signing of the agreement on agricultural
exports, we witness the potential for positive
developments when backed by active and involved
diplomacy and broad international support. The high
stakes of nuclear safety and security and the international
community’s manifest concern should therefore make
that a focus of constructive and necessary engagement
between the parties. Those efforts, in turn, can pave the
path for a broader settlement that ends this devastating
conflict. We therefore reiterate the need for ongoing
dialogue to bring the conflict to a peaceful, sustainable
resolution in a way that is consistent with the Charter of
the United Nations and international law.
We re-emphasize the importance of achieving
a cessation of hostilities throughout Ukraine. The
alarming developments at the Zaporizhzhya plant
underline the urgency of finding a diplomatic end to
this conflict, which continues to cause a staggering
humanitarian crisis in Ukraine. Despite the difficulties
facing the Council, we must work towards fulfilling its
mandate and take incremental and pragmatic steps to
prevent further suffering.
Mr. Kvalheim (Norway): Let me start by thanking
Director General Grossi for his briefing, including by
providing frequent factual updates on matters within

22-458759/19

S/PV.9109

Threats to international peace and security

11/08/2022

the mandate of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA).

Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I thank Director
General Grossi for his clear and comprehensive briefing.

The Director General has outlined seven
indispensable pillars for nuclear safety and security.
We note with great distress that the Russian forces have
violated several of them during their military aggression
against Ukraine. Norway strongly condemns Russia’s
illegal and unprovoked invasion of Ukraine, which has
gone on for half a year.

Brazil has been following with great concern
news about recent shelling incidents at the facilities
of Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant in Ukraine. As
unanimously recognized by the General Conference of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), any
armed attack on, or threat against, nuclear facilities
devoted to peaceful purposes constitutes a violation
of the principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
international law and the Statute of the Agency. We
reiterate that all parties concerned have a responsibility
to ensure compliance with the applicable instruments
on nuclear safety and security, including the Convention
on Nuclear Safety, the Joint Convention on the Safety
of Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of
Radioactive Waste Management and the Convention
on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and
its Amendment.

In March, the IAEA Board of Governors adopted
a resolution deploring the Russian Federation’s
forcefully seizing control of the nuclear facilities. The
Board expressed
“grave concern that the Russian Federation’s
aggression is impeding the Agency from fully and
safely conducting safeguards verification activities
at Ukrainian nuclear facilities”.
We call on Russia to return full control of all Ukrainian
nuclear facilities to their Ukrainian operators.
The ongoing war has disrupted direct
communication lines between them and the Ukrainian
regulator. That is extremely dangerous. Nuclear safety
and security deteriorate from the presence of an armed
aggressor. The staff operating the facilities are under
psychological and physical stress, and they are at the
mercy of an invading force. That is not conducive to the
safe operation of nuclear facilities.
Norway has had long-standing cooperation
with Ukraine on nuclear safety and security, and we
commend Ukraine for its commitment and dedication to
ensuring the continuation of nuclear safety and security
in the country under these severe circumstances.
Damage to, and destruction of, civilian
infrastructure is unacceptable. It must always be
protected in accordance with international humanitarian
law. We are concerned that Russia’s occupation of
nuclear power plants in Ukraine also means seizing
control over the central sources of electricity for the
Ukrainian civilian population.
In conclusion, Norway again underlines that the
Russian Federation’s must immediately withdraw
its forces from Ukraine’s internationally recognized
borders and cease all threats and military actions. That
would restore Ukraine’s abilities to ensure safe and
secure operations at nuclear facilities.
10/19

During the ongoing Review Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, the States parties have been insisting on the
need to promote nuclear safety and security, as well as
to reduce risk. The urgency of translating those words
into action is increasingly evident.
While the IAEA assessment that there was no
immediate threat to nuclear safety as a result of
Saturday’s incident give us some relief, we cannot
lose sight of the fact that recent events have breached
virtually all the seven pillars outlined by Director
General Grossi earlier this year. The absence of an
immediate threat does not mean the absence of a threat;
it means only that the parties still have a chance to
avoid a disaster.
What makes the situation so alarming is precisely
the fact that we are fully aware of the catastrophic
and lasting consequences for human health and the
environment that any damage to the Zaporizhzhya
power plant would entail. We therefore call on all parties
to refrain from any measure that could jeopardize the
safety and security of the nuclear power plant, as well
as its safe operation.
As Director General Grossi stated recently, the
current situation is untenable. We echo the calls for
the deployment of an IAEA expert mission to the
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant without delay.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): We thank Mr. Grossi,
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
22-45875

11/08/2022

Threats to international peace and security

Agency (IAEA) for his information, clarifications
and leadership.
He was crystal clear during his address at the
general debate of the tenth Review Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT), which is still under way, as he was
today: the IAEA should be fully involved everywhere
in Ukraine in order to help prevent a nuclear disaster
there. He must be listened to, and his request must
be met.
There would not be a meeting of the Security
Council and we would not be discussing this issue were
it not for the Russian invasion of Ukraine and if this
unjustified and senseless war, which continues to this
hour, had not started. We and the entire world are now
familiar with its disastrous impact on every aspect of
human life and activity, including — as feared more
than once — increased nuclear risks, with potentially
disastrous consequences.
Is it not ironic that, while the tenth NPT Review
Conference is under way and the entire world hopes
for tangible progress on the three pillars of the NPT,
we meet, sadly, to talk about a persistent, serious risk
and a nuclear plant in Ukraine that threatens not only
Ukraine and its population, but also its neighbours, the
European continent and beyond?
Let me recall one fundamental fact that is much
more than a curiosity — until Russia’s invasion of
Ukraine, no nuclear plant had ever been attacked,
overrun, occupied or reportedly militarized by an
invading army. It is the first time that this has ever
happened, as a result of Russia’s war of choice, and it
has created one of the worst precedents.
There is countless evidence that Russian forces
continue to conduct their ugly war recklessly and with
brutality. There is a legitimate concern, therefore, that
Russian forces may directly or indirectly cause a serious
or severe nuclear accident and take other actions that
may result in the exposure of Ukraine’s population to
ionizing radiation, all while accusing the victims of
the very same actions. Such dreadful concerns have
been validated by the shelling of a nuclear research
institute in Kharkiv as well as by overrunning and
occupying Europe’s biggest nuclear power station,
in Zaporizhzhya.
In the course of the past six months of the war,
Russia has carried out indiscriminate ground and air
attacks on civilian infrastructure in residential areas,

S/PV.9109

causing thousands of innocent victims. Furthermore,
cyberwarfare against targets in Ukraine, including
electric-power-grid installations and systems, has
reportedly been linked to Russian actors and interests.
Gaining full clarity of the situation concerning the
power plant in Zaporizhzhya is critical, and that must
be carried out through international eyes, meaning the
IAEA missions.
Russia’s actions constitute a serious and
irresponsible breach of nuclear safety rules and are
another example of its blatant disregard for international
law and international norms. They undermine the
IAEA’s ability to monitor Ukraine’s peaceful nuclear
activities for safeguarding purposes.
As rightly stated recently by the Foreign Ministers
of the Group of Seven, “it is Russia’s continued control
of the plant that endangers the region”. Therefore, the
longer the war continues, the greater the likelihood
that additional nuclear challenges and risks may arise
related to the need for equipment maintenance in
Ukraine’s nuclear energy programme and other related
issues, which would normally not be conducted just
because of the war.
Albania reiterates its full and continued support
for the IAEA and for its staff to be able to access
all nuclear facilities in Ukraine safely and without
any impediment and to engage directly and without
interference with the Ukrainian personnel responsible
for the operation of those facilities. The safety of
all individuals implementing those efforts must be
addressed to strengthen nuclear safety, security and
safeguards in Ukraine.
Albania condemns any act of violence perpetrated
inside or near the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant
or against its personnel. The Ukrainian personnel
operating the plant under Russian occupation must
be able to carry out their important tasks without
restrictions, threats or pressure. Unfortunately, as
we have seen, the seven safety pillars essential to
maintaining nuclear safety and security, defined at the
start of the war by the IAEA, have all been compromised
at the Zaporizhzhya plant.
We reiterate our call on the Russian Federation to
stop the war and immediately withdraw all its armed
forces from Ukrainian nuclear facilities and from the
entire Ukrainian territory.

22-4587511/19

S/PV.9109

Threats to international peace and security

Let me conclude, like other speakers — because it is
important — by recalling what Director General Grossi
has repeatedly said, including in the General Assembly:
“If an accident occurs at the Zaporizhzhya nuclear
power plant, we will not have a natural disaster to
blame. We will have only ourselves to answer to.”
Actually, we know who is to be blamed, but we hope that
we will never come to that. For that reason, there is a need
for concrete action, since inaction is unconscionable.
Nuclear safety should not be compromised; it should
not be politicized; and it should not be used for military
tactical advantage. This is not the time for empty
words, biased narratives or the blame game, but for the
immediate and strict application of the IAEA safety
procedures and protocols in Ukraine.
Mrs. Kamboj (India): Let me begin by thanking
Director General Rafael Grossi for his update,
focusing on the safety and security of nuclear facilities
in Ukraine.
We continue to carefully follow developments
regarding the safety and security of Ukraine’s nuclear
power reactors and facilities. India attaches high
importance to ensuring the safety and security of such
facilities, as any accident involving nuclear facilities
could potentially have severe consequences for public
health and the environment.
We also accord a high priority to the discharge by
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) of its
safeguards and monitoring activities, in accordance
with its Statute, in an effective, non-discriminatory and
efficient manner, and we value the efforts of the Agency
in that regard. We have noted the latest information
available with regard to the nuclear power plants and
facilities in Ukraine, including the updates published
on 9 and 10 August by the IAEA, as well as today’s
updates on the latest developments.

11/08/2022

of diplomacy and dialogue. We support all diplomatic
efforts to end the conflict.
While we are discussing the nuclear dimension of
this conflict, we also need to be acutely cognizant of the
impact of the Ukraine conflict on developing countries,
particularly on the supply of food grains, fertilizer
and fuel. It is important for all of us to appreciate the
importance of equity, affordability and accessibility
when it comes to food grains. Open markets must
not become an argument to perpetuate inequity and
promote discrimination.
In that regard, we welcome the initiative, backed by
the Secretary-General, to open the export of grain from
Ukraine via the Black Sea and the facilitation of the
exports of Russian food and fertilizers. Those efforts
demonstrate that differences can be resolved through
sustained dialogue and diplomacy, which has been the
consistent position of India.
We continue to reiterate that the global order
is anchored on international law, the Charter of the
United Nations and respect for the territorial integrity
and sovereignty of nation States.
Mrs. Toroitich (Kenya): I thank Mr. Grossi,
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), for his briefing.
We are having this discussion against the backdrop
of the tenth Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
taking place on these premises. The objective of the
Treaty is to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons
and weapons technology, promote cooperation in the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy and further the goal
of achieving nuclear disarmament and general and
complete disarmament.

India expresses its concern over the reports of
shelling near the spent-fuel storage facility of the
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant. We call for mutual
restraint so as not to endanger the safety and security
of nuclear facilities.

We are all alive to the fact that the use of such
weapons, whether intentional or accidental, can have
an apocalyptic effect on humankind, biodiversity and
the environment. Kenya therefore reaffirms its belief
that the total elimination of nuclear weapons remains
the only absolute guarantee against the use of or threat
of use of nuclear weapons.

India continues to remain concerned over the
situation in Ukraine. Since the beginning of the
conflict in Ukraine, India has consistently called for
an immediate cessation of hostilities and an end to
violence. We called on both sides to return to the path

In that regard, we are deeply concerned by the
reports of the shelling of Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant. Fully aware of the catastrophic
effects of stray or deliberate targeting of such an
installation, we note with relief that no damage was

12/19

22-45875

11/08/2022

Threats to international peace and security

caused to the reactors themselves, and neither was there
any radiological release or reports of injuries.
We urge the need to safeguard the seven
indispensable pillars of nuclear safety and security, as
echoed by the Director General. We further urge the
parties to refrain from any military action that could
jeopardize nuclear safety and security in Ukraine. It
is also essential that the IAEA be allowed to send a
mission of nuclear safety, security and safeguards
experts to the site as soon as possible to conduct
safeguards verification activities.
Beyond the dangers posed by an insecure nuclear
power plant, Kenya remains gravely concerned about
the unabated strikes and shelling in various parts of
Ukraine. With no meaningful ceasefire in sight, this
war continues to cause untold suffering to the Ukrainian
people. It also threatens to usher in a new era of major
global wars.
Kenya continues to call for the parties’ restraint
in taking any action that may further escalate the
situation. We reiterate the need to shift focus to an
immediate cessation of hostilities and the deployment
of available diplomatic tools. Such a cessation should
set the foundation for the negotiation of a lasting peace
settlement that guarantees the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Ukraine while taking into consideration the
security concerns of the Russian Federation.
Finally, I reaffirm Kenya’s respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine within
its internationally recognized borders.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I would like to thank the Director General of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) for
his briefing.
France is very concerned about the serious
threat to the safety and security of Ukrainian nuclear
facilities. The Zaporizhzhya plant, the largest in
Europe, was forcibly seized by Russia last March as
part of its unjustified and unjustifiable aggression
against Ukraine. The presence and actions of Russian
armed forces in the vicinity of the plant significantly
increase the risk of an accident with potentially
devastating consequences. Russia bears responsibility
for this situation.
Russia must return full control of the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant, as well as all nuclear facilities
in the country, to Ukraine. As the Secretary-General

S/PV.9109

stressed today, all military personnel and equipment
must urgently be removed from the plant. Ukrainian
personnel operating the plant must be allowed to carry
out their duties without threat or pressure. Russian
control of Ukrainian nuclear facilities is a danger — a
danger to the Ukrainian people, a danger to the region
and to the entire international community.
France welcomes and supports the efforts of the
IAEA Director General, which it has supported from
the outset and at a high level, in particular by actively
contributing to his technical assistance plan for
Ukraine. France recalls the importance of the Seven
pillars of nuclear safety and security defined by the
IAEA Director General. They must be respected. The
IAEA’s ability to monitor Ukraine’s peaceful nuclear
activities to ensure compliance with safeguards, which
has also been compromised by Russia’s actions, must
also be restored.
For that reason, I would like to emphasize in this
regard the importance of facilitating a mission of IAEA
experts to the Zaporizhzhya plant. This mission must
focus on nuclear safety and security and allow for the
necessary safeguards inspections to be carried out. It
must respect Ukraine’s full sovereignty over its own
territory and infrastructure.
In addition, IAEA personnel must have safe
and unhindered access to all nuclear facilities in
Ukraine. The Agency must be able to communicate
directly — without interference — with the Ukrainian
personnel responsible for operating these facilities.
France reiterates its unwavering support for the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Ukraine within its internationally recognized borders.
Since 24 February, we have witnessed the devastating
human cost of Russian aggression. Russia must
immediately withdraw its troops from the territory of
Ukraine. It must stop its dangerous headlong rush.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We are grateful for the convening of today’s
briefing of the Security Council, and we thank the
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), Mr. Rafael Mariano Grossi, for his
briefing on the critical situation at the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant. The nuclear plant regulator’s
statements on the effects of the attacks that took place
last weekend are indeed cause for great concern. It is
clear to everyone that a nuclear accident would have
devastating consequences on an international scale.

22-4587513/19

S/PV.9109

Threats to international peace and security

It is precisely for that reason that we unambiguously
reiterate that any attack against nuclear facilities is
unacceptable, in line with what was established at the
2009 IAEA General Conference, that is, that any attack
or threat against nuclear facilities dedicated to peaceful
purposes constitutes a violation of the principles of
the United Nations Charter, international law and the
Statute of the Agency. Similarly, such attacks violate
international humanitarian law, including the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and Additional Protocol I of
1977 thereto, which were ratified by the parties to the
conflict. The parties therefore have no justification
whatsoever for not complying with them.
The situation prevailing in Zaporizhzhya in
recent days is part of a deplorable pattern of attacks
against civilian infrastructure. Mexico urges respect
for the obligation not to attack civilian targets, which
includes, of course, not carrying out indiscriminate
or disproportionate attacks. International law,
international humanitarian law and nuclear security
conventions must be respected without exception. As
Director General Grossi pointed out, we are facing
a real risk of nuclear disaster. The humanitarian
consequences would be catastrophic for both human
health and the environment.
We echo the Secretary-General’s call for an
IAEA inspection of the Zaporizhzhya plant as soon as
possible. We urge that no obstacles or conditions be
put in the way to prevent such inspections. It is this
mission that will provide us with objective, truthful and
independent information on the conditions prevailing
at the plant, which we urgently need to know.
I conclude by reiterating our support for the
efforts of the International Atomic Energy Agency
to create conditions for the stabilization of the plant,
and we urge the IAEA Director General to continue to
keep the Security Council informed of nuclear safety
developments in Ukraine, as he has done. Finally,
once again, what these serious hardships show is that a
diplomatic solution to the conflict leading to a cessation
of hostilities must urgently be sought.
Ms. Moran (Ireland): I would like to thank Director
General Grossi for his briefing. The International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) has an indispensable
role to play in supporting Ukraine to ensure nuclear
safety and security at all facilities in that country,
especially since Russia’s invasion, and he has our full
backing in his work.
14/19

11/08/2022

Ireland is deeply concerned by the situation at
the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant and the strong
risk of a radiological accident or incident arising from
military activity at the site. Such an incident could have
devastating consequences for the people of Ukraine,
who have already suffered so much from the actions
of the Russian Federation. It would also have serious
consequences for the wider region.
Let us make no mistake: the issues at Zaporizhzhya
arise solely from the unjust and unprovoked war waged
by Russia against Ukraine. The reckless actions of
the Russian military forces in Ukraine have already
demonstrated their utter disregard for nuclear safety
and security, including in their violent, illegal seizure
and occupation of the Zaporizhzhya facility. Their
actions raise real fears of a significant radiological,
chemical or biological accident in Ukraine.
Director General Grossi previously set out the basic
principles of nuclear safety and security that should be
respected. We call on Russia, and indeed all States, to
commit themselves — in all circumstances, including
in situations of armed conflict — to these seven pillars
of nuclear safety and security in relation to peaceful
nuclear facilities and materials.
While we are meeting in this Chamber today, in
other parts of this building, delegations are gathered
for the Review Conference of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). The
NPT forms the cornerstone of the international nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation architecture.
Russia’s actions in Ukraine risk undermining all three
pillars of work under that important Treaty. We urge
the Russian Federation not to violate or undermine
such essential multilateral instruments, upon which our
collective security depends.
In calling for today’s discussion, Russia seeks
to avoid its responsibilities and distract from what is
really happening due to its unjustified and unprovoked
war on Ukraine. We again urge the Russian Federation
to stop using the Security Council to try to advance
its disinformation campaigns. If Russia is serious about
safety at the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant, what it
needs to do is clear. It must end its illegal occupation of
the site and withdraw its troops and munitions so that
the Ukrainian authorities, with the IAEA, can uphold
their responsibilities for safety and security at the site.
The IAEA Board of Governors has set out the same in a
resolution adopted at its special session in March.
22-45875

11/08/2022

Threats to international peace and security

Finally, Ireland again calls on Russia to end its
brutal war against the Ukrainian people, withdraw
its troops from the entire internationally recognized
territory of Ukraine and respect the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of its neighbours.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I thank Director
General Grossi for briefing us once again on the
situation in Ukraine.
The United Kingdom remains deeply concerned
about the ongoing impacts of Russia’s illegal invasion
of Ukraine and, in the context of today’s meeting,
its effects on nuclear safety. The Security Council
discussed Russia’s reckless actions at Ukrainian nuclear
facilities, including in Chornobyl and Zaporizhzhya,
at the start of the invasion. On 3 March, the Board of
Governors of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) adopted a resolution calling for Russia to cease
all actions against and at all nuclear facilities in Ukraine
so that the competent Ukrainian authorities could regain
full control and ensure their safe and secure operation
and the IAEA could resume its important safeguards
verification activities.
Now, more than five months later, Russia’s control
of the Zaporizhzhya plant continues. The competent
Ukrainian authorities and IAEA inspectors are still
prevented from properly carrying out their essential
duties. As Director General Grossi said, Russia’s actions
have violated almost all of his seven pillars of nuclear
safety and security. Russia’s actions are contrary to
the principles of the Convention on Nuclear Safety and
other international nuclear safety conventions and put
in jeopardy the safety of millions who would be affected
by a nuclear incident in Ukraine. In the light of that,
and despite Russia’s continued lies and obfuscation in
the Chamber about its brutal and irresponsible assault,
we should be clear: it is Russia’s continued invasion
and military presence that put the plant at risk, thereby
endangering the local population, the wider region and
the entire international community.
We welcome Director General Grossi’s efforts
to strengthen nuclear safety and security in Ukraine
in challenging circumstances, as well as the tireless,
heroic efforts of Ukrainian nuclear facilities’ staff,
despite the immense pressure they are under. We
reiterate our call for IAEA inspectors to be permitted
access to all nuclear facilities in Ukraine to address
nuclear safety, security and safeguards concerns in a
manner that respects Ukraine’s sovereignty over its
territory and infrastructure. In that regard, we note

S/PV.9109

with appreciation Foreign Minister Kuleba’s letter to
Mr. Grossi and the Secretary-General on the issue. We
once again call on Russia to immediately withdraw its
forces from Ukraine and return full control of all of
Ukraine’s nuclear facilities to their rightful, sovereign
owner to ensure their safe and secure operation.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.
I thank Director General Grossi for his briefing.
China has been closely following the issue of
safety and security at the nuclear facilities in Ukraine
and is deeply concerned about the recent attack on
the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant. According to
the information obtained by the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) from Ukraine’s nuclear
regulator, the attack did not pose an immediate
threat to nuclear safety, and radiation levels remained
normal. Nevertheless, the attack damaged the physical
integrity of the plant, its safety and security system
and power supply. It also posed a threat to the safety
of plant personnel and sounded a nuclear alarm to the
international community.
The safety and security of nuclear sites must
not be subject to trial and error. The Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant is one of the largest in Europe. If
a large-scale accident were to occur at that plant, the
consequences would be more devastating than those
of the Fukushima nuclear accident. The leakage of
massive quantities of radioactive material caused by the
Fukushima nuclear disaster and the resulting nuclearcontaminated water had far-reaching consequences,
including repercussions for the marine environment,
food safety and human health, thereby sparking
widespread interest and concern. China does not
want to see the same risks being incurred again. We
therefore call on the parties concerned to exercise
restraint, act with caution, refrain from any action that
may compromise nuclear safety and security and spare
no effort to minimize the possibility of accidents.
China has always supported the IAEA’s active
role in promoting nuclear safety and security and in
performing its safeguards duties in strict accordance
with its mandate. We note that Director General Grossi
and the IAEA team of experts have planned to visit the
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant. Secretary-General
Guterres has also issued an appeal to that end. Russia
has undertaken to provide the necessary assistance

22-4587515/19

S/PV.9109

Threats to international peace and security

to facilitate the visit. We are also aware that, in its
letter dated 9 August to Director General Grossi and
Secretary-General Guterres, Ukraine underscored
the increasing need to organize that visit. We hope
that the current obstacles will be removed as soon as
possible so that the mission by Director General Grossi
and the IAEA team of experts can take place without
delay and that they will be able to conduct their work
without impediment.
The crisis in Ukraine has been dragging on for more
than five months. The security risks to nuclear facilities
posed by the conflict loom large. Only by defusing
the situation and restoring peace as soon as possible
will we be able to eliminate nuclear risks, reduce
miscalculation and avoid accidents. Once again, we call
on all parties concerned to resume negotiations as soon
as possible, seek a solution to the crisis in Ukraine in
a calm and rational manner and address each other’s
legitimate security concerns through a balanced,
effective and sustainable security architecture with a
view to achieving common security.
It is China’s consistent position that the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations
should be upheld. State sovereignty and territorial
integrity must be respected. We call upon all parties
in the international community to act responsibly to
facilitate an appropriate solution to the crisis and step
up political and diplomatic efforts in order to create the
conditions for the parties to return to the negotiating
table. China will continue to play a constructive role in
that regard.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Today, once again, none of our Western
colleagues decided to call a spade a spade by recognizing
that it is the armed forces of Ukraine that are recklessly
shelling the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant. From
what has been said, it would seem that Russia alone
has created risks there. So then what is the meaning
of the Ukrainian armed forces’ shelling of a nuclear
power plant? Is it a response to risks created by Russia?
That is surreal and faulty logic, but we are certainly not
surprised. For six months now we have seen not just
a disinformation war unleashed against us but a war
of lies.
16/19

11/08/2022

Our Western colleagues have long chosen what
they believe to be a perfect tactic when discussing
Ukraine-related topics — a coordinated effort to blame
Russia for everything that is happening within the zone
of hostilities, categorically rejecting any possibility,
even a hypothetical one, that Kyiv might bear any guilt,
as happened with the provocations in Bucha and Irpin
and in Kramatorsk.
Incidentally, why have references to the events in
Kramatorsk disappeared from the radar? More than
50 people were killed in the railway station there by
a multiple-launch rocket-system strike. I will tell you
why — because the station was hit by a Ukrainian
Grad rocket launcher, and the rockets had a Ukrainian
military serial number. That is irrefutable. The recent
report issued by Amnesty International, hardly a proRussian organization, confirmed what we have been
saying at every meeting on Ukraine since the beginning
of the special military operation, which is that the
armed forces of Ukraine and Ukrainian nationalist
battalions are using the civilian population as human
shields and residential buildings as firing points, as
well as deploying heavy weaponry and artillery in the
vicinity of hospitals, schools and kindergartens.
Look at the indignation it caused in the West —
how dare Amnesty International blame the Ukrainians
for anything? To paraphrase a well-known proverb,
when it comes to talking about Kyiv, either say
something nice or say nothing at all. In practice, that
means that Kyiv continues to be given carte blanche
to commit any crimes at all. Instead of calling a spade
a spade, we see glaring double standards and miracles
of resourcefulness orchestrated so that not a shadow
of responsibility is attributed to Kyiv, although it is
obviously guilty of this shelling. That is irresponsibility
in action, an inability to assume responsibility for
global problems if it does not jibe with the West’s
narrow mercantile geopolitical interests.
In the case of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant,
we have seen how the Western version of events has
played out in Western minds, whereby the responsibility
for shelling the Zaporizhzhya plant is of course Russia’s.
We heard it in the awkward statements today. With the
small exception of the especially zealous supporters,
today we were spared those nonsensical allegations,
which were too absurd for the respectable adults in this
Chamber, but we are shocked by the irresponsibility
of Europe’s political elites, who in their irrational and
unconditional support of Kyiv are willing to jeopardize
22-45875

11/08/2022

Threats to international peace and security

the safety of their own citizens. We might wonder if
they have any common sense.
We call on our colleagues to convey to their leaders
the need to influence the Kyiv regime and force it to
stop its irrational strikes on the Zaporizhzhya nuclear
power plant, which is essentially turning the residents
of European States into hostages, and our colleagues
are among those who bear responsibility for that.
We note with regret that the Secretariat is not able
to give a sober assessment of the situation. We hear
statements, including from the Secretary-General,
that “the plant may be subjected to attacks or may
be a basis for the launching of attacks”, and he calls
for it to be demilitarized. Russia is not using civilian
infrastructure, not to mention nuclear facilities, for
that purpose. That is a tactic of the Ukrainian armed
forces, who, in violation of the norms of international
humanitarian law, are setting up military positions in
close proximity to civilian infrastructure and using
civilians as human shields.
As I already mentioned, Russian soldiers, in close
coordination with the plant’s staff, are ensuring the
protection of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant
and are repelling the Kyiv regime’s attacks every day.
Thanks to their efforts, it has so far been possible to
protect the plant’s key infrastructure in order to prevent
a nuclear catastrophe.
We know what the Kyiv regime is capable of, and
the world has witnessed it as well. Those who are calling
for the withdrawal of Russian forces should realize the
consequences of the facility being left unprotected and
being potentially used by Kyiv and nationalist groups
for their utterly monstrous provocations.
The President (spoke in Chinese): The
representative of the United States of America has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Ms. Jenkins (United States of America): I will be
brief. I do not really want to repeat everything that I
said before. I just want to again appeal to Russia to end
its seizure of the Zaporizhzhya power plant and return
control of the facility to the Government of Ukraine. We
will then see how quickly civility returns to the facility.
The President (spoke in Chinese): The
representative of the United Kingdom has asked for the
floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I will also be
brief. Let us call a spade a spade and be very clear:

S/PV.9109

there would be no risk to nuclear safety without the
illegal invasion of Ukraine by Russia. That invasion
has cost countless civilian lives, and this incident at the
nuclear facility is precisely because Russia carried out
that invasion.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I recognize the
representative of terrorist Russia in the permanent seat
of the Soviet Union.
Just half a year ago, one could hardly imagine a
situation where the biggest nuclear power station in
Europe would be seized following an armed attack by
tanks and artillery, backed by military personnel and
weaponry, which is now being used to shell Ukrainian
cities and villages across the Dnipro River.
It is a matter of alarm that, in order to divert
attention from those practices, Russia has resorted
to dangerous provocations, the staged shelling of the
nuclear power plant itself. The Russians are well known
for their elaborate plans of deceit, sabotage and coverups, like the one we witnessed today.
A conclusion one may draw from today’s torrent
of deception by the Russian envoy is that, when they
realized that their plan had collapsed like a house of
cards, Russia decided to go for broke and call this
meeting. That call looks especially cynical considering
their most recent attack on the facility earlier today,
which directly endangered both the plant facilities and
its personnel.
I would like to thank Director General Grossi for
his briefing. He has provided us with a comprehensive
update on the current situation that makes it clear that
the only way to ultimately remove the nuclear threats
due to the illegal Russian presence at the nuclear power
plant is the withdrawal of the Russian troops and the
return of the station to the legitimate control of Ukraine.
Ukraine highly appreciates the efforts of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and the
United Nations to ensure the safety and security of
the Ukrainian nuclear facilities against the backdrop
of the Russian invasion. The Zaporizhzhya nuclear
power plant has been occupied since 4 March, with its
personnel working at gunpoint. Ukraine has been in
close consultation with the IAEA about the matter. We
have always underlined the importance of the Agency’s
full and consistent implementation of its mandate.

22-4587517/19

S/PV.9109

Threats to international peace and security

In that regard, since the beginning of Russia’s
occupation of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant,
Ukraine has insisted on the need to send a mission to
the site, and negotiated its modalities with the Agency.
We therefore deeply regret that such a visit has not yet
taken place due to the destructive Russian position.
Despite their public declarations, the occupiers have
resorted to manipulation and unjustified conditions for
the mission’s visit, as well as shelling the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant and Enerhodar, thereby making the
visit impossible so far.
We strongly reject the attempts by Russia to escape
responsibility for the delay by blaming Ukraine, the
Secretary-General and the Secretariat, as was the
case not only today but also with the Russian Foreign
Ministry statement of 9 August. That prompted
Ukraine’s Foreign Minister, Mr. Kuleba, to reiterate
the extreme importance of conducting the Agencyled international mission to the site in his letter to the
Agency’s Director General and the Secretary-General,
sent on 9 August.
We welcome the readiness of the IAEA Director
General, expressed during this briefing, to send the
mission, led by the Agency, to the occupied Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant, which should be conducted in strict
compliance with the national legislation of Ukraine
and with full respect for its international obligations.
We stand ready to provide the mission with all the
necessary assistance and to facilitate its travel through
Ukrainian-controlled territory.
Let it be known that the distance between the
Ukrainian-controlled bank of the Dnipro River and
the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant, which is on
the opposite side of the river, is five miles, be it from
Nikopol or Marhanets. If Russia stops shelling those
cities, what in the world will prevent the mission from
covering those five miles?
In the light of the continued militarization of the
site of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant by the
Russian armed forces, its shelling and subsequent
damage to, and mining of, certain areas of the site, it
is imperative that such a mission have qualified experts
in the military dimension. That can be achieved by
including those experts in the mission team. Ukraine
also sees much added value in drawing upon relevant
and extensive United Nations political expertise. United
Nations representatives will be able to make a significant
contribution to the preparation of the mission’s final
report, thereby outlining the military dimension of
18/19

11/08/2022

the critical threats and challenges to nuclear safety,
security and safeguards at the Zaporizhzhya plant site,
stemming from its occupation and militarization by
Russian armed forces.
It is absolutely clear that the provocative Russian
practices of shelling the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power
plant and the city of Enerhodar pose an unprecedented
threat to nuclear security for Ukraine, Europe and the
world as a whole. Russia must strictly abide by the
laws and customs of war, including those relating to
nuclear facilities.
The shelling that took place on 6 August sheds light
on how those provocations are arranged. In particular,
the Russian occupants present at the site at the time
of the shelling — in total, about 500 soldiers — and
representatives of the Rosatom State Atomic Energy
Corporation took shelter in advance, before the shelling
began, while the local employees were wounded. It
also speaks volumes that Russian military hardware,
deployed at the nuclear power plant, was hidden in
the power houses at the first and second reactors. The
shelling damaged three radiation-monitoring detectors
at the dry spent-fuel storage facility site, which made
early detection and a timely response in the event of
the deterioration of the radiological situation or release
of radiation from the spent-fuel containers impossible.
On 7 August, Russian armed forces again resorted
to shelling the Zaporizhzhya plant site and damaged the
750-kilowatt overhead power line of the Zaporizhzhya
plant Kakhovska substation. As a result of the shelling,
a safety trip switch was activated at one of the power
units. Currently, that power unit is being cooled down.
Consequently, there is only one remaining direction
of power delivery at the Zaporizhzhya plant. Should
that last line be damaged, the Zaporizhzhya plant will
be totally without power. Russian plans regarding
the Zaporizhzhya plant aim to disconnect it from the
energy system of Ukraine and cut off electricity in the
south of the country.
Earlier, the Russian occupiers also mined the
Zaporizhzhya plant outside the cooling pond and the
banks of Kakhovska reservoir, which borders the plant.
Moreover, Russian armed forces are using the plant as
cover for shelling the Ukrainian-controlled cities located
on the opposite side of the Dnipro River, especially
Marhanets and Nikopol, with multiple-launch rocket
systems. Under such circumstances, the Ukrainian
personnel of the Zaporizhzhya plant continue to do
22-45875

11/08/2022

Threats to international peace and security

their best to ensure nuclear and radiation safety, as well
as to mitigate the consequences of the Russian shelling.
Let me underline that the Russian actions at and
against the Zaporizhzhya plant completely violate
practically all seven indispensable nuclear safety and
security pillars outlined by the Director General at the
meeting of the Agency’s Board of Governors on 2 March.
We demand that Russia fully implement the resolution
of the Agency Board of Governors entitled “The safety,
security and safeguards implications of the situation
in Ukraine”, dated 3 March. Russia must immediately
cease all actions against nuclear facilities in Ukraine
and return control over all seized nuclear facilities to
the Ukrainian side. The international community must
continue to put political pressure on the aggressor
State of Russia and demand the full and unconditional
de-occupation of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant.
Ensuring the safety and security of the nuclear facility
cannot be seen as a goodwill gesture. It is the duty of
an occupying Power, in accordance with international
humanitarian law.
Now, let me explain it to the Russian ambassador
in the simplest way, step by step, in a way that even a
school kid could understand. First, Russia must state
loud and clear that it will allow an IAEA-led mission
to take place immediately and unconditionally, and
that it will not obstruct the mission across the river,
five miles from plant. Secondly, Russia must demine
the facilities of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant.
Thirdly, Russia must remove its military personnel
and withdraw its weaponry. Fourthly, it must stop
playing games.
None of us can stop the wind if it carries radiation,
but together we are capable of stopping a terrorist State.
And the sooner we stop Russia, the sooner Europe and
the world will be able to feel safe again.
The President (spoke in Chinese): The
representative of the Russian Federation has asked for
the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I do not plan to engage in a polemic with a
representative of the Kyiv regime and react to the stream
of conscience and lies that he shared with us today.
On the subject of the mission of the International
Atomic Energy Agency, which was interrupted by Kyiv,
I would suggest that Council members look again at our
statement, which says everything very clearly.

S/PV.9109

I would like to draw attention to something else,
namely, that the representative of the Kyiv regime is the
only one at today’s meeting who said that it was Russia
that shelled the power station that is under its control in
the city of Enerhodar, which is also home to the plant’s
staff. Even the backers of Kyiv ruled out saying this. For
the record, I would like to draw the Council’s attention
to this statement by the Ukrainian side.
The President (spoke in Chinese): Before
concluding the meeting, I now give the floor to
Mr. Grossi to make a brief statement.
Mr. Grossi: I thank the President for giving me
the opportunity to make a succinct closing statement.
I want to thank all members of the Council for their
statements, which are very important for us at the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), as they
help us to understand even better how they see things.
Of course, it is not our remit to get into the political
considerations, and we recognize the obvious differences
that exist. But there is something very important that
I at least personally take from this meeting. There is
a common denominator in the Chamber in New York:
everybody agrees that nuclear safety and security must
be preserved; everybody agrees and supports the seven
pillars of nuclear safety and security; and everybody
believes that the IAEA mission must take place. It is
therefore no longer a matter of “if”; it is only a matter of
“when”. And the “when” must be “as soon as possible”.
It is only the “how” that needs to be addressed. As I
indicated in my initial briefing, I am consulting — and
I will be intensifying my consultations — with Ukraine
and with the Russian Federation. Of course, the United
Nations, through the United Nations Department for
Safety and Security, has been involved in all of this,
with a view to having the IAEA conduct a mission that
is so badly needed.
Of course, after that, or at any other moment, I will
be at the disposal of the Security Council to continue
briefing on our function and on our mission to support
Ukraine at this important hour and to restore complete
safety and security to all the facilities in the country.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank Mr. Grossi
for his clarifications and additional comments.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 4.55 p.m.

22-4587519/19
