S/PV.7684

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7684

th meeting
Friday, 29 April 2016, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Liu Jieyi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Yoshikawa
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Seck
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Power
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation concerning Western Sahara
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation concerning Western Sahara
(S/2016/355)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-12217 (E)
*1612217*

S/PV.7684

The situation concerning Western Sahara

The meeting was called to order at 11.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Western Sahara
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation concerning Western Sahara
(S/2016/355)
The President (spoke in Chinese): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2016/401, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by United States of America.
I wish to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/2016/355, which contains
the report of the Secretary-General on the situation
concerning Western Sahara.
The Council is ready to proceed to a vote on the
draft resolutions before it. I shall first put the draft
resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
China, Egypt, France, Japan, Malaysia, Senegal,
Spain, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland and United States of America
Against:
Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)

29/04/2016

MINURSO plays an indispensable role in preserving
and ensuring safety and security in Western Sahara and
must continue to do so until a just, lasting and mutually
acceptable political solution that will provide for the
self-determination of the people of Western Sahara is
achieved. We thank members of the Security Council
and those in the Group of Friends of Western Sahara
for their support in concluding the negotiations on the
MINURSO mandate renewal and adopting the resolution
today in advance of the mandate’s expiration tomorrow.
As we all know, this year’s mandate renewal was
challenging and contentious. That is an understatement.
It is taking place against a backdrop of significant
uncertainty for the Mission, with the removal of civilian
staff, including the Mission’s political component,
rendering MINURSO incapable of fully functioning
and fulfilling its mandate. Civilian staff provide
essential support of the Mission’s operations. UnderSecretary-General Ladsous has made abundantly clear
that the current conditions in which MINURSO is
striving to do its job are unsustainable.
It is important that Morocco and the United
Nations have a constructive relationship. In fact, it is
absolutely necessary if the United Nations-led process,
which we all support, is to bring about a peaceful,
sustainable and mutually agreed solution to the conflict
in Western Sahara. To that end, it is critically important
that continued engagement between Morocco and
the United Nations leads to resolving the challenges
facing MINURSO and to restoring MINURSO to
full functionality.

I shall now give the floor to those members of
the Council who wish to make statements following
the voting.

The policy of the United States regarding Western
Sahara has not changed. We consider Morocco’s
autonomy plan serious, realistic and credible. It
represents a potential approach that could satisfy
the self-determination aspirations of the people of
Western Sahara. At the same time, the United States
believes that we — and by “we” I mean not only our
Government but also the Security Council — have a
responsibility to protect the integrity of the mandates
that we authorize and to ensure the effectiveness and
safety of peacekeeping personnel worldwide, including
those serving in MINURSO.

Ms. Power (United States of America): The United
States supports the Security Council’s adoption of
the resolution 2285 (2016), which renews for another
year the mandate of the United Nations Mission for
the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO).

The Security Council must respond swiftly and
proactively in any situation in which a Government
requires the staff from a United Nations peacekeeping
mission immediately to depart. Our goal has been and
remains securing a return to the full functionality of

Abstaining:
Angola, New Zealand and Russian Federation
The President (spoke in Chinese): There were 10
votes in favour, 2 votes against and 3 abstentions. The
draft resolution has been adopted as resolution 2285
(2016).

2/13

16-12217

29/04/2016

The situation concerning Western Sahara

the MINURSO mission as soon as possible so that it
can fulfil the mandate given to it by the Council. We
consider the civilian component, including the political
reporting function, to be a crucial part of that mandate.
Resolution 2285 (2016) provides an important signal
from the Council and a realistic path to achieving that
necessary return to full functionality.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): It was with
great disappointment that New Zealand abstained
today. This was the first time during our current term
on the Security Council that we have not supported the
adoption of a Council resolution.
It should not have been like this. It should have
been possible to maintain the tradition of consensus on
this important issue. We thank the United States for its
determined efforts to that end. But consensus implies
a meeting of minds and common commitment. Those
elements have not been a feature of the preparation of this
resolution. Rather, we have seen, again, the preparation
of a text in a Group of Friends whose composition does
not reflect the span of perspectives that exists on the
Western Sahara, neither among the protagonists on
this issue nor on the Council, and an unwillingness to
accept modest amendments on a text that deals with an
issue of importance to the whole Council, indeed to the
whole United Nations membership.
In New Zealand’s view, today’s resolution falls
short of what the Council should be doing to discharge
properly its responsibilities on the Western Sahara.
A resolution that truly reflected the gravity of the
current crisis over the United Nations Mission for
the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO) and
the magnitude of the challenge inherent in the full
discharge of the MINURSO mandate should have done
the following things.
First, the resolution should have stated the reality
that the expulsion of the civilian component had
seriously compromised the Mission and its ability to
discharge its mandate. These facts have been repeatedly
stated by the Secretariat in its briefings to the Council
over the past month.
Secondly, the resolution should have called for
the immediate restoration of the full functionality of
the Mission and provided for the Council’s continued
engagement to ensure that a return to full functionality
is achieved in the near future.

S/PV.7684

Thirdly, on the core political direction of the
mandate, the Council should have taken up the sensible
and appropriate advice of the Secretary-General,
reiterated in this week’s consultations by the Personal
Envoy of the Secretary-General, Christopher Ross,
and Under-Secretary-General Hervé Ladsous, that
the time had come to engage in serious negotiations
without preconditions and in good faith to reach a
mutually acceptable political solution that would
provide for the self-determination of the people
of Western Sahara. And that mutually acceptable
solution should include the resolution of the dispute
over the status of Western Sahara, including through
agreement on the nature and form of the exercise of
self-determination. As Mr. Ladsous told the Council
quite categorically on Wednesday (see S/PV.7679), we
can no longer procrastinate in addressing these deep
underlying issues.
MINURSO fulfils an essential function, and its
inability to fulfil its mandate risks fuelling further
instability in an already troubled region. The Council
must provide the full weight of its support to the
Mission. Notwithstanding our abstention, New Zealand
reiterates its full support for MINURSO, its mandate,
the Secretary-General, his Personal Envoy and
Special Representative.
Finally, in our view, every member of the Security
Council must reflect on the broader implications of
the current episode over MINURSO’s deployment
for the Council’s stewardship of its peacekeeping
operations globally.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela voted against the adoption of
resolution 2285 (2016), on the renewal of the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
(MINURSO), for substantive reasons and of procedure,
which have troubled us deeply. This entire process has
been characterized by a terrible lack of transparency,
which made it difficult for us to reach the shared goal
of consensus. The results of the voting this morning
constitute a clear message that a significant number of
the members of the Security Council see that there is a
clear fracture in the different positions held by Council
members on how to resolve this issue.
First of all, I should like to point out that the
discussion of this issue was preceded by a series
of events that shaped the way this matter would be

16-122173/13

S/PV.7684

The situation concerning Western Sahara

dealt with in the Security Council. Let us recall that,
on 18 November 2015, we asked for an “Any other
business” discussion in the Security Council in the face
of the serious difficulties that Ambassador Christopher
Ross, Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General, had to
confront in order to carry out his diplomatic work in
the territory. At that time, Venezuela warned against
that attempt on the part of one of the parties — the
Moroccan side — to impede the work of the Special
Envoy. But it was not possible to count on the backing
of the Security Council in the light of our concern,
which foresaw a conflicting situation with regard to
the Council’s mandate. Similarly, when the SecretaryGeneral tried on various occasions to visit Western
Sahara, he faced many obstacles by the Government
of Morocco, which set preconditions and reservations.
My country asked the Council for us to express our
support for the Secretary-General in carrying out his
duties. However, it was not possible to come up with
any elements, not even for the press, on the Council’s
support for the Secretary-General. Finally, following
the Secretary-General’s visit to the Western Sahara
territories, and given that the terrible, unprecedented
number of impediments he encountered in carrying out
his duties, Venezuela once again asked for a Security
Council analysis of the situation and a statement from the
Council, which were also not possible. In other words,
the Council was not able to anticipate a situation such
as the one produced later on by Morocco’s expulsion of
the civilian component of the United Nations Mission
for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO).
In that regard, the Security Council has been
subject to a great deal of pressure on the part of some
of its members, as well as an incredible amount of
pressure by Morocco, so that we are not able to meet
the responsibilities entrusted to us to prevent conflicts
such as the latent one in the region of Western Sahara.
Following the expulsion of the MINURSO civilian
component, already a month ago, the Council was also
incapable of expressing its position in rejection of this
unprecedented situation precipitated by a country that
ought to embrace, protect and facilitate the fulfilment
of the mandate of a peacekeeping mission.
Previously, we also expressed our deep annoyance
and disappointment that it was not possible, as is the
practice in other cases, for the closed consultations on
this issue to be preceded by a briefing to the Security
Council, which would have made it possible to hear, here
in Hall and before the entire international community,
4/13

29/04/2016

the views of the Head of MINURSO, Ms. Kim Bolduc,
and of Special Envoy Christopher Ross, as well as
those of former President Joaquim Chissano, Special
Envoy of the African Union for Western Sahara. Let
us recall that last year when we voted on and adopted
the resolution on MINURSO (see S/PV.7435) we asked
that former President Chissano, who is a hero of Africa
and decolonization processes, could take the floor.
That was not possible, however, because, once again,
members of the Security Council blocked it.
All of this is to say that this process was preceded
by a host of impediments, irregularities and situations
that have served to create a state of absolute lack of
transparency. Most serious of all, as we see it, is that
with so many actions the effort has been to change de
facto — as has happened on the ground — the mandate
of MINURSO. Without its civilian component,
MINURSO simply cannot take the necessary steps
to carry out the referendum, which is in fact the
mandate the Security Council established. We should
remember that carrying out a referendum was what
allowed for agreement between the parties and for the
establishment of the ceasefire. The parties put their
trust in the Security Council, and the ceasefire has
been in place for 25 years to lead to a referendum. That
solution seems increasingly far off, given the intention,
in an arbitrary way and counter to the mandate of the
Council, to forget about the referendum as the solution
for the Sahraoui people.
Against that backdrop of clear contempt, last
Wednesday at 3.30 p.m. we were presented with a draft
resolution (see S/2016/401). Apparently, it had been
discussed in the Group of Friends. However, the rest
of the members did not have access to it. Thanks to the
efforts made by the President of the Security Council, it
was possible to extend its consideration for an additional
day. Yesterday was held the first and only substantive
meeting to discuss the matter, which did not in fact lead
to achieving consensus.
Moreover, the text before us, which was adopted at
resolution 2285 (2016), does not address the legitimate
concerns and proposals of several of the countries with
an interest in this important issue, including Venezuela.
The resolution ignores the current situation on the
ground, which has been the subject of various closed
meetings of the Council and which has produced deep
concern among Member States. It is not enough to
bemoan the situation with MINURSO, as the resolution
does; rather, it should have emphatically condemned
16-12217

29/04/2016

The situation concerning Western Sahara

Morocco’s unilateral expulsion of international staff
and demanded their immediate return. A Security
Council document that is not capable of stating clearly
who expelled MINURSO’s civilian contingent, or
why, is a text that aims to intentionally ignore the
reality in Western Sahara. We believe we have lost an
outstanding opportunity for the Security Council to
express, via this resolution, its absolute disagreement
with the expulsion of MINURSO’s civilian personnel,
which constitutes not just a harsh blow for the political
negotiating process but also a lamentable precedent for
the international community.
In addition, our attention was starkly drawn to the
fact that the resolution does include any measures to
ensure the return of MINURSO’s civilian staff to the
area of operations. Regrettably, we must state that had
this involved a weaker country without the right allies
in the Council, the Security Council would not have
hesitated to impose severe sanctions, as it often does
with many brotherly African countries. We are sending
a message to the international community that is
possible to violate the decisions of the Security Council
without consequence for Member States. It was not even
possible to include a provision in the resolution aimed
at setting a 30-day period for a periodic consideration
of this issue by the Security Council. As provided by
the resolution adopted, it will be 90 days before the
Secretary-General, who by then will be about to be
replaced, informs the Security Council as to what
has happened with MINURO’s civilian staff. And it
should be noted that will be only to “inform”, and no
concrete actions are foreseen. This seems paradoxical:
MINURSO’s entire essential component having been
expelled, in just 72 hours, the Council does not have the
will to meet once per month to look into developments
in the situation on the ground. What is more, the
text of the resolution does not even take up the just
aspirations of the Sahraoui population, which for more
than 40 years have lived in a territory under a pending
decolonization process, or the existing concerns with
regard to protecting the human rights in Western Sahara
while taking into account the recommendations made
by the Secretary-General in his report (S/2016/355).
We believe that the status quo with regard to
Western Sahara is already unsustainable. It is for that
reason that the ambiguous language of the resolution
sends a negative signal and reflects a disheartening
message. We should not forget that MINURSO’s
mandate was first set out in resolution 690 (1991),

S/PV.7684

which urged the Mission to make every effort to pursue
a just and lasting solution by undertaking a referendum
on the self-determination of the Sahraoui people. It
is that people who should choose between autonomy
and independence.
It is essential that, in dealing with the issue of
Western Sahara, the Council should act with authority,
determination and transparency, and in accordance
with international law. We are facing a situation
in which the Security Council is at risk of failing to
fulfil its mandate, and it will now be very difficult to
comply with Article 24 of the Charter of the United
Nations, which confers the primary responsibility on
the Council for the maintenance of international peace
and security on behalf of Member States. In the past,
there have been serious deficiencies in that regard,
including cases where the permanent members of the
Council have violated the Charter. Such violations of
the international rule of law must end and the Council
must live up to its responsibilities.
If the people of Western Sahara are not guaranteed
the right to determine their own future and the
Kingdom of Morocco is allowed to continue to occupy
the territory, it will be the first time since the founding
of the United Nations that the international community
accepts de facto that a non-self-governing territory,
recognized as being in the decolonization process,
would be forcibly annexed without the people’s consent.
The
Bolivarian
Republic
of
Venezuela
recognizes and supports MINURSO’s important
role in overseeing the ceasefire, reducing the threat
of mines and unexploded ordnance and promoting
confidence-building measures between the parties with
the aim of holding the referendum, which represents its
principal mandate. Our vote against today’s resolution in
no way means that we deny the significant efforts being
made by the civilian and other personnel of MINURSO,
who even in extremely difficult conditions are trying to
do their jobs on the ground. Nor are we ignoring the
Secretary-General’s efforts to mediate and facilitate,
and he has our full support in that regard, as does his
Personal Envoy Christopher Ross and Ms. Bolduc, in
holding direct talks in good faith between the parties to
the conflict. MINURSO should continue to cooperate
and to immediately re-establish its operational and
political capacities in order to ensure that it can fulfil
its mandate, so as to deal with the difficult situation
facing displaced and separated Sahrawi families and

16-122175/13

S/PV.7684

The situation concerning Western Sahara

enable them to live in dignity on the land that belongs
to them, in their own country.
The Security Council’s lack of action on such an
urgent and serious issue is unacceptable. We have said
that to other Council members in our closed meetings,
and we continue to condemn it and to refuse to validate
it. The situation regarding Morocco’s treatment of
MINURSO and its mandate is completely irregular
and has been validated in a weak Security Council
resolution, which we reject. With it, we have lost an
opportunity to send a strong message to the parties
demanding the restoration of MINURSO’s civilian
personnel, whose work we support and appreciate as the
only means ensuring the maintenance of the ceasefire
over the past 25 years and more. We also demand
that negotiations be resumed with a view to holding a
referendum on self-determination.
Lastly, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
regrets the fact that we have lost an opportunity to
reassert the Security Council’s responsibility to work
for a just solution when the people of Western Sahara
have been waiting for more than 40 years to be able
to overcome their situation, that of the last remaining
colony on our brotherly continent of Africa.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to applaud the persistent efforts of the United
States, which worked tirelessly to ensure that resolution
2285 (2016), which we just adopted, represented a
response adequate to the difficulties we have witnessed
in the past few weeks in relations between Morocco
and the Secretary-General regarding the issue of
Western Sahara and the United Nations Mission for
the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO). The
goal, after all, is to create the conditions conducive to
restoring an atmosphere conducive to calm and to the
proper functioning of MINURSO, to which we are all
very committed.
Thanks to the decision we have just taken,
MINURSO’s mandate has been renewed for a year and
for the entire Mission. That could be crucial, since the
Mission does essential work on the ground, and I would
like to commend the work of the Ms. Kim Bolduc,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Western Sahara, Mr. Christopher Ross, Personal Envoy
of the Secretary-General, and the Secretary-General
himself. They have all contributed within their areas
of responsibility to ensuring that the ceasefire is
maintained and to advancing the situation towards a
6/13

29/04/2016

settlement of the dispute, which is so necessary to the
people of Western Sahara and to the stability, security
and prosperity of the region, which is in any case
facing major security challenges. As a result, France
will continue to support the political process, led by the
United Nations and aimed at making progress towards a
just, lasting and mutually acceptable political solution,
in accordance with international law and the relevant
Security Council resolutions.
On the substance of the issues, France believes
that the plan for autonomy presented by Morocco
in 2007 represents a serious and credible basis for a
negotiated solution. Now that the mandate has been
renewed, steps must be taken as quickly as possible to
enable MINURSO’s mandate to be fully implemented,
and specifically resolving the issue of its personnel,
particularly the civilian component, which in the past
few weeks has been the subject of discussion between
Morocco and the Secretary-General. For its part, the
Council should continue to follow the issue actively
and to work to establish a climate of trust and positive
momentum conducive to political negotiations, the
responsibility for which lies in the United Nations with
the Secretary-General and his Personal Envoy. France
will continue to support every effort in that regard.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Spain voted in favour of today’s resolution 2285 (2016).
We heartily commend the efforts of the United States
as facilitator and other members of the Security
Council for their work. We are well aware of the
difficulties those negotiations presented. Spain would
have preferred that this year we could have once again
adopted the resolution unanimously in a demonstration
of the Council’s unity. Unfortunately, that has not been
the case.
Among other things, the role of the United Nations
Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
(MINURSO) is crucial to maintaining peace and
security in a strategic region. We believe that the text
of the resolution succeeded in achieving a balance
between the annual renewal, which in our view provides
necessary institutional stability, and appropriate followup on the part of the Security Council to ensure that
MINURSO is restored to full functionality and is in a
condition to comply fully with its mandate, as called
for in the resolution we have just adopted. It is time to
overcome this crisis. We encourage Morocco and the
Secretariat to intensify their contact and efforts.
16-12217

29/04/2016

The situation concerning Western Sahara

Beyond today’s mandate renewal, Spain believes
that the international community must focus its efforts
on helping the parties to reach a just, lasting and mutually
acceptable political solution that calls for the free selfdetermination of the people of Western Sahara within a
framework of provisions in line with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes the adoption of resolution 2285
(2016). Although the past few weeks have been
regrettable, today’s resolution must mark a turning point
in the urgent efforts to bring the United Nations Mission
for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO)
back to full functionality. MINURSO’s work, including
its vital civilian component and political reporting
function, is critical to the stability of Western Sahara.
Recent events have rendered it unable to deliver on its
mandate over the past six weeks.
Let me be clear. The Council has the responsibility
to protect the integrity of its peacekeeping missions
and to preserve their ability to implement their
mandate. MINURSO is no exception. In that regard,
resolution 2285 (2016), adopted today, contains two
important elements. First, it emphasizes the urgent
need for MINURSO to be returned to full functionality.
Secondly, it contains a review mechanism in the form
of a briefing by the Secretary-General within the next
90 days to ensure that that reinforcement happens and
an undertaking for the Council to consider how best
to achieve that outcome, if it is not fully functional.
In the meantime, we urge the resumption of productive
talks between Morocco and the United Nations, so that
the Council can be satisfied that MINURSO is again
fully functional.
Our collective focus must also return to the United
Nations process and to finding a lasting and mutually
acceptable political solution for Western Sahara, one
that provides for the self-determination of the people of
Western Sahara. The United Kingdom position on that
issue remains the same. The United Nations process
will continue to have our full support.
As Western Sahara illustrates, there are too many
intractable long-running disputes on the agenda of
the Council, so today we urge the parties to engage
constructively with each other and with the United
Nations process, so that together we can find a solution
and settle the question of Western Sahara once and for
all. Doing so is not only of the utmost importance to the

S/PV.7684

Western Saharan refugees, who continue to suffer from
the protracted dispute, but also for the security and
economic prosperity of all countries and all peoples in
the Maghreb region.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Ukraine voted today in
favour of resolution 2285 (2016), given its conviction
that the Council has to ensure that the United Nations
Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
(MINURSO) continues to conduct its operations,
which are vital for peace, stability and security in
Western Sahara. The resolution adopted is important,
not just for the sake of the continued work of the
Mission but for creating the proper environment and
providing the necessary impetus for a relaunch of the
political process so as to achieve a lasting and mutually
acceptable solution.
At the same time, we fully share the concerns, and
even the frustrations, of some Council members about
the current circumstances in which the Mission has
to operate. We therefore emphasize the urgent need
to restore the Mission’s full capabilities, including
political functions, as soon as possible.
We commend the Group of Friends of Western
Sahara for their efforts aimed at resolving the current
situation. Ukraine calls upon all parties to cooperate in
good faith with the operations of MINURSO and to take
the necessary steps to ensure the security, unhindered
movement and full freedom of access of the United
Nations and associated personnel in carrying out their
mandate in conformity with existing agreements.
In conclusion, I would like to express Ukraine’s
support for the United Nations efforts to find a solution
to the issue of Western Sahara.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I thank the Permanent
Mission of the United States for preparing the text of
resolution 2285 (2016), given the delicate circumstances
involved. Malaysia voted in favour of the resolution,
which renews the mandate of the United Nations Mission
for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO)
for another year and emphasizes the urgent need for
MINURSO to return to full functionality, as we are
mindful of the importance of preserving the integrity
and ability of MINURSO to fulfil its mandate as
stipulated in the Council’s resolutions.
The ongoing operation of MINURSO is
indispensable to stability and security in Western
Sahara. We reiterate Malaysia’s principal positions on

16-122177/13

S/PV.7684

The situation concerning Western Sahara

29/04/2016

the need to resolve conflicts through peaceful means,
as well as our firm commitment and support for United
Nations peacekeeping operations as a tool for the
maintenance of international peace and security. We
would like to underscore Malaysia’s continued support
for the efforts of MINURSO, as well as that of the
Secretary-General and his Personal Envoy, Ambassador
Christopher Ross, to achieve a just, lasting and mutually
acceptable political solution, which will provide for the
self-determination of the people of Western Sahara,
based on the relevant Security Council resolutions, as
well as on respect for the principles and purposes of the
Charter of the United Nations and international law. In
that regard, we would like to emphasize the importance
of full cooperation by all parties with the efforts of
the Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General and with
MINURSO in order to enable them to perform the tasks
mandated by the Council.

are deployed by the Council to carry out critical tasks
around the world to maintain international peace and
security. Given that the mandate of MINURSO was due
to expire on 30 April, many Member States, including
Japan, made strenuous efforts to address the situation.
It was a matter of priority for the Council to extend the
mandate of the Mission by tomorrow. At the same time,
it was also necessary to ensure that MINURSO returns
to full functionality as a matter of urgency.

Lastly, we would have hoped for a broad,
inclusive and transparent consultation process on
draft resolutions that would take into consideration the
legitimate concerns and views of all Council members.
Sufficient time for consultations would enable us to seek
clarity on the issues at hand, consider sensible options
and determine the guiding principles for consensusbuilding measures.

In the resolution, the Council requests to be
briefed within 90 days, but that does not mean that
we should wait 90 days to take action. Rather, in
the light of the urgency, efforts should be made to
recover full functionality in an expeditious manner. It
is the responsibility of the Council to ensure that its
resolutions, including this one, are fully implemented.
We look to the Kingdom of Morocco, an important
member of the international community, to continue its
utmost efforts to improve the situation in cooperation
with the United Nations. Japan stands ready to assist
such efforts in any way it can.

Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): Let me begin by
emphasizing the critical role that the United Nations
plays under the leadership of the Secretary-General,
his Personal Envoy and the Head of the Mission in
maintaining peace and security, as well as in promoting
mutual trust and achieving a political solution in
Western Sahara.
On the ground, the personnel of the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
(MINURSO) carry out important tasks mandated by
the Council. MINURSO has managed to continue its
operations with a limited capacity after the departure
of 73 of its personnel on 20 March. That continuity has
been possible solely owing to the dedicated efforts of
the remaining personnel of MINURSO, whom I wish
to commend.
On 24 March, members of the Security Council
expressed serious concerns about the developments
related to Western Sahara and therefore stressed
the importance of addressing the situation, so that
MINURSO might resume its full capacity to carry out its
mandate. Peacekeeping operations and other missions
8/13

Japan voted in favour of resolution 2285 (2016)
because it provides the answer to those priorities.
I would also like to express our appreciation to the
penholder, the United States, for its efforts in preparing
the draft resolution. A return to full functionality
should, in our view, include on-site political reporting
capabilities, so that MINURSO will be able to fully
carry out its mandate contained in the relevant Council
resolution, including the one we have just adopted.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the need for
lasting adherence to the ceasefire and the importance
of the continuation of negotiations towards a long
overdue political solution that will provide for the selfdetermination of the people of Western Sahara.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Egypt
voted in favour of resolution 2285 (2016), extending
the mandate of the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO) for a full
year, convinced as we are of the importance of the
role played by United Nations peacekeeping forces in
maintaining international peace and security, and our
role as a troop-contributor.
The region is facing several challenges that threaten
its people and threaten the existence of the States in
the region. Those are circumstances that should not be
further aggravated. In that context, since last March,
Egypt has called for a calm and balanced approach.
16-12217

29/04/2016

The situation concerning Western Sahara

That is the only way that the Council will be able to deal
with this matter. That position was reflected during the
negotiations on resolution 2285 (2016), adopted today.
The contents of the resolution are drafted well and in
a very careful and precise manner in order to convey
the situation in Western Sahara, and with a view to
settling the crisis there in accordance with the relevant
Council resolutions.
After having adopted this very important resolution,
which draws on lessons from past experience, and after
having prevented what could have become a large-scale
crisis, we must examine in a thorough and in-depth
manner the events that were set in motion on 7 March,
in addition to the events that followed and their causes.
We must learn lessons from the past in order to maintain
international peace and security. Furthermore, the
main lesson of the events of the past two months is
the danger of an explosion of conflicts that have been
left unresolved. We must reiterate the importance of
reaching, within the framework of Security Council
resolutions, a political settlement agreed to by all with
regard to Western Sahara.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): The Security
Council has just adopted resolution 2285 (2016) to
renew the mandate of the United Nations Mission
for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO).
Angola abstained in the voting for a number of reasons
that we would like to outline, the first of which was a
desire to reaffirm the expression of our political will
and hope that it is never too late to correct mistakes.
Angola, as a member of the African Union, is ready
and remains fully engaged with regard to the search for
a just solution for the people of Western Sahara. We
regret that every proposed amendment to the draft,
which were presented by a number of Member States,
including Angola, met outright rejection. Indeed, there
was no meaningful negotiation on this text. We made
constructive proposals that, in our view, addressed the
legitimate concerns of the international community but
were not given due consideration.
Although we welcome the request for briefings by
the Secretary-General at least twice a year, we deem
it imperative to shorten the reporting period. The
Security Council needs to be informed and constantly
updated on developments on the ground. We believe
that the current yearly report does not fit such a need,
although the period has been reduced. The situation is
too volatile, and the Council needs to remain seized.
It must never miss the opportunity to act, as it did

S/PV.7684

recently when unfortunate decisions that changed the
operation of the Mission were made. The decisions
made last month by one of the parties to the controversy
have entailed serious consequences for the Mission’s
ability to fulfil its mandate. The decision on staffing
has created a dangerous precedent for peacekeeping
missions around the world, and for the very reputation
of the Security Council, which is responsible for their
deployment and management. The resolution adopted
fails to address the situation with the seriousness and
engagement that it deserves. One of our colleagues this
morning referred to it as “significantly uncertain”.
We would like to underscore that the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation concerning Western
Sahara, dated 19 April, states that
“[w]ithout a suitable and fully staffed
international civilian component, the Mission
cannot fulfil a core component of its functions”
[and that] “the expulsion of most of the MINURSO
international civilian component ... can be expected
to be exploited by ... radical elements” (S/2016/355,
para. 93).
And the Council is quite aware of the fact that,
unfortunately, those radical elements are very much
present in the region. The resolution should have
requested the immediate return of MINURSO to full
functionality without preconditions. That is one of the
main reasons why we abstained in the voting earlier.
We believe that the Security Council should
assume its responsibilities and address the failing
parties by imposing appropriate measures as it has
done in similar cases before. Angola cannot support the
adoption of what we consider to be a biased resolution
that validates double standards. The resolution should
also have reaffirmed the mandate of MINURSO,
including its political mandate, which is to assist
the parties to achieve a just, lasting and mutually
acceptable political solution that will provide for the
self-determination of the people of Western Sahara. We
believe that MINURSO should also be given a human
rights mandate to monitor the human rights situation in
the territory, which is of great concern to members of
the Council.
In conclusion, Angola reaffirms its commitment
to continuing its constructive engagement in order to
support MINURSO’s activities, with its full capacity,
as mandated by the Security Council and in accordance

16-122179/13

S/PV.7684

The situation concerning Western Sahara

29/04/2016

with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.

will say that that text has been outpaced by events and
sends the wrong political message.

Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): The United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO), which
was set up by the Security Council and includes Russian
military observers, has played an extremely important
stabilizing role. Its work has been effective and has
allowed for the establishment of an environment that
is conducive to advancement towards a political
settlement of this long-standing issue, based on Security
Council resolutions.

However, we would particularly stress the fact
that we appreciate our good and historically friendly
relationships with countries in the region, including,
of course, Morocco, which are based on their
multidimensional plans for development and respect
and concern for each other’s interests. Concerning
the artificially exacerbated situation with regard to
MINURSO, we should not forget the key task, which is
to get a dialogue going between the parties, and that is of
fundamental importance to efforts to support security
and stability in that part of the world. In that regard, a
positive role could be played by the African Union.

The relevant Security Council resolutions clearly
set out that the form of the settlement must be acceptable
to the parties, Morocco and the Polisario Front, and
must provide for the self-determination of the people
of Western Sahara within the context of the procedures
and the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. Monitoring the ceasefire is one of
the key roles of the Mission; however, the political
component is also of considerable importance. Since no
one has changed the final goal, which was established
through international decisions, the parties must
realize that, without United Nations assistance, the
difficult path towards a mutually acceptable settlement
is unthinkable.
The situation concerning the Mission is, however, a
cause for deep concern. We know that specific steps are
being taken in order to diffuse the tension, but they have
not yielded the hoped-for result. The actions that have
been taken with regard to United Nations personnel may
negatively impact the situation in the region, and what
is very important for international peace and security,
namely, United Nations peacekeeping efforts, has been
made more difficult to implement. The confrontational
approach must be replaced by a responsible one based
on unconditional respect for Security Council decisions.
The work of the Mission must be fully re-established.
We need to bring all staff back to their responsibilities
as soon as possible, so that they can fulfil unhindered
the functions that have been assigned to them.
In our view, the text of resolution 2285 (2016),
which extends the mandate of the Mission for the next
12 months suffers from substantive shortcomings. We
were therefore unable to vote in favour of the resolution.
The ninth preambular paragraph mentions serious and
credible efforts to move the process forward towards a
solution. Everyone who is aware of the current situation
10/13

Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): With
Senegal’s vote in favour, the Security Council has
just adopted resolution 2285 (2016), renewing for a
period of 12 months the mandate of the United Nations
Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara, which
was to expire tomorrow on 30 April. It is assuredly a
balanced resolution, for which the delegation of Senegal
would like to commend the leadership demonstrated
by the United States of America in conducting the
consultations. It is the result of the constructive spirit
with which the members of the Council participated in
the process, allowing for the achievement of a text this
morning that entertains hope with regard to the political
process, the only way to resolve the issue.
Bearing in mind the important role played by the
United Nations in that process, as well as the equally
constructive stance taken by Morocco, I would like
pay tribute to them and encourage all efforts being
made to enhance cooperation between the Secretariat
and the Kingdom of Morocco. The dialogue was never
broken between the parties, thanks, in particular, to
the discrete diplomacy that has been deployed, as well
as the bilateral contacts. The delegation of Senegal
therefore takes this opportunity to highlight that the
self-governance that Morocco has been proposing since
2007 appears to be positive, serious and realistic. It
can encourage the pursuit of a climate of cooperation
between the parties for a just, long-lasting and mutually
acceptable solution in conformity with the Charter of
the United Nations.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Because
this is one of the few occasions on which the subject
of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in
Western Sahara (MINURSO) has been addressed in
16-12217

29/04/2016

The situation concerning Western Sahara

an open meeting of the Security Council, Uruguay,
as a non-permanent member elected by the General
Assembly to the Security Council and a member of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group,
feelsduty-bound to relay to the other Member States
much of what has been already expressed and presented
in the various consultations of the Security Council and
on which resolution 2285 (2016) is based.
Let us be very clear. Uruguay is in favour of
maintaining the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara, on the condition that it
is able to fulfil each and every one of the components of
the mandate set out by the Security Council. Uruguay
has a long history of participating in peacekeeping
operations under United Nations auspices. Currently, we
have 1,500 troops deployed, mostly in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Haiti. Troop-contributing
countries come to an agreement with the United Nations
on a set of documents that serve as mutual guarantees
with regard to the mandates of missions, standards and
discipline, which are applicable at all times. Those
documents are commonly known by their English
names: status-of-forces agreement, status-of-mission
agreement and rules of engagement, and so on.
The mandates provided by the Security Council
and the entire set of documents that I have mentioned
constitute the contract that binds troop-contributing
countries with the United Nations. Furthermore, they
are the guarantees that protect the personnel whom
a country voluntarily contributes to a peacekeeping
operation. Accordingly, it is obvious that that set of
commitments can be modified only by whomever has
the international legitimacy to do so. In this case, that
is the Security Council.
The Security Council today adopted resolution
2285 (2016) on the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara. The text was presented
to the members of the Security Council in an initial
version on Wednesday afternoon — Ambassador Rafael
Darío Ramírez Carreño of Venezuela pointed out that it
was at 3.30 p.m. — and the draft of the resolution that
we adopted today was presented at 6.45 p.m. yesterday.
The resolution was drafted in consultations with a very
small and self-convened group called the Group of
Friends on Western Sahara. Although we feel that we
are friends of the Western Sahara, apparently we are
not qualified to be members of that select group.

S/PV.7684

Owing to the content and structure of the resolution,
the text is almost identical to the resolutions adopted
by the Council in previous years. In other words, it is
business as usual. My delegation believes, however,
that we are very far from business as usual, because on
16 March, the Permanent Mission of Morocco conveyed
to the Executive Office of the Secretary-General a list
of 84 members of the international civilian component
of the MINURSO and the African Union who had
to leave Morocco within three days’ time. It was a
document — an objective fact — and we have all read
it. That sovereign yet unilateral decision taken by
Morocco immediately altered and radically changed
the conditions of the operationality of the Mission
provided for by the Security Council, which today
barely manages to maintain its self-sufficiency — far
from complying with the mandate with which it was
entrusted.
We all know that the sovereign decisions adopted
by Morocco indicate that their authorities felt deeply
offended by the statements made by the SecretaryGeneral during his visit to the region in early March.
For my delegation, the question of offenses must be
resolved directly between the person who was offended
and the offender. Each party will decide on the actions
that they wish to take with regard to one another, but
between themselves, without affecting a third party.
My delegation deems that the sovereign measures
adopted by Morocco have no connection to the person
whom that country considers to be the offender — the
Secretary-General — but are rather aimed at the entire
Organization that he represents. The expulsion of the
international civilian component of MINURSO from
Western Sahara has nothing to do with any offence that
the Secretary-General could have committed. It has
everything to do with the mandate that the Security
Council established in a timely manner and with the
functionality of the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara.
That is why we were very surprised, in reading
the text of the resolution, not to find a single reference
to the fact that a decision has disrupted the operation
of an important peacekeeping mission. I should like
to read out the twenty-third preambular paragraph of
resolution 2285 (2016), which consists of the following
curious statement:
“Regretting that MINURSO’s ability to fully
carry out its mandate has been affected as the

16-1221711/13

S/PV.7684

The situation concerning Western Sahara

majority of its civilian component, including
political personnel, cannot perform their duties
within MINURSO’s area of operations.”
The Security Council does not explain in any way
how the inability of the Mission to carry out its tasks
might have arisen. We have no indication as to whether
a lack of means or equipment or some impediment
on the part of the personnel are responsible, or if a
serious misfortune — a dengue or chikungunya virus
infection — arose to prevent that from happening.
Following the text, we see that in operative
paragraph 1, despite the fact that the Council admits that
MINURSO is prevented from carrying out its tasks, it
has decided to extend it until 30 April 2017. Paragraph
2 emphasizes the urgent need for MINURSO to return
to full functionality. In regard to a Mission that cannot
comply with its tasks for unknown reasons and whose
mandate has been extended, the Council points to the
urgent need for it to return to full functionality. Frankly,
we have no idea what the phrase “full functionality”
means. It is clear that it is a comparative term and that
“full” will depend on the parametre that it is measured
against. For example, if tomorrow we compare the
functionality of MINURSO to how MINURSO is
functioning today, clearly MINURSO will have
reached full functionality. Perhaps the provision was
intended to imply that “full functionality” was the
state of operation enjoyed by the Mission on 15 March,
before the adoption of the sovereign measure taken
by Morocco, but for one reason or another that is not
specified in that sentence.
Finally, I would like to refer paragraph 3, which
“Requests the Secretary-General to brief the
Council within 90 days on whether MINURSO
has returned to full functionality and expresses
its intention, if MINURSO has not achieved full
functionality, to consider how best to facilitate the
achievement of this goal”.
I would like to point out several issues in that regard.
First, the Council provides no guideline on what
to do or how to ensure that MINURSO recovers full
functionality, nor does it point who is responsible for
leading the process of the return to a normal situation.
I admit there is some logic to the Security Council’s
inability to explain why functionality was lost or what
it means by “return to full functionality”, and that it is
therefore unable to define how and who has to do it.
12/13

29/04/2016

Secondly, the timeline for a return to full
functionality — three months — is too long. We all
remember Murphy’s Law. Murphy has a special chapter
on “committology” that is guided by the principle that
every committee tends to use to the maximum the
period entrusted to it to carry out its task. Murphy was
an optimist. In that regard, there is also a certain logic
to this three-month period. The Council does not know
why, how or who has to carry out this task, so it is best
to provide for as long a deadline as possible.
Thirdly, it is not very common, but the Council
itself is expressing serious doubts as to whether the
Mission can return to full functionality within three
months. If that were not the case, the Council would not
need to reaffirm its intention to consider how best to
facilitate achievement of that goal.
With respect to the phrase “expresses its intention”,
allow me to make a frank comment. We are all familiar
with the variety of tones used in diplomacy to refer
to the degrees of commitment that we are willing to
make. We have all on different occasions used different
expressions — I will say them in English since that
is the language in which we usually draft — such as
“shall”, “will”, “would”, “should”, “may”, “might”,
“ought to” and so on, to express our intentions. The
phrase that represents one of the most tenuous types
of commitment on the spectrum is the term “best
endeavours”. Thus, if it is decided after three months
that we have not returned to full functionality, the most
that the Council is committed to is “to consider how
best to facilitate achievement of this goal”. I have to
ask — would any of us sign a contract to sell our house
to a buyer who expresses the intention of paying us but
does not even set a price?
After so much discussion, it would have been far
simpler to include a provision stipulating something
along the line of “urges the Government of Morocco
to facilitate forthwith the full recomposition of the
United Nations Mission for the Referendum in the
Western Sahara”, such that it could fully carry out the
mandate established by the Security Council. As some
of my colleagues have already pointed out, we were
unable to rupture the iron-clad content of the text that
is presented here.
I reiterate that Uruguay is in favour of maintaining
a United Nations Mission for the Referendum in the
Western Sahara which that is able to comply with every
element of its mandate, as defined by the Security
16-12217

29/04/2016

The situation concerning Western Sahara

Council. Our delegation believes that resolution 2285
(2016) does not endow the United Nations Mission for
the Referendum in the Western Sahara with the tools or
guarantees necessary to comply with its mandate. That
is why my Government felt obligated to vote against
the resolution.
In conclusion, Uruguay endorses and supports
the actions of the entire Secretariat, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Western
Sahara, and the Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Western Sahara. We unreservedly support the
work undertaken by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon.
Moreover, as a troop-contributing country in many
missions, we pay tribute to all MINURSO personnel,
who face ongoing and ever-greater difficulties.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.
The Council just adopted resolution 2285 (2016), on
extending the mandate of the United Nations Mission
for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO), in
which it decides to do so for one year and emphasizes
the urgent need for the Mission to return to full
functionality expeditiously. It also reflects the will and
resolve of the Security Council to push for a political
solution to the question of Western Sahara and maintain
MINURSO’s mandate.
China supports the extension of MINURSO to
allow it to resume its full capacity to implement the
Council’s resolution at the earliest. It is our hope that
the Mission will continue to play an important role in

S/PV.7684

the implementation of the Council’s resolutions and in
stabilizing the situation in Western Sahara.
China has maintained a consistent position on the
question of Western Sahara. We will continue to uphold
a fair and objective position on the matter and support
the United Nations in its efforts to push for a political
solution to the question. We encourage both parties,
based on the relevant Council resolutions, to seek a fair,
long-lasting solution which is acceptable to both sides
through negotiations.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers. Before adjourning the meeting, as this
is the last scheduled meeting of the Council for the
month of April, I would like to express the sincere
appreciation of the delegation of China to the members
of the Council, especially my colleagues the Permanent
Representatives, their respective staff and to the
secretariat of the Council for all the support they have
given to us.
It has been a busy month and one in which we have
reached consensus on several important issues within
our purview. We could not have done it alone and without
the hard work, support and positive contributions
of every delegation and the representatives of the
Secretariat, as well as all of the relevant conference
service officers. As we end our presidency, I know I
speak on behalf of the Council in wishing the Egyptian
delegation good luck in the month of May.
The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.

16-1221713/13
