S/2003/918

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 September 2003
Original: English

Letter dated 25 September 2003 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to convey the attached communication, dated 19 September
2003, from the High Representative for the Implementation of the Peace Agreement
on Bosnia and Herzegovina (see annex).
I should be grateful if the present letter could be brought to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

03-53223 (E)

011003

*
0
3
5
3
2
2
3
*

S/2003/918

Annex
Letter dated 19 September 2003 from the High Representative for
the Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina addressed to the Secretary-General
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1031 (1995) of 15 December 1995, in
which the Council requested the Secretary-General to submit to it reports from the
High Representative in accordance with annex 10 of the General Framework
Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Conclusions of the London
Peace Implementation Conference of 8 and 9 December 1995, I herewith present to
you my twenty-fourth report (see enclosure). I would kindly ask for the report to be
distributed to the Council members for their consideration.
In order to better satisfy the above-mentioned reporting requirements of
resolution 1031 (1995), I propose to submit my reports to you for onward
transmission to the Security Council on a more regular schedule. The next report
will cover the period from 1 September to 31 December 2003 and you will receive it
in January 2004. From then on, reports will cover a six-month period and you will
receive them in January and July each year. Should you or any Council member
require information at any other time, I would be pleased to provide an update in the
form of a letter.
(Signed) Paddy Ashdown

2

S/2003/918

Enclosure
Twenty-fourth report of the High Representative for the
Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina to the Secretary-General of the United Nations
12 October 2002-31 August 2003
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1031 (1995) of 15 December 1995, in
which the Council requested the Secretary-General to submit to the Council reports
from the High Representative on the Implementation of the Peace Agreement on
Bosnia and Herzegovina in accordance with annex 10 of the Peace Agreement and
the Conclusions of the London Peace Implementation Conference of 8 and 9
December 1995, I herewith present the twenty-fourth report.

Summary
Since taking over as High Representative on the Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina on 27 May 2002, I have made it clear that my
aim, during my term of office, is to set Bosnia and Herzegovina irreversibly on the
road to statehood within the European Union (EU). My priorities remain the rule of
law and economic reform — justice and jobs. My aim is also to continue to improve
the functioning and effectiveness of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s key governing
institutions, and to ensure that they can depend on more reliable funding
arrangements.
In the period since my last report, we have made measurable progress. We have
set up the Anti-Crime and Corruption Unit (formerly called the Serious Crimes Unit)
within my Office, to deal with crime and corruption and have begun the process of
restructuring the Bosnia and Herzegovina court system at all levels. The new Legal
Reform Unit, High Judicial and Prosecutorial Councils, and Special Chamber in the
State Court and a Special Department in the Bosnia and Herzegovina Prosecutor’s
Office are now functioning.
On 7 March, we launched a major attack on the networks which provide
funding and support for key International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia indictees, including Radovan Karadzic. My Office has also been tasked
by the Peace Implementation Council with establishing a system for domestic
prosecution of war crimes.
The EU Police Mission was launched on 1 January 2003 and is now fully —
and successfully — operational.
I launched the expert reform commissions — comprised of local representatives
but chaired in each case by a respected international expert — covering indirect tax
policy, defence and intelligence. A wholly locally staffed commission was also set up
to explore possible ways to achieve the unification of Mostar, which made important
progress but fell short of success. A second attempt under international community
chairmanship is now under way.

3

S/2003/918

The state-level Civil Service Agency, which was created in May 2002 by the
imposition of the Law on Civil Service, is now fully operational and an important
factor in introducing, though not without some resistance, modern standards in public
administration. We are now working to ensure that the Federation Civil Service
Agency is fully funded and fully operational.
After a long process of government formation, coalition governments were
formed at the state, entity and cantonal levels.
While full restoration of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s pre-war multi-ethnic
tapestry remains a distant prospect, the implementation of property legislation, the
increasing visibility and self-confidence of return communities and, most
importantly, the numbers of people returning, are encouraging and mean that we are
on track for the drawdown of the Reconstruction and Return Task Force at the end of
2003. It will be extremely important, however, to maintain adequate local and
international funding for refugee return and international monitoring of the process
for some time after the drawdown of the Task Force.
The media development mandate has largely been completed and the
department closed down, though there is further important and potentially
contentious work to do to establish an independent functional and economically
viable public broadcasting system.
A mission implementation plan for my Office has been drawn up and was
endorsed by the Peace Implementation Council at the beginning of the year, and now
forms the basis for the work of my Office in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

4

S/2003/918

I. Introduction
1.
This is my second report to the Secretary-General since taking over as High
Representative for the Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina on 27 May 2002. In the present report, I will assess the progress made
toward the goals outlined in my last report and review developments during the
reporting period.

II. The rule of law
2.
When I arrived in Sarajevo, I outlined my priorities as first justice, then jobs,
through reform. Building on the work of my predecessor, we have made further
progress in recent months. In the field of the rule of law, the key steps have been the
following:
• On 18 October 2002, I issued a decision ensuring that the building and land
which had been identified as the site for the Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina
would be dedicated, in perpetuity, for such purposes. My objective is to have
that state level court address the most serious cases of financial crime,
organized crime and political corruption.
• On 1 November 2002, I imposed a complete restructuring of the court system
within Bosnia and Herzegovina, closing and consolidating courts throughout
both entities in order to achieve a more efficient and more accountable judicial
system. The number of first-instance courts was reduced from 78 to 47, subject
matter jurisdiction was harmonized and commercial departments are to be
created in 15 first-instance courts. They also provided the necessary
framework to enable the High Judicial and Prosecutorial Councils (HJPCs) to
announce judicial positions in the first- and second-instance courts in the
entities.
• The practical implementation of the streamlined court system has started.
Meetings with the 12 Ministers of Justice have been held and visits to the
courts affected conducted to assess budget, space, renovation and equipment
needs.
• On 1 November 2002, I imposed amendments to the laws establishing judicial
training centres in order to make it possible for those centres to become
operational and begin to provide needed training to judges and prosecutors
throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina. In December 2002, the HJPCs adopted
two training programmes on criminal procedure for judges and prosecutors.
• Thirteen disciplinary panels were established within the HJPCs to hear
complaints against incumbent judges and prosecutors. During this period, 166
complaints were received by the HJPCs and forwarded to the disciplinary
prosecutor. Twenty-three judges submitted their resignations, 10 of whom had
been previously suspended by the High Representative.
• The High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council has reviewed over 300
applications for the first wave of vacancy announcements in seven different
courts and prosecutor’s offices: the Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
Prosecutor’s Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Entity Supreme Courts and
Prosecutor’s Offices and the Constitutional Court of the Republika Srpska.

5

S/2003/918

During the months of November and December 2002, the HJPCs interviewed
171 candidates for those vacancies.
• On 2 December 2002, all remaining judicial and prosecutorial posts for the
middle and lower tier were advertised. By the closing date of 13 January 2003,
more than 1,600 applications had been received for the approximately 900
positions. The process of reselection will continue throughout 2003.
• On 16 January 2003, the HJPC appointed eight members to the Criminal
Division of the State Court and a Chief Prosecutor and three assistants to the
Prosecutor’s Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
• On 24 January 2003, the Criminal Procedure Code of Bosnia and Herzegovina
was imposed, which entered into force on 1 March 2003. This represents a
giant leap in the process of reforming the criminal justice system of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Together with the Criminal Code, which entered into force
on the same date, it renders the Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina operative.
• On 27 January 2003, the newly appointed judges of the Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and prosecutors of the Prosecutor’s Office of Bosnia and
Herzegovina took their oaths of office in a widely welcomed ceremony. On
that same day, the Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina held a ceremony
recognizing its occupancy of its newly renovated temporary facilities.
• We are in the process of recruiting international judges and prosecutors to
serve in the special criminal panels of the Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the special division of the Prosecutor’s Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Provisions for the participation of those international members were included
in the amendments imposed on 24 January.
• The Criminal Division of the Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Prosecutor’s Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina are off to a productive start.
The Prosecutor’s Office brought charges against eight defendants for
counterfeiting. Two of those defendants entered pleas of guilty, while the cases
of the remaining defendants will be set for trial. Shortly thereafter, the
Prosecutor’s Office brought charges against other accused persons for human
trafficking. Those are the first criminal charges brought by the State Prosecutor
who was appointed at the end of January 2003. The Rule of Law Pillar of my
Office has worked closely with him to resolve issues related to the new codes
enacted by the High Representative in January 2003, as well as to find
additional resources to support the work of his office.
• As promised in my last report, we have created a new unit called the AntiCrime and Corruption Unit (ACCU, formerly known as the Serious Crimes
Unit) to provide my Office with a broad scope of support capabilities for the
local prosecution, investigation and analysis of systemic organized crime and
corruption. ACCU, in close cooperation with domestic agencies and
authorities, has undertaken efforts to guide and support investigations and
prosecution in multiple cases. At present, ACCU is primarily focused on
guiding two major criminal investigation task forces initiated by my Office. At
times, due to political and technical limitations for the local authorities, ACCU
has also provided specialized support capacities, such as forensic audit work or
specialized experts as court witnesses.

6

S/2003/918

• ACCU is assisting in the assessment of cases to be transferred to the
Prosecutor’s Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina as part of the implementation
of the new Criminal Code and Criminal Procedure Code of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
• During early May, ACCU worked with the European Union Police Mission
(EUPM), at the request of the Minister of Interior of the Republika Srpska, to
transfer a major organized crime case to the Criminal Division of the Court of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Prosecutor’s Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The Prosecutor’s Office brought charges against those defendants, who were
ordered to pretrial confinement. One of the international prosecutors of the
Prosecutor’s Office handled the matter under the direction of the Chief State
Prosecutor. This is a very serious case — perhaps the most significant human
trafficking case in Bosnia and Herzegovina’s history — and the fact that it is
being tackled within Bosnia and Herzegovina’s court system is a significant
step forward.
• The head and deputy head of the Rule of Law Pillar visited Belgrade on 29 and
30 April to meet with officials from the Serbian Ministry of Justice and
Ministry of Interior and the Chief Prosecutor. The purpose of the visit was to
offer to facilitate the creation of operational protocols between these ministries
and offices and their counterparts in Bosnia and Herzegovina in order to more
effectively interdict criminal activities which transcend the borders of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and Serbia. In addition, during the visit, the officials of my
Office exchanged information with Serbian officials as to specific suspected
criminal activities of interest to both Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia and
arranged for further exchanges of information in regard to those suspects.
Serbian officials were eager to establish the relationships suggested and to
continue the exchange of such information.
• On 23 April 2003, I held a crime summit, which included attendance by the
Ministries of Interior of both entities and the Ministry of Security of the State,
together with the State Border Service and State Investigation and Protection
Agency. EUPM also participated in this meeting. The purpose of the meeting
was to address the impending end of the state of emergency in Serbia and the
possibility that many persons apprehended in Serbia might flee to Bosnia and
Herzegovina upon release from Serbia. At the meeting, I proposed to local
officials a two-pronged approach to addressing this possibility. The short-term
proposal included an immediate exchange of information with Serbian officials
as to those persons to be released from custody in Serbia, in particular those
released persons with business, family or other connections to Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The longer-term solution included the development of
operational protocols between appropriate agencies in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and Serbia to address common issues related to criminals whose activities
transcended the border between the two countries. The local officials of Bosnia
and Herzegovina readily adopted the proposals put forward and pledged that
they would undertake the suggested actions.
• The Rule of Law Pillar continued to have discussions with the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the Council of Europe in
regard to the future of the Human Rights Chamber. These three organizations,
in consultation with local officials, devised a plan which will process the large

7

S/2003/918

backlog of cases pending in the chamber and also provide for future cases
regarding alleged human rights violations to be handled by other institutions of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. There have been several meetings with the
Constitutional Court and with the Human Rights Chamber in order to discuss
the proposed plan and to solicit the views of those institutions in order to
identify issues which will need to be resolved during implementation of the
plan. The plan was presented to the Peace Implementation Council (PIC)
during its meeting in the middle of June.
• The Criminal Institutions and Prosecutorial Reform Unit (CIPRU) has worked
with the state court and state prosecutor’s office to rebalance their budgets. Of
particular importance is the rebalancing of the budget of the prosecutor’s office
to enable the office to employ additional prosecutors and legal staff to handle
the increased responsibilities of the office.
• The Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina held a session on 30 May
2003. This was the first session of the court in more than a year. The first order
of business for the court was the election of its president and three vicepresidents. One member of the court from the Republika Srpska remains to be
appointed.
Attacks on networks supporting persons indicted for war crimes
3.
On 7 March 2003, certain amendments to the banking agency laws in both
entities so as to permit the entity banking agencies were imposed to freeze bank
accounts of persons and firms providing financial support to persons impeding or
obstructing implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement. On that same date,
acting on behalf of the entity banking agencies, those new provisions of the entity
banking agency laws were used in order to freeze bank accounts of two individuals
who we have good reason to believe have repeatedly provided financial support to
persons indicted for war crimes.
4.
On 7 July 2003, a further set of decisions were issued, freezing the bank
accounts of several more individuals and removing Dragomir Vasic from his
position as a member of the RSNA and Counsellor for Zvornik municipality. In all
cases, the individuals were reliably believed to be violating article 19 of the Peace
Agreement by providing material support to Radovan Karadzic.
5.
We have also benefited from close cooperation with the EU and the United
States. The EU has, at our initiative, put in place a visa ban list against a number of
individuals suspected of obstructing ICTY in its mandate and providing material
support to persons indicted for war crimes. The United States has also frozen the
assets of a number of persons on similar grounds.

III. Jobs and economic/administrative infrastructure
6.
In an effort to make a new beginning after the 5 October 2002 elections, and to
finish the work of the last Government in the area of economics, 13 decisions were
issued on 21 October 2002, designed to help promote growth in Bosnia and
Herzegovina by means of a series of reforms in the banking, statistics land registry,
communications and other areas.

8

S/2003/918

7.
An important initiative was launched on 12 November 2002 to dismantle
barriers to business growth and job creation. The Bulldozer Initiative was designed
to help businesses knock down as many roadblocks and cut as much red tape as
possible to free up the economy for growth. Initially, the committee was coordinated
by my Office and composed of the United States Agency for International
Development, the World Bank, the European Commission, IMF and my Office.
Domestic members include the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
Republika Srpska Employer’s Confederation, the Business Women Confederation,
the Foreign Investors Association and many regional or local business associations.
Local business leaders are — and remain — very much in the driving seat. It is they
who come up with examples of the most egregious barriers to business and they who
take the lead in campaigning for their removal.
8.
In December 2002, the Bulldozer Committee presented the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Governments with a list of 50 economic roadblocks along with their
respective legal solutions. Those proposed changes were presented to the relevant
authorities (State Council of Ministers, Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
Government and the Republika Srpska Government) during the first quarter of 2003.
Businesses or business associations that submitted the requests had an opportunity
to testify before the parliamentary assemblies’ committees and advocate for reform,
which will reinforce their role as major contributors to economic policy through the
lobbying process. Local implementation committees coordinated by local business
associations were set up in order to ensure proper reform implementation and
follow-up. All 50 pieces of legislation were adopted, none imposed, by 4 June 2003,
and the domestic authorities have assumed complete responsibility for the next
phase of the project, which will involve six regional committees.
9.
Apart from its impact on the economic reform agenda, the Bulldozer
Committee and its successes represent the first major example of growth, in the
business sector at least, of a genuine civil society in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
10. Concrete progress has also been made in a number of other areas as well
during the reporting period, as described below.
Tax and fiscal structure
11. One of the tests I set out in my speech to the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Parliament on 6 October 2002 was: “Reform the revenue system by beginning the
process of establishing value added tax (VAT) at the state level and reforming
customs”. In February 2003, the Indirect Tax Policy Commission was established
and tasked to undertake a number of activities to promote a single customs service
for Bosnia and Herzegovina and a single/state-level VAT. Several presentations were
made to senior politicians, technical consultations were undertaken, and public
presentations and debates took place concerning VAT and customs issues.
12. On the tax front, good progress has been made. The Commission, led by
former European Commission official Joly Dixon, an expert in EU indirect tax
policy, agreed on the text of an interim law that established the Indirect Tax
Authority (ITA) on 1 July, within the deadline set in my decision. It subsequently
agreed a fully fledged framework law providing for the unification of the customs
administrations in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the working methods and authority of
ITA and its Governing Board. The Law will authorize ITA and its Governing Board
to begin work on the establishment of VAT at the state level.

9

S/2003/918

13. This legislation meets EU standards and would equip Bosnia and Herzegovina
with a modern state-level system of indirect tax collection and a single, efficient
customs service; it is now awaiting endorsement by the Council of Ministers and
parliamentary approval. Its successful enactment into law and the start of its
implementation will be a big step, in demonstrating that Bosnia and Herzegovina is
capable of taking difficult decisions in this sensitive area, in tackling fraud and
corruption and in moving towards EU compatibility. Significantly, the Law breaks
new ground in two other areas. This will be the first time that article 3.5A of the
Dayton Peace Agreement will be used to pass competencies from the Entities to the
State and the first time that administrative areas will be established which conform
to the natural economic regions of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and not the Inter-Entity
Boundary Line.
Agriculture and forestry
14. A state-level veterinary law was passed but full implementation was delayed
by the slow appointment of the new director for the State Veterinary Office. The
new director was named in May 2003, and his initial tasks are to get the animal
identification project under way, to adapt local regulations to EU standards and to
secure sustainable financing over the next five years.
15. A Federation forestry law has been passed but some amendments have yet to
be addressed in Parliament, thus slowing the broad implementation effort, including
the closure of the existing 22 summaries (forest enterprises) and the establishment
of one cantonal forest enterprise per canton to regularize and increase the flow of
revenues at the local level.
Telecommunications
16. Progress has been made in the telecommunications sector by enacting the Law
on Communications as part of the economic package, which will enable the
regulator to implement rapidly a regulatory regime conducive to competition. Audits
have been carried out in this sector and will be made public in the near future.
Electric power
17. Progress has been made on the implementation of the institutional
arrangements. The Bosnia and Herzegovina Council of Ministers proposed the
appointment of members of the State Regulatory Commission (SERC) to the
Parliament of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the next step in the appointment process
is the approval from the Parliament of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Appointment of
SERC members will mark an important milestone in the reform process. Also,
intensive efforts are aimed at ongoing implementation of the State Electricity Law,
specifically the establishment of a state transmission company, state regulator and
independent system operator.
18. In November 2002, Bosnia and Herzegovina signed a memorandum of
understanding on the regional electricity market in southeastern Europe and its
integration into the EU international electricity market. The memorandum was
signed under the auspices of the Stability Pact with the goal of establishing an
integrated regional electricity market in southeastern Europe by 2005 and ensure its
integration into the EU internal electricity market. The regional market will be based

10

S/2003/918

on the principles set out in the Electricity Directive and other legislation related to
the operation of the EU market.
Transportation
19. The state Licensing Commission has commenced licensing of international and
inter-entity bus services under the recently passed Law on International and Interentity Road Transportation. Once that process is completed, we anticipate that the
Commission will turn its efforts towards distribution of truck licences in the field of
international and inter-entity truck transport. With the creation of the Foreign Trade
Chamber of Commerce and the recent introduction of the Law on Associations, the
establishment of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Trucking Association now creates the
conditions for going forward with the implementation of the TIR Carnet system,
which will allow Bosnia and Herzegovina truckers movement throughout the EU
without restrictions at borders.
20. In the field of rail transport, the Working Group on Rail Transport has
concluded its meetings and a draft of a new state law on railways of Bosnia and
Herzegovina has been prepared for presentation to the Council of Ministers. The law
on railways for Bosnia and Herzegovina provides for state-level regulation of all
railway operations, including safety in the country in line with constitutional powers
over international and inter-entity transport, with the overall objective of freedom of
movement throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina as well as compliance with EU
standards.
21. The Samac Bridge was finally opened to passenger traffic for both road and
rail transport, while the issue of opening it to freight traffic and the location of the
customs facility is continuing to be addressed.
22. The signing of the Framework Agreement on the Sava Basin took place at a
ceremony in Kranjska Gora, Slovenia, on 3 December. That agreement, along with
the Protocol on Navigation, represents a step closer to establishing normal
navigation on the Sava and through the Port of Brcko, as well as closer cooperation
between neighbouring countries with respect to other aspects of the Sava Basin.
23. Finally, under the new structure for the Council of Ministers, a new post for a
Minister of Communications and Transport has been established which will now
provide a stronger basis for the development of a transportation policy and plans and
for regulating transport at the state level.
Public administration reform
24. On 23 January, the head of the Civil Service Agency, who was appointed by
my predecessor, reported to the Chair of the Council of Ministers that the Agency is
now fully operational. The Agency is key to preventing any party patronage at the
state level since it is responsible for the recruitment of civil servants. The Republika
Srpska is setting up a similar agency with the financial and technical support of the
international community, and my Office has facilitated the drafting of similar civil
service legislation for the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, a commitment
made by the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities under the rule of law targets. That
law was adopted in May 2003 and we are now working with the United Nations
Development Programme, which has agreed to act as the lead agency, to ensure that
the Civil Service Agency is properly funded and staffed so the law can be properly

11

S/2003/918

implemented. I have concerns, however, at the remaining level of dysfunction in
government departments and ministers’ offices. Attention will be required to this
area and to the effectiveness of the wider civil service to improve the functionality
of governments and public administration in general in the near future.
25. Meanwhile, serious problems are still encountered in politically motivated
replacements of members of governing boards of various public bodies and
appointments to civil service positions.

IV. The political environment
26. The initial period following the 5 October elections was dominated by
government formation, but the state-level Council of Ministers, led by Prime
Minister Terzic, has now been in office for some eight months. Prime Minister
Terzic’s administration is hampered by the constitutional dysfunction of the Council
of Ministers (he does not appoint and cannot remove ministers — they owe their
existence and loyalty to parties, not the Government) and lack of capacity and
support within the institution of the Council as a whole. As the result, the output of
the Council has been low, with limited legislative activity. The restructuring of the
new ministries and bodies has also proceeded slowly.
27. The Entity governments face similar problems. In the Federation, the process
of government formation in Canton 7 was finalized at the end of June, more than
eight months after the elections. The Herzegovina-Neretva Canton was the last selfgovernment unit in the entire Bosnia and Herzegovina to put its elected government
in place. This required considerable prodding from my Office, culminating with the
threat of serious fines for the parties involved in the obstruction.
28. The continuing division of Mostar remained a serious problem during the
reporting period. Eight years after the war, the city of Mostar is a collection of
municipalities without coordination and without the capacity to generate the
development of the city. A commission comprised solely of local representatives
was established in the spring to explore options for a permanent statute of the city,
and to provide Mostar citizens with an opportunity to contribute to the debate about
the future of their city without interference from the international community. By
the beginning of August, however, the commission had achieved only limited
results. A second attempt to create a new Mostar reform commission under
international community auspices, will begin in September.
29. In the Republika Srpska, despite some initial posturing and rhetoric, such
major processes as the Independent Tax Commission, the Defence Reform
Commission and now the Intelligence Commission are functioning relatively
smoothly.
30. The resignation of Mirko Sarovic as a member of the Presidency on 4 April
2003, in the wake of the ORAO arms-to-Iraq scandal was a step towards
establishing political accountability in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Security and defence
31. On 2 April 2003, in response to the ORAO issue, my Office issued several
defence-related decisions to help address the systemic weaknesses exposed by the
ORAO arms-to-Iraq scandal. These included amendments to the Entity defence laws

12

S/2003/918

and constitutions in order to ensure that a similar situation would not arise again. On
9 May 2003, I established the Defence Reform Commission, chaired by former
United States Assistant Secretary for Defense James Locher, which is tasked with
proposing reforms, principally to the command and control of the armed forces in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and which — if agreed — will help the country achieve its
declared goal of becoming a credible candidate for membership in the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) Partnership for Peace by January 2004. This
Commission had made substantial progress as of August 2003 and is due to
complete its work by mid-September.
32. There have been other significant developments in the defence area. Terms of
reference for the Secretary-General of the Standing Committee on Military Matters
(SCMM) have been agreed and he has been invited to attend the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Council of Ministers, although not yet as a full member with voting
rights.
33. On a more practical level, the SCMM secretariat is due to expand (from nine to
about 88 personnel) over the next few months, which will allow the secretariat to
begin operating as a fledgling “ministry”, coordinating activity with other ministries
and acting on behalf of the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina in matters relating to
defence.
34. A decisive step forward has been made in reform of the intelligence services in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Expert Commission on Intelligence Reform, headed
by former senior Hungarian intelligence official and former Hungarian Ambassador
to Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kalman Kocsis, was launched at the end of May 2003.
The Commission is tasked with producing a proposal for setting up a single
intelligence structure. It was due to produce the necessary legislative changes and
other legal instruments, in line with democratic principles and practice elsewhere in
Europe, by mid-September.
Srebrenica
35. I continue to chair the Executive Board of the Foundation of SrebrenicaPotocari Memorial and Cemetery, with my Office providing support and
coordinating this important effort.
36. Following the ground-breaking ceremony that took place on 11 October 2002
at the Potocari site, work on phase I of construction began. In that phase, which was
completed at the end of January, the site was prepared for the burials of up to 1,000
individuals. Phase II is now going ahead, which involves the provision of grave sites
for approximately 9,000 additional individuals and construction of the Musala
Mutual Crypt, with garden, service facilities and parking.
37. The burials of the first 600 identified individuals took place on 31 March 2003.
A further 400 identified individuals were also buried on 11 July 2003.
38. At the request of surviving family members and following consultations with
the Republika Srpska authorities, on 25 March 2003 I issued a decision transferring
the ownership of the Battery Factory “A.S.” a.d. Srebrenica to the Foundation of the
Srebrenica-Potocari Memorial and Cemetery. The decision also established a
commission, which is to determine the compensation to be paid by the Republika
Srpska to the current owners and users of the Battery Factory by September 2003.
The Battery Factory site has a special place in the memory of Srebrenica families

13

S/2003/918

since it was the last place many of them saw their beloved relatives alive. The
decision had the full support of the Srebrenica-Potocari Memorial Foundation’s
Executive Board. The Foundation, in consultation with families of victims, will
determine the future use of the Battery Factory site.
39. The Executive Board of the Foundation has made intensive efforts over the
period in question to raise funds, without which the Foundation would have been
unable to implement the project. As a result of those fund-raising activities, the
Foundation has received contributions of about 3.5 million euros that allowed work
to begin at the site. The Human Rights Chamber issued a decision on 7 March 2003
ordering the Republika Srpska Government to pay 2 million convertible marka
(KM) by 7 September 2003 to the Foundation and another 500,000 KM each year
for the following four years. Since families opposed such a decision, the Executive
Board agreed to proceed with fund-raising activities and to consult families on how
to use those funds once the Republika Srpska pays. Therefore, approximately an
additional 1.5 million euros are still needed to complete the project and the
Executive Board continues to request the assistance of potential donors.
40. On 20 September 2003, former United States President Clinton will be the
guest of honour at the official opening of the Cemetery, at the invitation of the
Foundation.
Bosnia and Herzegovina in the region
41. A significant step was reached between Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia
when Croatia managed, in January 2003, to ratify the provisionally applied
agreement on the determination of border crossings of 6 April 2001. This is the first
bilateral agreement to enter into force in this field. The newly constituted Bosnia
and Herzegovina Presidency and President Mesic have agreed to do their utmost to
complete pending procedures and negotiations regarding border issues and dual
citizenship, and in early February they initiated a draft agreement on the local
border zone regime and the three annexes to the Co-location Treaty of 17 June 2002.
Those documents are now waiting to be signed by both Foreign Ministers.
42. Two developments in the relationship between Bosnia and Herzegovina and
the former Federal Republic of Yugoslavia deserve special mention. First, an
agreement on dual citizenship was signed on 29 October 2002 in Belgrade by the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Minister for Civil Affairs and Communications and the
Yugoslav Minister of the Interior. That agreement was ratified in 2003 by both
countries and has now entered into force in both countries. Second, both heads of
delegations to the commissions dealing with border issues initialled in December
draft agreements on the local border zone regime and on a simplified regime to be
applied in a zone in the eastern part of Bosnia and Herzegovina enmeshed with the
territory of Serbia and Montenegro.
43. The murder of Serbian Prime Minister Zoran Djindjic on 12 March 2003 was a
terrible blow to the region. The best tribute to Zoran Djindjic’s memory will be to
continue the work in which he was engaged to secure progress and stability in the
region and its integration into mainstream Europe, and in so doing to demonstrate
that such attacks cannot defeat democracy. Increased cooperation between Bosnia
and Herzegovina and its neighbours in the fight against criminal networks — as
described above — will be an important part of that effort.

14

S/2003/918

International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
44. The plan for domestic trial of war crimes in a special panel of the Court of
Bosnia and Herzegovina has been the subject of several meetings during 2003.
Meetings were held with the Ministries of Justice as well as the prosecutors of both
entities and state. In addition, OSCE and the Council of Europe were invited to offer
comments on the proposals. The recommendations resulting from the discussions
with those groups and ICTY were presented to and approved by PIC on 12 June.
The PIC Steering Board of Political Directors decision called for the establishment
of a war crimes chamber within the Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and a war
crimes department within the State Prosecutor’s Office. I have been tasked to
establish and co-chair with the relevant Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities an interagency implementation task force, involving other relevant international
organizations, to coordinate the implementation of the project.

V. Returns
45. The number of refugees returning continues to be strong, exceeding 102,000 in
2002. According to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) statistics, the total of registered returns to and within Bosnia
and Herzegovina has risen to nearly 1 million people, including some 390,000 socalled minority returns. The State Ministry for Human Rights and Refugees,
together with relevant Entity ministries — assumed a greater leadership role in the
return process during 2002 and moved closer towards ownership of the remaining
process. Despite this, many challenges towards achieving “sustainable return”
remain.
46. On 30 January 2003, the Peace Implementation Council endorsed an annex VII
(General Framework Agreement for Peace) (GFAP) Strategy, drawn up by the
Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities, UNHCR and my Office in order to ensure that
the progress continues. Beyond recognizing the need to facilitate as many as
500,000 additional returns in Bosnia and Herzegovina under domestic leadership
over the next four years, the strategy provides a road map to build additional
capacity within domestic institutions to take on these tasks as international
organizations scale down their operations, recalibrate resources to address other
priorities, and in some cases phase out completely. The strategy calls for the
Reconstruction and Return Task Force to draw down by the end of 2003.
47. Property law implementation made decisive progress during the reporting
period. The countrywide repossession rate of 67 per cent promises nearly full
implementation by the end of 2002. Large urban centres, such as Sarajevo and Banja
Luka, however, remain a source of concern, as they lag well behind the Entity
averages of 71 per cent and 61 per cent in the Federation and the Republika Srpska,
respectively. Since approximately 40,000 claims remain unimplemented in both
Entities, the focus now is to ensure adequate budgeting for alternative
accommodation at all appropriate levels of government. In addition, the domestic
authorities, with the assistance of the international community, will introduce a
package of minor amendments to property laws aimed at ensuring adherence to the
principles of transparency and rule of law embodied in the new strategic direction
for property law implementation. As partners, the international community and

15

S/2003/918

domestic institutions will also work to ensure a smooth transfer of the Commission
for Real Property Claims (CRPC) responsibilities to the local institutions.
48. Increasing leadership in the property repossession process by the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Ministry for Human Rights and Refugees, together with the responsible
entity ministries, is welcome. But that success raises increasing concerns about the
lack of harmony in the property laws in the region. There are still some 21,000
Croatian Serbs who occupy the homes of others and who seek to either repossess
their homes in Croatia and/or return. Increasingly, those families face eviction under
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s laws without their own long-term housing solutions
because the recent amendments to property laws in Croatia have not gone far
enough and have yielded little real results. Similarly, pre-war residents of other
neighbouring countries in the region (Slovenia) have approached my Office with
concern about their own eviction and are unable to repossess property and return to
their own pre-war homes in the region. Solutions within Croatia and other former
Yugoslav States must be identified for those individuals, which requires compatible
property law throughout former Yugoslavia.
49. However, returns to Bosnia and Herzegovina from other parts of the region are
progressing with increasing numbers of returns from both Croatia and from Serbia
and Montenegro.
50. As returnees attempt to reintegrate into society, combined domestic and
international efforts must ensure that their individual choice is sustainable. The legal
framework necessary to ensure returnees’ unbiased access to socio-economic
facilities and opportunities is largely in place, but information on and enforcement
of the applicable laws and agreements remains limited. To increase returnees’
awareness of their rights, my Office has developed a number of public information
campaigns that provide information on access to employment opportunities,
education, health and utilities.
51. Many displaced persons still do not return to their pre-war residences because
they feel they would be unable to rebuild their lives there. While many of the
concerns are well grounded, some are based on incomplete information. To
encourage displaced persons to consider return, my Office developed media
programmes that increase the visibility of successful returnees and provide factual
information on return conditions. In addition, my Office, the Sarajevo Economic
Region Development Agency and the country’s employment bureaux are jointly
developing a system to make information on vacancies around the country more
widely accessible.
52. In addition, there are many employment creation initiatives around the country,
often targeting returnees in particular, but no study has ever compared the
effectiveness and efficiency of the different approaches followed. To aid donor
agencies in their programme designs for 2003, my Office conducted a survey among
implementing organizations and provided donor agencies with their feedback on the
advantages and drawbacks of the various types of programmes. Those efforts are
aimed at rebuilding Bosnia and Herzegovina’s multiethnic society with opportunities
for all citizens, including refugees, displaced persons, returnees and the domiciled
communities.
53. Although we are on track for the draw down of the Reconstruction and Return
Task Force, and the handover of responsibility to local authorities at the end of

16

S/2003/918

2003, there are still major tasks ahead. Draft legislative amendments have been
agreed on some items but must still be presented to the Bosnia and Herzegovina
parliaments. Discussion still continues among the international community and with
Bosnia and Herzegovina ministries on two important institutional aspects: the
Return Fund and the prospective Bosnia and Herzegovina institution which should
review CRPC claims.
54. The fact that at a time when refugees and displaced persons are returning in
large numbers, international financial assistance is rapidly decreasing, remains also
a concern. Furthermore, Bosnia and Herzegovina domestic funds remain insufficient
to cover needs.

VI. European Union Police Mission
55. On 1 January 2003, the European Union Police Mission began operations in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. It followed on from the United Nations International
Police Task Force (IPTF) operation and is intended to build on and secure IPTF
successes in police reform. I would like to pay tribute to the United Nations for their
achievements in Bosnia and Herzegovina with the International Police Task Force
and to thank them for the smooth transition to the EUPM operation.
56. EUPM is the European Union’s first crisis management operation under the
European Security and Defence Policy. The Mission consists of 500 police officers
and 50 civilian experts from 33 States, led by Police Commissioner Sven
Frederiksen, under my overall supervision in my capacity as Special Representative
of the European Union. Commissioner Frederiksen knows that he can count on my
total support, both as part of the EUPM chain of command and as High
Representative.
57. On 24 January 2003, I issued decisions which will enable EUPM to
recommend to me the removal, as a last resort, of police officers who obstruct the
implementation of GFAP. The same set of decisions enabled my Office to monitor
trials and investigations in certain circumstances, another role previously performed
by IPTF. I will not hesitate to take action, if the Commissioner requests it of me,
against any police officers that obstruct the work of EUPM and the implementation
of GFAP.
58. EUPM programmes are intended to cover all areas of law enforcement. At the
outset of the mission, however, priority has been given to two particular issues:
safety of returnees and the fight against organized crime. Trafficking in human
beings is part of the latter priority and will be addressed as part of this effort.
59. EUPM is not, however, a substitute for Bosnia and Herzegovina police
engagement. Seven years after the war, it is time for Bosnia and Herzegovina
authorities to take on their law enforcement responsibilities. Local ownership is the
key to an effective and sustainable rule of law. It is also the key to the country’s
progress towards European integration. EUPM’s role was accordingly designed to
monitor, mentor, advise and assist Bosnia and Herzegovina in this process but not to
do its work for it.

17

S/2003/918

VII. Media development
60. On 31 December 2002, I closed my Office’s Media Development Department.
The PIC directives called for “the establishment of free and pluralistic media
throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina”. More concretely, they called for establishment
of a politically independent, transparently funded public service broadcasting sector,
in conformity with European standards, which should be balanced by a strong and
viable commercial sector. Both sectors should be regulated by a strong, independent
regulatory body, which would determine standards for content and allocate media
frequencies. In order further to enhance freedom of expression, PIC called for the
adoption of legislation covering freedom of information and the decriminalization of
defamation, consistent with accepted international democratic standards etc.
61. My Office’s Media Development Department played the leading role in
promoting those policies. The following achievements have been made in
implementing those directives:
• The Communication Regulatory Agency (CRA), established in 1998, became
an indigenous, independent and self-sustaining broadcasting and
telecommunications regulator, in accordance with best international practice.
CRA has successfully completed the process of issuing long-term licences for
all broadcasters that qualified.
• In August 2002, the Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliament adopted a package of
laws on the public broadcasting system in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Previously,
two High Representative decisions regulated that area and provided for the
establishment of Federation Television in October 2001, the launch of the
state-wide Bosnia and Herzegovina Radio 1 in May 2001 and the launch of the
first element of Bosnia and Herzegovina Television, Bosnia and Herzegovina
TV Main News in May 2002.
• In the commercial broadcasting sector, the Open Broadcast Network survived
the rapid withdrawal of international financial aid in 2000 and has successfully
attracted international investment. Also, the United States-funded Mreza Plus
commercial TV network is making headway towards economic sustainability.
Sustainability of both the commercial and public broadcasting sectors has been
significantly enhanced by the CRA broadcast licensing process, which reduced
the over-saturated market of almost 300 broadcasters by nearly 30 per cent.
• With the Defamation Law enacted in the Federation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in November 2002, freedom of information laws consistent with
accepted international democratic standards are now in place at the entity and
state levels.
• With regard to the press, self-regulation was opted to serve as a major defence
to democratic freedoms. The establishment and subsequent operations of the
Press Council for Bosnia and Herzegovina has been a major step forward in
protecting press freedoms and promoting journalists ethics. It is now up to the
Press Council to prove that it is capable of enforcing adherence to the
principles laid down in the Bosnia and Herzegovina Press Code.
62. My Office will continue monitoring developments in the Bosnia and
Herzegovina media and assisting, where necessary, in accordance with its mandate
under the Peace Agreement. The mandate of my broadcasting agent expired on

18

S/2003/918

30 June 2003, and we are now working to ensure that the Bosnia and Herzegovina
authorities establish a sustainable mechanism for financing CRA that will ensure its
continued independence and the maintenance of European standards.

VIII. Mission implementation plan
63. In December 2002, the PIC Steering Board endorsed my Office’s Mission
Implementation plan (the full text of the plan can be found on our web
site at http://www.ohr.int/ohr-info/ohr-mip/default.asp?content_id=29145). The plan
outlines six core tasks for my Office:
• Entrenching the rule of law.
• Ensuring that extreme nationalists, war criminals, and their organized criminal
networks cannot reverse peace implementation.
• Reforming the economy.
• Strengthening the capacity of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s governing institutions,
especially at the state level.
• Establishing state-level civilian command and control over armed forces,
reforming the security sector, and paving the way for integration into the EuroAtlantic framework.
• Promoting the sustainable return of refugees and displaced persons.
64. Each task is divided into several subprogrammes, and my Office’s departments
are responsible for defining and implementing the steps towards each goal. During
the reporting period, we presented the PIC Steering Board with two informal
updates, in April and June. A formal report on and assessment of the first year of the
plan will be prepared in early 2004.

IX. Reporting schedule
65. In order to better satisfy the requirements of Security Council resolution 1031
(1995), in which the Council requested the Secretary-General to submit to the
Council reports from the High Representative in accordance with annex 10 of the
Peace Agreement and the Conclusions of the London Peace Implementation
Conference of 8 and 9 December 1995, I propose to submit my reports to you for
onward transmission to the Security Council on a more regular schedule. The next
report will cover the period from 1 September to 31 December 2003 and you will
receive it in January 2004. From then on, reports will cover a six-month period and
you will receive them in January and July each year. Should you or any Council
member require information at any other time, I would be pleased to provide an
update in the form of a letter.

19
