General Assembly-Forty-second Session

204

cial and Cultural Rights, the lnternational Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights and the Optional Protocol to the
lnternational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;
16. Also requests the Secretary-General, within existing resources, to ensure that the Human Rights Committee and the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights are able to hold the necessary sessions and are provided with administrative support and summary records;
17. Further requests the Secretary-General to ensure
that the Centre for Human Rights of the Secretariat etfectively assists the Human Rights Committee and the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights in the implementation of their respective mandates;
18. Again urges the Secretary-General, taking into account the suggestions ofthe Human Rights Committee, to
take determined steps, within existing resources, to give
more publicity to the work of that Committee and, similarly, to the work of the Committee on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights;
19. Invites the Human Rights Committee and the
Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights to
explore further ways of expediting consideration of periodie reports;
20. Welcomes the publication of the first volumes of
the official public records of the Human Rights Committee and looks forward to the early publication of further
volumes;
21. Encourages all Governments to publish the texts of
the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights and the Optional Protocol to the lnternational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights in as many
languages as possible and to distribute them and make
them known as widely as possible in their territories.
93rd plenary meeting
7 December 1987

42/104.

International Literacy Year

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 41/ 118 of 4 December 1986,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1987/80 of 8 July 1987, in which the Council recommended that the General Assembly proclaim 1990 as International Literacy Year,
Recalling that in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights 2 and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights 13 the inalienable right of everyone to education is recognized,
Mindful of the fact that the eradication of illiteracy is
one of the paramount objectives of the International Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade,94
Recognizing that the elimination of illiteracy constitutes
a prerequisite for ensuring the right to education,
Emphasizing that widespread illiteracy, especially in
many developing countries, seriously hinders the process
of economic and social development and cultural and
spiritual advancement,
Emphasizing further that this situation is utterly incompatible with what is required by the great advances in the

94 See resolution 35/56, annex.

scientific and technical revolution that mankind is witnessing,
Convinced that the process of education can make an indispensable contribution to the achievement of social progress, mutual understanding and co-operation among nations,
Mindful ofthe fact that the eradication ofilliteracy calls
for world-wide co-operation and joint efforts,
Considering that the complete elimination of illiteracy in
all regions of the world should be recognized as a priority
objective of the international community,
Convinced that the elaboration of a global strategy for
the eradication of illiteracy and the organization of a
world-wide literacy campaign will promote deeper understanding by people throughout the world ofthe various aspects of the problem of illiteracy and help to intensify efforts to spread literacy and education,
Taking note with appreciation of the programme for lnternational Literacy Year submitted by the DirectorGeneral of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, 95
Taking into account the guidelines for international
years and anniversaries adopted by the General Assembly
in its decision 35/424 of 5 December 1980,
1. Proclaims 1990 as lnternational Literacy Year;
2. Invites ali States to ensure adequate nation-wide
preparation for International Literacy Year;
3. Recommends that the specialized agencies, regional
commissions and other organizations of the United Nations system consider in their respective forums the contributions that they could make to the success of International Literacy Year;
4. Invites interested intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations to exert etforts in their respective fields to contribute adequately to the preparation and
implementation of national and international programmes
for International Literacy Year;
5. Invites the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization to assume the role of lead organization for International Literacy Year;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-fourth session an ítem entitled "Preparation and organization of International Literacy Year".
93rd plenary meeting
7 December 1987

42/105.

Reporting obligations of States parties to
United Nations instruments on human rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 41/121 of 4 December 1986 and
other relevant resolutions,
Reiterating the fundamental importance it attaches to
the fulfilment of reporting obligations under international
instruments on human rights,
Recognizing that etfective periodic reporting by States
parties to relevant treaty bodies not only enhances international accountability in relation to the protection and promotion of human rights, but also provides States parties
with a valuable opportunity to review policies and programmes affecting the protection and promotion of human rights and to make any appropriate adjustments,
95 See E/1987 /111

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Expressing concern about the increasing backlog of reports on implementation by States parties of United N~tions instruments on human rights and about delays m
consideration of reports by the treaty bodies,
Recognizing the burden that coexisting reporting systems place upon Member States that are parties to various
instruments and noting that this burden will become more
onerous as additional instruments come into force,
Welcoming the decision taken by the States parties to the
International Convention on the Elimination of Ali Forms
of Racial Discrimination, 3 at their tenth meeting, to approve the practice of the Committee on the Elimination of
Racial Discrimination of considering multiple overdue reports in consolidated form, 96 and the decision taken by the
States parties, at their eleventh meeting, to recommend
that in arder to facilitate the current work of the Committee, States parties, as a general practice, after submitting
initial reports to the Committee, should submit further
comprehensive reports on every second occasion thereafter when reports are due, that is, every four years, with a
brief updating report at each intervening occasion when
reports are due, 97
Reaffirming the importance of providing adequate resources for all bodies supervising implementation of
United Nations instruments on human rights, including
maintaining summary records for their proceedings, in
particular for the presentation and consideration of periodie reports by States parties,
Reaffirming also the independent, expert character of
the treaty bodies,
l. Urges States parties to United Nations instruments
on human rights with reports overdue to make every effort
to present their reports as soon as possible and to take advantage of opportunities whereby such reports can be consolidated;
2. Invites States parties to United Nations instruments
on human rights to review the processes followed in the
preparation of their periodic reports with a view to ensuring compliance with relevant guidelines, improving the
quality of description and analysis and limiting reports to
a reasonable length;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to revise, as a matter of priority and in consultation with the treaty bodies,
the draft compilation of general guidelines elaborated by
the various supervisory bodies and the list of articles dealing with related rights under the United Nations instruments on human rights, and to include in the guidelines,
where appropriate, the general comments of the supervisory bodies in order to assist States parties in compiling reports;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To propose a draft agenda for the meeting of the
persons chairing the treaty bodies to be held at Geneva in
October 1988, which reflects, in ter afia, the following objectives:
(i) To give priority attention to consideration of
remedial measures, including co-ordinated action
when appropriate, to deal with the problems highlighted in the reports of the Secretary-General; 98
(ii) To give further consideration to harmonizing and
consolidating reporting guidelines on the basis of
the suggestions in the above-mentioned reports,
with a view to providing clearer and more compre96 See CERD/SP /26.
97 See CERD/SP/31.
9 8 A/40/600 and Add.l

and A/41/510

205

hensive guidelines for more concise reporting by
States parties;
(iii) To identify and develop possible projects for technical advisory services with a view to assisting
States parties upon their request in fulfilling their
reporting obligations;
(iv) To explore ways of expediting consideration of
periodic reports, such as by envisaging time-limits
on oral interventions, avoiding duplication in questioning,
requesting supplementary written
material, and encouraging States parties to submit
reports that are as succinct as possible;
(b) To circulate a draft agenda for the meeting to the
treaty bodies to enable comment and to facilitate preparations;
(e) To submit a report on the meeting to the General
Assembly at its forty-fourth session;
5. Invites the persons chairing the treaty bodies to
maintain communication and dialogue with each other on
common issues and problems;
6. Invites States parties to United Nations instruments
on human rights to consider at their meetings further ways
of streamlining and otherwise improving reporting procedures, as well as enhancing co-ordination and information
flow between the treaty bodies and with relevant United
Nations bodies, including the specialized agencies, and requests the Secretary-General to inform the General Assembly of any decisions of the States parties on these issues;
7. Welcomes the efforts of the treaty bodies to rationalize reporting procedures and to scrutinize periodic reports
more intensively and expeditiously,
8. Invites the newly established Committee against
Torture to give due attention to the issues raised in the
present resolution when developing arrangements for periodie reporting by States parties;
9. Requests the Economic and Social Council to consider rearranging the periodicity of reporting under the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights; 13
10. Requests the Secretary-General to provide from official United Nations sources a compilation of statistics
relevant to the consideration by the treaty bodies ofthe reports of States parties;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to strengthen coordination between the Centre for Human Rights and the
Centre for Social Development and Humanitarian Affairs
of the Secretariat with reference to the implementation of
human rights instruments and the servicing oftreaty bodies;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to arrange, within
existing resources and taking into account the priorities of
the programme of advisory services, further training
courses for those countries experiencing the most serious
difficulties in meeting reporting obligations under United
Nations instruments on human rights;
13. Invites the specialized agencies and other United
Nations bodies to assist the Secretary-General in the
above-mentioned endeavours and to develop complementary training activities in this field;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the
annual reports ofthe Committee on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights, the Human Rights Committee, the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, the
Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against

206

General Assembly-Forty-second Session

Women and the Committee against Torture are made
available to ali the members of these bodies;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit, as expeditiously as possible, the text of the present resolution to
ali members of the treaty bodies;
16. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-third session as a separate ítem, the item entitled
"Reporting obligations of States parties to United Nations
instruments on human rights".
93rd plenary meeting
7 December 1987

42/106.

International Conference on the Plight of Refugees, Returnees and Displaced Persons in
Southern Africa

The General Assembly,
Gravely concerned at the deteriorating situation in
southem Africa arising from the continued domination
and oppression of the peoples of South Africa and Namibia by the minority racist régime of South Africa,
Conscious of the need to provide increased assistance to
the peoples of the region and the liberation movements of
South Africa and Namibia in their struggle against colonialism, racial discrimination and the policies of apartheid,
Conscious a/so of its responsibility to provide economic,
material and humanitarian assistance to independent
States in southern Africa in order to assist them in coping
with the situation resulting from the acts of aggression and
destabilization committed by the apartheid régime of
South Africa,
Aware that apartheid in South Africa, the illegal occupation of Namibia and acts of destabilization carried out by
South Africa and its surrogate elements continue to be the
main causes of refugee flows and the displacement of persons in the southern region of Africa,
Taking note of the decision of the Council of Ministers
ofthe Organization of African Unity at its forty-sixth session, held at Addis Ababa from 20 to 25 July 1987, to convene an International Conference on the Plight of Refugees, Retumees and Displaced Persons in Southern Africa
and to enlist the active support of the international community, in particular the United Nations, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the Southern
African Development Co-ordination Conference, to that
end, 99
Taking note also of the decision by the Executive Committee of the Programme of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees to endorse the proposal for
the convening of an international conference to address
the specific situation of refugees and displaced persons in
southern Africa, 100
Appreciating the current efforts ofthe intemational community to provide humanitarian assistance to refugees and
other persons displaced by armed conflict in the countries
of southern Africa,
Recognizing that the task of caring for refugees is a matter of international concern and solidarity in keeping with
the Charter of the United Nations, international and regional instruments, in particular the 1951 Convention 10 1
and the 1967 Protocoi 102 relating to the Status of Refu99 See A/42/699, annex I, resolution CM/Res.1117 (XLVII).
100 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-second Session,

Supplement No. 12A (A/42/12/ Add.1), para. 209.
IOI United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189, No. 2545.
102 /bid., vol. 606, No. 879 l.

gees, as well as the Organization of African Unity Convention Governing the Specific Aspects of Refugee Problems
in Africa, 103 of 1969,
Convinced that there is an urgent need for the international community to extend maximum and concerted assistance to southern African countries sheltering refugees,
returnees and displaced persons and also to highlight the
plight of the refugees, returnees and displaced persons in
southern Africa,
l. Welcomes the decision of the Organization of African Unity to convene in September 1988 an lnternational
Conference on the Plight of Refugees, Returnees and Displaced Persons in Southern Africa;
2. Reiterates its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for bis efforts, on behalf of the international community,
to organize and mobilize special programmes of economic
assistance for those African States facing grave economic
difficulties, the front-line States and other independent
States of southern Africa to help them to withstand the effects of the acts of aggression and destabilization committed by the apartheid régime of South Africa;
3. Welcomes the decision by the Executive Committee
of the Programme of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on the convening of the Conference;
4. Requests the Secretary-General of the United Nations, in close co-operation with the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, to give ali possible assistance
to the Secretary-General of the Organization of African
Unity in the preparation and organization of the Conference;
5. Appeals to ali Member States, the specialized agencies of the United Nations system and regional, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to provide ali the necessary support and resources needed for the
convening and success of the Conference;
6. Calls upan the international community to provide
increased assistance to the countries of southern Africa to
enable them to strengthen their capacity to provide the
necessary facilities and services for the care and well-being
of refugees, returnees and displaced persons in their countries;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to apprise the Economic and Social Council at its second regular session of
1988 and to report to the General Assembly at its fortythird session on the implementation of the present resolution.
93rd plenary meeting
7 December 1987

42/107.

Second lnternational Conference on Assistance
to Refugees in Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling ali its resolutions, particularly resolution
41/122 of 4 December 1986, relating to the Second International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in Africa,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on assistance to refugees in Africa, 104
Mindful that the fundamental purpose of the Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the Second International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in
Africa, held at Geneva from 9 to 11 July 1984, 105 was to
103 /bid., vol. 1001, No. 14691.
I04 A/42/491.
IOS A/39/402,

annex.
