<I

UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL

COUNCIId

RECORDS

2545’”

MEETING:

&.b,lLJ$%Qq~

30 MAY 1984

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisionalagenda(S/Agenda/2545)......................................

1

Adoption of the agenda. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . :. . . 1
Letter dated 21 May 1984 from the representatives of Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman,
Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/16574) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

WV.2545

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

(-2
i\

2545th MEETING

Held in New York on Wednesday, 30 May 1984, at 3.30 p.m.
President: Mr. Oleg A. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

2. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Russian]:
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received letters from the representatives of Djibouti, Mauritania,
Tunisia and Turkey in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, Egypt, France, India, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Upper Volta, Zimbabwe.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

agenda (S/Agenda/2545)

of the agenda

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Farah Dirir
(Djibouti), Mr. Ould Hamody (Mauritania),
Mr. Bouziri (Tunisia) and Mr. Gokqe (Turkey) took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

Letter dated 21 May 1984 from the representatives
of Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia
and the United Arab Emirates addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/16574)
The meeting

3. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Russian]:
The first speaker is the representative of Djibouti.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

was called to order at 4.30 p.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

4. Mr. FARAH DIRIR (Djibouti):
I should like to
express my appreciation to you, Mr. President, and to
the other members of the Council for giving my delegation the opportunity to participate in this debate of the
Council. I should also like to convey to you my warmest
congratulations on your accession to the presidency of
the Council for this’ month. I am quite’confident
that
your vast experience in the work of the Council and
your competence as a skilful diplomat will guide the
deliberations of the Council to a successful conclusion.
My congratulations are also extended to your predecessor, Mr. Kravets, representative of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, for the excellent and able manner in which he handled the deliberations of the Council
last month.

The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 21 May 1984 from the representatives of
Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the
United Arab Emirates addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/16574)
1. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Russian]:
In accordance with the decisions taken at previous
meetings [254Ist to 2543rd meetings], I invite the representative of Kuwait and the representative of Saudi
Arabia to take places at the Council table, and I invite
the representatives of Bahrain, Ecuador, the Federal
Republic of Germany, Japan, Jordan, Morocco, Oman,
Panama, Qatar, Senegal, Somalia, the Sudan, the
United Arab Emirates and Yemen to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

5. The pressing nature of the recent developments in
the Gulf region has once again impelled the Council to
meet in emergency session in the hope of averting the
imminent danger resulting from the Iranian aggression
and attack inflicted on oil-tankers of Saudi Arabia and
Kuwait sailing in their own territorial waters.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Shahin
(Kuwait) and Mr. Shihabi (Saudi Arabia) tookplaces at
the Council table; Mr. Al-Khalifa (Bahrain), Mr. Albornoz (Ecuador), Mr. van Well (Federal Republic of
Germany), Mr. Kuroda (Japan), Mr. Salah (Jordan), Mr. Mrani Zentar (Morocco), Mr. Ali (Oman),
Mr. Kam (Panama), Mr. Al-Thani (Qatar), Mr. Sarrt!
(Senegal), Mr. Adan (Somalia), Mr. Birido (Sudan),
Mr. Al-Qasimi (United Arab Emirates) and Mr. Sallam
(Yemen) took the places reservedfor them at the side of
the Council chamber.

6. As we follow the course of this debate, we observe
a dominant mood of yearning for an appropriate decision to be taken by the Council to prevent the Gulf
crisis from spreading throughout the whole region and
beyond.
7. Prior to the recent developments in the Gulf, the
Council had with regret witnessed the unfortunate man1

ner in which two sister Islamic countries, Iraq and Iran,
had been locked in bitter conflict for the past four years,
during which time both countries lost vast human, economic and material resources that would have otherwise been utilized in badly needed socio-economic reconstruction.

at stake are the vital security, stability and interests of a
region that is so important to developing and developed
nations alike, .not only for its economic, commercial
and material resources but also for its religious, cultural
and spiritual heritage and wealth so dear to the one
billion Muslims of the Islamic population scattered
throughout the world.

8. In this connection, while we appreciate the persistent efforts exerted in the past by the Council, the good
offices of the Secretary-General,
the Organization
of the Islamic Conference and the Movement of NonAligned Countries in resolving the Iraq-Iran conflict,
we cannot help but express our deep concern and frustration at the failure of those efforts to achieve a peaceful settlement of this conflict.

13. For all these reasons it is incumbent upon the
Council to halt any further deterioration of the Gulf
situation and to put an end to the Iranian aggression
against the peaceful Arab States before it gets out of
hand.
14. We are deeply disturbed about the evolution of the
Gulf crisis into a new phase emerging out of the Iranian
misconception
that the Iraq-Iran conflict should also
include other Arab nations in the Gulf because they
share blood and political relations with Iraq, the other
combatant in the conflict. We find this misconception a
very dangerous element that adds to the grave risk of
spreading the Iraq-Iran conflict throughout the entire
Gulf region and of leading to serious consequences that
may intemationalize
the conflict.

9. Our concern and frustration are perhaps more justified when we admit to ourselves that the gurpose of
this very series of meetings is to resolve a crisis situation arising out of previous efforts that have been made
in vain in the face of the deteriorating situation in the
Iraq-Iran conflict. We regret the deterioration of that
situation because, ‘while Iraq has offered a positive
initiative for negotiation ,and suspension of military
operations, Iran has refused to accept any appropriate
approach to mediation and conciliation.
Moreover,
Iran has ‘now detied international
law and order by
intensifying its hostilities’in
the Gulf and violating the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of the neighbouring Arab States.

15. No logic can justify the Iranian misconception
that it has the right to attack the Arab States of the Gulf
and destroy their properties because of the blood and
political ties they have with Iraq. If such an idea were
entertained it might set a dangerous precedent for any
would-be aggressor on the basis of which to attack and
violate the rights of a neighbour when that neighbour
happened to have historical ties and good-neighbourly
relations with one of the parties to a conflict. If an end is
not put to this new Iranian practice soon, the world will
not be a safe place to live in.

10. The Djibouti delegation, haunted by this background of past failures of international
efforts in the
Gulf crisis and by the current intensification of,Iranian
hostilities against the Gulf States, is more than ever
anxious to witness the success of the current debate at
taking the right course to avert the crisis. It is”for that
reason that my delegation urges the Council to consider
with more intent the legitimacy and gravity of the complaint of the Gulf States with regard to the aggression of
the Iranian war machine against oil-tankers and other
commercial vessels sailing to and from the Arab Gulf
countries that are not and have never been in a state of
war with Iran.
11. This body, which is the sole guardian of international peace and security, should call upon Iran to
respect the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of the Gulf States, to desist from
violating the stability of the region, to avoid any act that
might cause the situation in the Gulf to deteriorate
further and to refrain from endangering free and safe
navigation for all countries in the territorial and international waterways of the Gulf.

16. The Arab States in the Gulf region have acted
responsibly in refraining from becoming parties to the
Iraq-Iran conflict and have, very commendably,
restrained themselves to the point of frustration when
Iran has arrogated to itself the right to violate their
sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence by
attacking Saudi and Kuwaiti oil-tankers inside their
own territorial waters and out of the zone of conflict.
These attacks also have posed serious threats to the
freedom and safety of civilian ships navigating in international waterways to and from the Gulf States and
have jeopardized the interests of other developing and
developed nations. No one can justify these attacks
except the aggressor, ‘whose sole aim’is to undermine
the vital economic interests and stability of the Gulf
States.

12. The maintenance of international peace and security is the primary responsibility of the Council, and we
believe that the Council has the capacity and the resolve to satisfy and fulfil this difficult task, especially
when it finds it appropriate to do so. We also believe
that this is the right time for the Council to take a
decision on the fulfilment of this difficult task because

17. The giobal economy as we see it today under the
principles of global interdependence has made the Gulf
region an area in which the available economic and
cultural resources have necessitated and cemented the
inevitable convergence of the vital security and stability of the Gulf nations with the economic interests of
both developing and developed nations of the world.
2

18. For this reason alone, all peace-loving nations,
and especially the members of the. Council, should
strive to take appropriate action to dissuade Iran from
the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity
and political independence of the Gulf States or from
any belligerent behaviour inconsistent with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, and to restore the stability and normality of navigation in the Gulf region.

24. The Counc?s Specific concern today is the request of the six members of the Gulf Co-operation
Council to consider attacks against non-belligerent
merchant vessels in the international waters of the Gulf
and in the territorial waters of non-belligerent States. It
is completely appropriate that we should address this
problem directly.
25. It is well known that the right of free passage of
innocent shipping in international waters has long been
enshrined in international law as a fundamental right,
representing common interests of all States. Roman
lawyers characterized the sea ,as res communis-by
which they meant that it is beyond appropriation. Their
characterization has influenced the concept of freedom
of the seas as we know it today. It is too important a
right, too important a concept to an increasingly interdependent world, for us to permit it to be trampled
upon.

19. In conclusion, may we all in the community of the
United Nations call upon Iran to observe the spirit
of understanding, tolerance, peaceful coexistence and
good-neighbourliness
in its international
relations, to
refrain from the threat or use of force against its Arab
neighbours and to respect their sovereignty, territorial
integrity and independence, in accordance with the
principle of non-intervention
and non-interference
in
the affairs of other States.’
20. Mr. SORZANO (United States of America): We
have previously congratulated you on the assumption
of the presidency of the Council, but as you come to the
end of your term of office, I also wish to express our
appreciation of your efforts during this extremely busy
month.

26: We recognize that many of the issues which have
been raised concerning this ongoing war are complicated. We wish they all could be resolved. We earnestly
desire an overall settlement. We welcomed the fact that
one of the parties to the war accepted in principle the
cease-fire called for in resolution 540 (19g3), and we
hope that the time will soon come when both parties can
agree to a cease-tire and mediation leading to a resolution of their differences.

21. The Council has long been seized of the tragic war
between Iran and Iraq. This war has dragged on for
much too long-almost
four years. It has already inflicted perhaps .as many as half a million casualties
among combatants, innocent civilians, and children
and brought about untold damage to property. Emotions have understandably run very high on both sides.

27. We believe, however, that this is no reason not to
address in a straightforward manner the issue of attacks
on shipping, as requested by the representatives of the
six States which asked for this meeting, just as the’
Council separately addressed the frightful issue of
chemical-weapons
use. We therefore agree with the
States members of the Gulf Co-operation Council that
the Security Council should take a clear and unambiguous stand against the extremely dangerous expansion
of the war by attacks on innocent vessels in international waters or in the territorial waters of non-corn-’
batants. We firmly support the views expressed by the
Gulf Co-operation
Council and the League of Arab
States on this issue.

22. The Council has met repeatedly in an effort to stop
or suspend or ameliorate this conflict. Since 28 September 1980, the Council has adopted four resolutions
calling for a cease-fire. It has sought the good offices
of the Secretary-General
and his representatives in
working towards conciliation of the parties, endorsed,
the efforts of the Prime Minister of Sweden and issued
five Council presidential statements, including most
recently condemnation
of the illegal and unacceptable use of chemical weapons in this tragic war
[252&h meeting]. The United States whole-heartedly
supported and continues to support all these efforts.

28. The Gulf Co-operation Council’s reaffirmation of
the principle of collective security and its expressed
determination
to respond to threats to the security
of member States reflect deep concern about, recent
developments. The United States shares that concern.
As President Reagan said recently, the Gulf Stategare
anxious-as we all should be-that the war should not
be enlarged. We must prevent a widening of the war in
the Persian Gulf, which might disrupt the vital flow of
oil. For that reason, we urge that the Council take
meaningful action in addressing this critically important
matter.

23. Despite all these efforts, the war continues,
adding to its already terrible costs. And, as so often
happens when things do not get better, they do not stay
the same either; rather, they get worse. The war not
only continues but expands, posing an increasing threat
to the stability of the region and even to the global
economic system. The acceleration of attacks against
shipping in the Gulf, particularly attacks against shipping going into or ‘out of the ports of non-belligerent
States, not only threatens those States but indirectly
poses a potential threat to world price levels and a
threat of inflation just at the moment when world economic recovery and a healthy economic expansion is
beginning to get under way.

29. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation from Russian] I
The next speaker is the representative of Mauritania.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
3

30. Mr. OULD HAMODY (Mauritania) [interpretationfiom French]: First, Mr. President, on behalf of the
delegation of the Islamic Republic of Mauritania, I wish
to extend to you our best wishes for a successful outcome to your guidance of the business of the Council
this month. Your experience and your senseof responsibility guarantee such successand in particular ensure
a thorough examination of the very serious problems
brought before the Council by the six States members
of the Gulf Co-operation Council. I am happy to recall
not only that the Soviet Union, which you represent, is
geographically the neighbour of the Muslim Near East,
including among its citizens tens of millions of Muslims,
but that your great nation has frequently been an important and decisive alty during the last 30 years, particularly with regard to the recovery of the rights of the
Palestinian and other peoples of the region.

appeals of the international community and of course
their national interests. Today, again, while the Gulf
conflict is acquiring new proportions and threatening
the tranquillity and prosperity of the non-belligerent
countries of the region, we remind Iraq and Iran in the
Council of their formidable responsibilities.
36. The Islamic Republic of Mauritania is profoundly
convinced that these responsibilities exclude and prohibit the uncontrollable and unwarranted extension of
the conflict to non-belligerent countries. It is not in the
interest of anyone at all to increase the destruction, to
r&n other economies, to inflict enormous suffering on
other peoples of the region.
37. In this regard we have expressed our concern, in
particular at the time of the aggression against Kuwait
in 1981,at the danger of the Middle East’s becoming the
arena of foreign rivahies and intervention, of internal
divisions and confrontations between brothers. Today,
the attacks on merchant shipping in Saudi and Kuwaiti
territorial waters by the Iranian Air Force make this
danger even more real and more painful than ever.

31. We wish to express to your predecessor, Mr. Kravets, representative of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, our appreciation of the way -he guided the
work of the Council in April.
32. My delegation also wishes to express its gratitude
to all the members of the Council for permitting us to
take part in this important debate.

38. Mauritania fully shares the concern of the peoples
of the region at this new and very dangerous escalation
of the war, this violation of the sovereignty of Saudi
Arabia and Kuwait, and this attack on the freedom and
safety of navigation in the territorial waterways of
the Gulf. The very serious consequences of this escalation cannot but further complicate a situation which is
already very difficult and explosive. Even worse, it is a
setback to the prospects for the restoration of peace and
the reconciliation which is indispensable and natural
between all brother peoples on the Gulf coasts.

33. Having inherited, like Iraq ’ and Iran, among
others, the, noble ,Islamic civilization, the Islamic, Republic of Mauritania has always been deeply concerned
by the fratricidal conflict in the Gulf, and our people
never ceases to deplore the pointless violence taking
place there. In our eyes, no contradiction and no lack of
understanding can justify the tragic, cruel confrontation between brothers. This abnormal situation threatens,their common destiny, disregards their long history
of peaceful coexistence and is contrary to the duty of
tolerance, brotherhood and solidarity imposed upon
them by the very ethics of Islam. Since September
1980, the world-sometimes powerless, sometimes indifferent-has ‘witnessed in the Gulf a real tragedy
whose human, economic, social and political dimensions are even more terrible than the horrors revealed in
the press.

39. It is the view of our delegation that the Council
must condemn the inadmissible attacks on commercial
shipping and the flagrant and regrettable violation of
the sovereignty of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the
State of ‘Kuwait. It is imperative to discourage the
repetition of such acts in a region of vital strategic
importance whose stability and security is of interest to
all Member States of the Organization.
40. Our delegation wishes to reaffirm to the sister
delegations of Kuwait and Saudi Arabia its deep sympathy and its solidarity with them. We are gratified by
the confidence which those two brother countries and
the other Gulf countries show in the United Nations and
in the Council, with its special responsibility for international security and peace.

34. We cannot remain indifferent. Our people feel
bitterness and sadnessin the face of the grievous spectacle of hundreds of thousands of victims, Iraqi and
Iranian, the irreparable destruction of so many towns
and of essential infrastructure. Our people deeply regret, for. Iraq and ‘for Iran, the waste of enormous
human and material potential in a war which cannot end
with a victor but only with two vanquished, whatever
territorial or political gains one or other of the two
countries concerned may hope for.

41. Lastly, we wish for Iraq, Iran and the entire region
peace, reconciliation and prosperity on the eve of the
sacred month of Ramadan, a month of constructive
work, piety, conciliation, reconciliation, meditation
and tolerance.

35. In the United Nations, in the Movement of NonAligned Countries and in the Organization of the
Islamic Conference, our country has always urged Iraq
and Iran to observe moderation and restraint. It has
always reminded them of the need to rely on the peaceful solution of their differences in accordance with the

42. The PRESIDENT [interpretation from RussianI:
The next speaker is the representative of Turkey.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
4

,.
:

..

,. ..,.

/
: .‘. ._,.
,_.

‘.

43. Mr. GGKCE (Turkey): Mr. President, several
weeks ago, in this very Chamber, we had the privilege
of paying a tribute to your finesse and your exemplary
qualities as a diplomat. Subsequent developments have
proved once again how well placed our confidence is in
your wisdom, experience and skill in guiding the work
of the Council under even the most demanding circumstances.

side to pursue the war and thus erode further the
already meagre prospects of a peaceful solution. We
oppose and condemn such acts wherever and whenever
they occur.
49. Similarly, we regard the attacks in the Gulfagainst
commercial shipping&
an extremely serious development. These attacks are a flagrant violation both of the
freedom of navigation in international
waters, a fundamental principle of international law to which Turkey
attaches the utmost importance, and of the principle of
the freedom of trade. Such attacks have, unfortunately,
intensified in recent times. This interference with commercial shipping could easily generate new and dangerous developments which would be in the interest of
no country in the region. The escalation of the conflict
or its expansion will benefit no one. The Gulf must
remain outside the scope and be spared the repercussions of the Iran-Iraq war, which should, to the extent
possible and until such time as it is resolved, be somehow insulated and kept from further spilling over into
the Gulf. The assurance of the freedom of safe navigation for commercial shipping in that strategic waterway
should be the immediate objective. There must be security for all the littoral States, and there should be no
fractionation of the concept of Gulf security, if stability
is to be maintained and the sanctity of non-belligerents
in the region is to be preserved and respected.

44. Our purpose in speaking today is not only to
underline the concern of the Government of Turkey at
the recent turn of events in the Gulf region. We are all
aware that the whole international community is deeply
preoccupied with the highly volatile situation in that
region, which is already the arena of a protracted and
costly war between Iran and Iraq. The statements of the
previous speakers in the Council and statements elsewhere amply demonstrate the existence of widespread
concern.
45. We are speaking today also in the hope that we
may make a contribution,
however modest, to the
deliberations of the Council on this delicate, complex
and potentially explosive,issue.
The Council is faced
with a valuable opportunity to address itself in a positive, constructive way to a situation which threatens
not only the security of the Gulf .but also the economic
well-being of much of the world.
46. Both Iran and Iraq are our neighbours, and with
both we enjoy fraternal relations emanating from bonds
of religion and culture and the shared historical experience of many centuries. We are therefore,all the more
saddened by the prolongation of this tragic conflict,
sustained at the cost of staggering sacrifices by both
sides, sacrifices which continue to result in intolerable losses not only of material wealth but also, and
more important, of precious and irreplaceable human
resources.

50. The Government of Turkey calls on Iran and Iraq
to act with a sense of responsibility and to refrain from
actions that exacerbate the existing conflict. We appeal
to them to exercise the utmost restraint so as not to
entangle in their hostilities the non-belligerent
countries in the Gulf region. For their part, the non-belligerent Gulf States should also continue to exercise
maximum caution.
51. The international
community
also bears great
responsibility.
We must all meticulously avoid undue
interference in the Gulf. Outside intervention, irrespective of how it might be justified, could, given the stated
and well-known positions of the parties to the Iran-Iraq
conflict, be the precursor of more generalized external
involvement, the consequences of which could be neither entirely foreseen nor fully controlled, once set in
motion. Iran,‘and Iraq must on their own, without outside interference and through means acceptable to both
of them,. find an agreed settlement.

47. Our sorrow and concern have from the outset
been aggravated by our sensitivity to the ever-present
risk of the expansion of the war between Iran and Iraq
and the direct involvement
of other parties in the
hostilities. We have warned from the start that the IranIraq conflict has shattered more than the relations between these two major Powers in the region. The armed
confrontation
between them, we stated, could also
bring about dangerous entanglements in the entire Gulf
region. Clearly, any further deterioration and destabilization in the Gulf would have drastic consequences
for international peace and constitute a grave threat to
global security.

52. It is our hope that the Council will find it possible
to take an even-handed approach to the matter now
before it. The international community may try to help
the conflicting p&ties to find a solution but must not
attempt to impose one. It is for the Council to determine
how best it can contribute to safeguarding the right to
safe navigation in the Gulf and to the reduction of the
risk of a widening conflict. The Council, whether by
way of adopting a resolution or by some other means,
should essentially seek to strengthen the hand of the
Secretary-General,
who has reaffirmed his readiness to
assist in the peaceful resolution of this conflict. The

48. The change in recent months in the modalities
of the conflict tends to confirm our worst fears. The
prosecution of the conflict is no longer confined to
accepted and mutually
respected modalities.
This
makes us less confident about a pacific settlement in the
foreseeable future. We are of the view that the contravention of established norms of conduct in armed
‘hostilities and disregard of the generally accepted principles only serve to increase the resolve of the other
5

Council must resist the temptation to adopt an easy
decision which would be totally unacceptable to one or
the other party. The Council ought to avoid the prospect of investing its authority and credibility in a decision that would only lead to further intransigence
because of its lack of balance, fairness and justice. Both
Iran and Iraq should, through the action of the Council,
be enabled to co-operate with the Secretary-General,
while they take concrete steps towards the reduction of
tension in the Gulf.
53. Turkey, for its part, as a neighbour and friend of
both countries; will continue to exert all possible efforts
to contribute to bringing about a peaceful settlement of
the war between Iran ‘and Iraq and to promote the
stability and security of the Gulf region as a whole. The
position ‘of positive neutrality and impartiality which
the Government of Turkey has maintained with thorough consistency from the very beginning is, we believe, the only way for us to maintain the capacity
required to assist in the eventual peaceful settlement
of this conflict. Under appropriate conditions, Turkey
remains prepared to help and will help if and when
requested to do so.
I
54. The PRESIDENT [interprefutianfrom
&miun]:
The next speaker is the representative of Tunisia,
whom I invite to take a place at the Council table and to
make a statement.
55. Mr.. BOUZIRI (Tunisia) [interpretation
‘from
French]: As I am addressing the Council for the first
time, Sir, may I say on behalf of my delegation how
pleased I am to see you guiding the Council’s work
during this month of May, which is marked by an
increase in international tension. Your outstanding
qualities as a diplomat, your profound knowledge of
international affairs and your wisdom undoubtedly contribute to the successful progress of the Council’s work.
All this is a reflection of your country, where I had the
honour and the pleasure to represent Tunisia for more
than five years.
56. I should also like to take this opportunity to congratulate your predecessor, Mr. K&vets, representative of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, on the
efficient way in which he guided the Council’s work last
month.
57. Finally, I should like to thank the members of the
Council for allowing me to take part in its work.
58. Tunisia feels that it should take part in the debate
in the Council in order to ‘express its great concern
about the worsening of the situation in the Gulf region.
Extremely tragic from its very outset, the conflict between Iraq and the Islamic Republic of Iran has, unfortunately, known no respite for more than 44 months,
despite the efforts of the Council, the good offices
of missions of various kinds and the,repeated solemn
appeals to both belligerents.

59. We deeply regret that the deadly and absurd state
of war continues, particularly as it now seems to be
spilling over the belligerents’ borders, threatening
other States of the region and affecting the interests of
many other countries far from the zone of conflict.
60. The facts exist; they were stated during the first
day of the debate. They confirm the escalation that we
had all feared, which could plunge the Gulf region into a
war with unforeseeable consequences for the whole
world.
61. The attacks that are the subject of the requestmade to the Council alarm us for more than one reason. First, they were directed against the interests of
two countries that are not parties to the Iraq-Iran conflict and that have constantly declared their neutrality.
Secondly, they took place far from the theatre of hostilities, in the territorial waters of Saudi Arabia and
Kuwait or on the high seas.Thirdly,‘their targets were
unarmed merchant ,vessels, carrying neither arms nor
ammunition but only cargoes of oil.
62. All attacks on third parties are reprehensible
under international law. They run counter to the obligations assumed by their perpetrators under the Charter
of the United Nations and the 1958Convention on the
High Seas.’ They are also a violation of the sovereignty
of the countries concerned and of the fundamental principles of good-neighbourliness and peaceful coexistence. They are a serious threat to freedom of navigation
and trade in the Gulf.
63. Like the other members of the international community, my country is fully aware of the serious implications of this escalation. If the crisis is not contained in
time, there is a risk that it will lead to a blockade of the
ports of the Gulf countries, which will reduce the heavy
maritime traffic in that region to a mere trickle. The
risks run by the shipowners and insurance companies
will undoubtedly adversely affect the price of petroleum, with effects on the energy-importing countries,
above all those of the third world, which will suffer the
most.
64. It-is worth recalling that, at a time when many
countries throughout the world confront serious economic problems, such a crisis would contribute to the
paralysis of a number of already tottering economies
and put others in difficulty.
65. The economic stakes in the Gulf are so great that
the region has constantly been coveted by foreign
Powers. The destabilization of the region through the
expansion of the Iraq-Iran conflict would endanger not
only the legitimate interests of the Statesand peoples of
the region but also international peace and ‘security, and
would encourage foreign military intervention.
66. The escalation which we are witnessing in the Gulf
risks intemationalizing the conflict if this principal
organ of the United Nations does not show firmness,

imagination and good judgement. The Organization has
borne a responsibility
since the outbreak of hostilities
almost four years ago. It still bears that responsibility
today, faced with new developments which should be
1
defused as soon as possible.

offrces missions should not dishearten us, despite the
uneasiness we feel. We express our hope that eventually these two fraternal countries will silence their
guns and settle their differences at the negotiating table,
thanks to decisive action by the Council..

67. If the Council has a duty to denounce attacks on
third parties, particularly’ outside the war zone, it
should also once again look into the origin of the crisis
through which we are now living. Although they are
extremely serious, the attacks on the oil-tankers of
third countries are only a development of the conflict
that continues to rage between Iraq and the Islamic
Republic of Iran. Stopping the conflict from spreading
is in itself a positive action that we all earnestly call for.
It is the Council’s bounden duty to work for a solution
to the conflict involving dignity and honour for both
belligerents.

73. Mr. KHALIL
(Egypt) [interpretation
from Arabic]: The Security Council is meeting in response to the
complaint of the Gulf Co-operation Council in the light
of the Iranian attack on vessels sailing to and from ports
of Kuwait and Saudi Arabia.
74. We have been following very closely the statements made by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs and the
representatives of the Gulf States, who have demonstrated unequivocally the clear-cut danger which recent
grave. events in the Gulf pose to peace, security and
stability in that region of such vital importance to the
world economy and to international peace and security.

68. Tunisia believes that the recent events should
move the international
community
to redouble its
efforts to achieve that end. The worsening of the situation in the Gulf should not restrict the Council to an
awkward wait-and-see attitude or confine its action to
an unworkable decision. On the contrary, it should
permit it to develop an adequate response which will
help pave the way to a swift resolution of the conflict.

75. It, was only natural, in the light of the’ present
situation, for the Gulf States to take the necessary
steps, particularly the decision to convene the ministerial Council of the Gulf Co-operation
Council,
which, at its extraordinary meeting of 17 May, adopted
a declaration reviewing recent events-namely,
the Iranian attacks on vessels sailing to and from its member
States-and, noting the inherent danger to the vital
interests of those States.

69. We have noted in recent years that there are some
who do not want this war to end. Therefore, by a subtle
game of balancing forces, they have tried to prolong this
fratricidal war in order to wear down the two belligerents, impoverish their peoples and thus promote their
unworthy ends. We believe that, whatever happens,
these manoeuvres will redound upon them, particularly
I
if the conflict spreads significantly.

76. Egypt is very anxious to reaffirm that it shares
the profound alarm of the international community at
the dangerous escalation of events, which prejudices
the freedom of navigation of ships sailing to and from
ports and port facilities of littoral States of the Gulf not
parties to the conflict. That is’ why we reject and denounce the recent attacks on vessels sailing to and from
Kuwaiti and Saudi ports.

70. Use should be made of .the means authorized by
the Charter and international law to put an end to this
deadly war and to avoid a spread of the conflict, leading
to foreign intervention, with unforeseeable consequences. We congratulate the countries which in the course
of this debate have expressed their opposition to any
foreign military intervention in the region. At the same
time, we appeal particularly to one of the parties to
exercise restraint vis-d-vis its Gulf neighbours and
show more co-operation with the Security Council.
/
71. While we appreciate what the Council is doing
concerning this conflict, the efforts made by the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the various
initiatives of the Organization of the Islamic Conference and the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, we
have, regrettably, to say that these approaches have
remained fruitless, despite the determination
and selflessness with which they have been pursued. Nevertheless, my country desires the continuation of all efforts
that may one day lead to a cessation of the hostilities.
We do so with the same devotion as the international
community, and in its higher interests.

77. We are gratified by the decision of the Ministers
and of all those who have come to New York to participate in this Council debate. We view that as an
indication of the danger inherent in this escalation, and
we must pursue our efforts here at the United Nations
and elsewhere to eliminate its causes. It is .worth recalling that every State should respect its obligations
under the Charter and pledge to refrain in its international relations from the threat or use of force against
the territorial integrity and political independence of
any other State. States should also pledge to respect the
rules of good-neighbourliness.
78. From the outset Egypt has been following with
alarm the ongoing Iran-Iraq conflict. We are most concerned by the danger of a prolongation of this military
confrontation
because it might well spill over those
countries* frontiers, becoming not just a bilateral conflict but a much more dangerous regional one. Egypt,
for its part, will spare no effort to participate in attempts
to provide an atmosphere in which reason can prevail
and a positive response can be achieved to the sincere
call to settle the conflict through negotiation.

72. The absence of a positive reaction from either of
the belligerents to the Council resolutions and the good7

the United Nations, of international law and of nonalignment-above all, the right of every State to independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity, as well
as to non-interference in its internal affairs. That
explains our deep alarm and concern at the turn of
events in the Gulf-the attacks on vessels of two fraternal Arab countries, both of which have made every
effort to put an end to the war. Moreover, the Gulf
States have made and are continuing to make laudable
efforts to invigorate the international economy and
to fund the ongoing development of the developing
countries.

79. We cannot fail to recall that Iraq has responded
positively to the initiatives that have been made here at
the United Nations and elsewhere to put an end to the
conflict and to ensure the observance of international
legality through peaceful means.
80. It is no secret that Egypt has made a sincere
contribution in the framework of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries and through neutrality, to mobilize efforts to bring the Iran-Iraq war to a halt and to
settle the conflict by peaceful means. This is being done
in pursuance of the intensive contacts made by President Hosni Mubarak with a view to achieving the desired objective at the Seventh Conference of Heads of
State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at
New Delhi in March 1983.

83. Because of its privileged geographical position at
the crossroads of three continents for navigation and
commerce, Egypt strongly believes that the freedom of
navigation must be preserved in order to ensure the
prosperity and well-being of all States of the world.

81. We all undoubtedly remember that the President
of Egypt, in a statement before the General Assembly
on 28 September 1983, called on the international community to make additional efforts to put an end to the
Iran-Iraq conflict, because that war was completely
aimless and meaningless and its prolongation would
simply serve to increase tension, destabilize the
Gulf-a region of vital strategic interests-and provide
a pretext for foreign intervention. In the same
statement, the President said:

84. In conclusion, Egypt calls for action to help create
conditions, both inside and outside the Organization,
conducive not only to checking the deterioration of the
situation and stemming the escalation of tension, but
also to putting an end to the Iran-Iraq war. By taking
action on the complaint before it, the Council will move
in a positive direction to re-establish confidence in
negotiations as a way to achieve peace and stability.

“We are not asked to take sides, but we should
adopt a clear and unequivocal stand: the war must be
stopped and peace mtist be established.“*

The meeting rose ar 5.30 p.m.

82. In keeping with its efforts through its position of
neutrality to put an end to this war, Egypt apIjeals for
an end to hostilities, withdrawal and embarking on
negotiations to restore the rights of both sides on the
basis of respect for the principles of the Charter of

NOTES
I See United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 450, No. 6465.
2 OflciaIRecords of the Genera/Assembly, Thirty-eighth Session,
Plenary Meetings, 10th meeting, para.32.

8’

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences depositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous
aup& de votre libraire ou adressez-vous a : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes. New York ou Get&e.
KAK

COMO

HOTIYYHTh

CONSECUIR

H3AAHKR

OPrAHHR.41[WZi

PUBLICACIONES

OlYbE;UiHEHHhlX

DE LAS NACIONES

HAUHA

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas esdn en venta en librerias y casas disttibuidoras
en
todas panes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o ditijase a: Naciones Unidas, Section de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United

Nations,

New York

00300

90-61313-Jmu8y

19!?3-2.050
