United Nations

S/PV.4466

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-seventh year

4466th meeting
Thursday, 31 January 2002, 3.45 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Koonjul . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Mauritius)

Members:

Bulgaria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cameroon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guinea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ireland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Singapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Syrian Arab Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Tafrov
Mr. Belinga-Eboutou
Mr. Shen Guofang
Mr. Valdivieso
Mr. Doutriaux
Mr. Fall
Mr. Corr
Mr. Aguilar Zinser
Mr. Strømmen
Mr. Lavrov
Ms. Foo
Mr. Mekdad
Mr. Eldon
Mr. Williamson

Agenda
Wrap-up discussion on the work of the Security Council for the current month

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

02-23827 (E)

*0223827*

S/PV.4466

The meeting was called to order at 3.45 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Wrap-up discussion on the work of the Security
Council for the current month
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
As this is a wrap-up meeting, by definition we are
supposed to take stock of what we have done during
the month, or what we have not done, or what we
would have liked to have achieved. This exercise can
also be an opportunity to evaluate the way in which the
Council has conducted its business during the month.
In that connection, I invite members to comment on all
the issues that we have dealt with during the month,
and also to comment on the manner in which these
issues have been dealt with. I also invite the comments
of members on how we can improve upon what we
have not been able to achieve during the month.
For this meeting we do not have a list of
speakers, and I invite those who wish to take the floor
to raise their hands.
I would now like to make a very brief statement
on how we have seen our own presidency before I open
the floor to Council members.
The programme of work of the Security Council
for the month of January has been determined mainly
by the exigencies imposed by previous decisions of the
Security Council. The Council renewed the mandates
of four peacekeeping operations, examined 11 reports
of the Secretary-General and adopted seven resolutions
and two presidential statements. We also issued 12
press statements on various issues discussed during the
month.
While the attention of the international
community continues to be occupied with the situations
in Afghanistan and the Middle East, as well as with the
threats posed by terrorism to international peace and
security, the programme of work for the month of
January attempted to strike a balance in its approach by
addressing these issues in an adequate manner and, at
the same time, refocusing attention on conflict
situations in Africa and elsewhere.

2

We are pleased that the public meeting on the
situation in Africa, with the participation for the first
time of the Secretary-General of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU), attracted several ministers from
both member and non-member countries of the
Council. I wish to express my sincere appreciation to
all those delegations that participated in the meeting, in
particular those ministers from member and nonmember countries of the Council who travelled to New
York for the occasion.
It is our hope that the presidential statement
which we have just adopted will serve as a basis for
greater and more effective interaction between the
Security Council and the OAU. We also hope that
succeeding presidencies will continue this focus on
African issues by taking a global and holistic approach,
and we are grateful in this regard that the United
Kingdom delegation has already announced that it will
do so during its presidency in July.
I invite members to comment on the open briefing
by the Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
Sir Jeremy Greenstock, which took place on 18
January. Their comments could focus on whether that
meeting was useful and on how we can further the
work both of the Security Council and of the CounterTerrorism Committee to attain the goals we set
ourselves in resolution 1373 (2001).
During this month we also remained engaged and
committed with respect to the situation in Afghanistan.
We had our regular briefings; we lifted sanctions
against Ariana Afghan Airlines; we were able to
unfreeze the assets of the Central Bank of Afghanistan.
Yesterday’s address by Mr. Hamid Karzai, Chairman of
the Afghanistan Interim Authority, stressed once again
how important the continued involvement of the
Security Council is to the Afghan people in their quest
for peace and stability.
At the beginning of the month we had said too
that we would try to promote transparency in our work.
One of the ways we did that was by setting up a web
site on which we provided daily summaries of meetings
and consultations of the Security Council. Members of
the Council may wish to comment on whether that was
useful or whether it could be further improved to make
our work more transparent. In the same vein, I am very
glad that the public meeting on the situation in Africa
was broadcast live through a United Nations webcast.
That was indeed a technological breakthrough which

S/PV.4466

allowed the whole world to follow the business of the
Security Council. It is probably too easy to find out
whether this was well received, but it would be
interesting to find out whether this kind of service
could be of use in the future to promote transparency in
the work of the Council.
During this month we were also able to pursue
discussion of some issues relating to the documentation
and procedures of the Security Council. We spent quite
a bit of time both at ambassadorial and experts level to
review the format and the content of the report of the
Security Council to the General Assembly. This shows
that it is possible, with good will, to have discussions
on issues that may appear to be difficult. We are glad
that on this issue we are, almost, near agreement and
that we will be able to have something ready for next
month.
During several past wrap-up meetings, we have
laid emphasis on the need for the Council to interact
with non-members of the Council in order to share
views on issues before the Council. Members of the
Council may wish to comment on the format we
adopted during the debate on the work of the CounterTerrorism Committee, whereby we heard three
members of the Council, then three representatives of
non-Council States, and had Sir Jeremy Greenstock
intervene after every six or so speakers. Our aim was to
promote some kind of interactive dialogue. I would like
to get the views of members on whether that was
successful and on whether it might be encouraged in
the future. We were also able during January to have
two short but very interesting meetings on the format
of future wrap-up meetings; even here we seem to be
moving towards some consensus. We hope that we will
be able to try the new format — on which, again, there
is near-consensus — next month.
During this month we were also able to start
regular briefings on the situation in the Middle East, a
subject which had remained in the footnote of the
Council’s programme for far too long. The briefing by
Mr. Terje Roed-Larsen, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Process, was, I hope, extremely useful,
because we were able to get first-hand information
from somebody who has actually been operating in the
field.
We are also very grateful that the President of the
Economic and Social Council was able to respond to
our invitation to participate in the public meeting of the

Security Council on the situation in Africa. We hope
that this participation heralds a new era of cooperation
and coordination in addressing issues of international
peace and security, in particular the post-conflict
peace-building
components
of
peace-building
initiatives. The interaction between these two major
organs of the United Nations had long been awaited.
Members of the Council may wish to address this
matter and to suggest ways in which we can improve
the relationship between the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council.
The work of the Council during the month of
January proceeded, in our view, without too much
pressure: we had only one evening sitting. That was
possible thanks mainly to the cooperation and support
extended by everyone here to me and my team during
the month. I will reserve my vote of thanks until
everybody else has spoken.
I now open the floor to those members who wish
to speak.
Mr. Strømmen (Norway): Let me, first of all,
congratulate you, Sir, on the excellent manner in which
you have conducted the presidency of the Security
Council during the month of January 2002. You
deserve our heartfelt thanks. We have chosen to
highlight briefly three points relating to the work of the
Council this month.
First, we welcome the focus on African issues,
notably reflected in the comprehensive public debate
on 29 January and in the decision to dispatch a Security
Council mission to Ethiopia and Eritrea next month in
support of the peace process between those two
neighbouring countries. I am pleased to confirm that
preparations for the mission are well under way in
close cooperation with the parties.
Secondly, we commend you, Sir, for the
transparency exercise undertaken during the month.
Finally, I ask your indulgence, Sir, and wish to
reiterate the desirability of brevity in our interventions
in order to facilitate a businesslike and interactive
meeting culture in the Council. We must be able to
encourage openness and transparency and at the same
time to make meetings in the Chamber and in the
consultation room as businesslike and result-oriented
as possible.
Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
take this opportunity, Sir, to convey to you and your

3

S/PV.4466

team our appreciation for the very skilful way in which
you have guided our work, as well as for your
commitment. I shall heed the recommendation that we
should speak briefly, perhaps for only three minutes.
My first comment relates to our public meeting
on Africa. It was a timely, useful debate with excellent
participation from the membership of the Organization.
Here, the delegation of Mauritius deserves special
commendation.
I have two points to make regarding the future.
The first is that we should perhaps narrow the focus of
our debate on the African continent to a few specific
points that could in turn be set out in a more concrete
manner in a presidential statement. Secondly, we are
glad there has been an agreement about creating the ad
hoc working group to follow up on the African
situation and the topics of the presidential statement, as
well as on working in coordination with the Economic
and Social Council. During the year that organ will
examine the creation of a special advisory group to
meet the needs of countries emerging from conflict,
and we enthusiastically welcome the intention of the
British delegation to take up this matter again during
its presidency in July.
I would also like to say something about the work
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee and about
resolution 1390 (2002), which spells out the mandate
of the Committee established under resolution 1267
(1999). It clearly emerged during the open meeting this
month that the Counter-Terrorism Committee has been
advancing in a quiet and perhaps somewhat invisible,
but intensive manner. It is having a considerable effect
on the maintenance of international peace and security.
The members of the Council are dedicating
considerable time and effort, and certainly have done
so throughout the month of January, to accomplish a
task that should be duly appreciated by the
international community. The adoption of resolution
1390 (2002) opened up a new modality for the Council,
because, in practice, it established the only sanctions
regime that is not linked to a specific territory or
country, but rather has global application. That is why
its implementation will require new mechanisms, and
we will have to discuss substantive topics never before
tackled in the Council. I would offer as an example the
discussion of the procedure to elaborate in a flexible
manner the lists of individuals, entities or organizations
involved in international terrorism without diminishing
the flexibility of action that is required.

4

I would like to conclude by highlighting the
importance of this wrap-up exercise. We should not
measure its impact only by the size of the audience,
which is again small. With this only criterion, we
would have to reach the absurd conclusion that other
public meetings regularly held on other topics on the
Council’s agenda should be eliminated, because they
do not draw a massive number of representatives of
non-members of the Council. This exercise leaves a
record of our individual vision of the work of the
month, and this in itself is very important. We hope
that in the future we will agree on procedures and
content that will be enthusiastically welcomed by all
members of the Council and by a greater number of
non-members as well.
The President: I thank the representative of
Colombia for his kind words.
I would like to inform members that this is the
last Council meeting that Ambassador Shen of China is
attending with us. I would like to offer him, on behalf
of all the members of the Council and on my own
behalf, our very best wishes for continued success. He
has been the Deputy Permanent Representative of
China, and he will be departing from New York very
shortly. I know that I am speaking on behalf of all
members when I express the hope to be able to see him
again in New York in either an official or unofficial
capacity. We all look forward to that opportunity.
Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would first like to thank you, Mr. President, for the
good wishes that you have expressed to me just now.
With regard to this month’s work, the month has
been a very fruitful one. The President made a very
comprehensive plan for the month’s work. While
promoting transparency, he also tried his best to
guarantee the efficiency of our work.
The Security Council successfully carried out its
work for this month, thanks to the efficient efforts of
the President and the work of the Mauritius delegation.
In particular, the programme of work of the last week
fully demonstrates the capacity of the President for
coordination and leadership.
The Security Council held a public meeting on
the situation in Africa, which demonstrates the
importance the Security Council attaches to the
problem of Africa, and which also strengthens the
communication between regional organizations such as

S/PV.4466

the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and the
United Nations. We hope that the broad consensus
reached on how to resolve the issues of peace and
development in Africa can be quickly translated into
concrete actions. The issue of Africa should be a
priority matter on the agenda of the Security Council.
In the future, we hope that we can further strengthen
the communication between the OAU, other regional
organizations and the United Nations.
The President also arranged a timely open
meeting to hear the report of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee on its work and future work plan. At the
same time, it was an opportunity to get a sense from
the broader membership of what it expects from the
Committee. This is no doubt very beneficial for the
next stage of work of the Committee.
The question of Afghanistan was also a focus of
the this month’s work. The Chairman of the Afghan
Interim Authority, Mr. Karzai, spent only a short time
in the Security Council, but his presence was very
significant. We fully support the statement made by the
President on behalf of the full membership, and we
hope that the next President will continue to be seized
of the situation in Afghanistan.
Of course, there is still the regrettably unresolved
issue of the conflict between Palestine and Israel.
Yesterday’s discussion of it was far from sufficient. We
hope that the Security Council will expand its
involvement in and give greater attention to this issue
so that it can play a greater role. It would be a pity if
the Security Council could not play a greater role on
that question, which affects the security of the region
and the world.
This is the last time that I will be taking the floor
here as the Deputy Permanent Representative of the
Chinese delegation to the United Nations. I have
worked here for the past four years, during which time
my collaboration with colleagues here in the Council
has left me with good memories. I would like to take
this opportunity to express my heartfelt thanks to all
my colleagues for having extended to me and to my
delegation their support and cooperation.
Finally, again I would like to thank you, Sir, for
the good wishes expressed to me just now.
The President: I thank the representative of
China for his very kind words and for the words of

wisdom that he had for the members of the Council
before he leaves. We wish him all the very best.
Mr. Doutriaux (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank you, Sir, for the excellent way that
you have presided over the Council in the month of
January. I would also like to bid farewell, but not
adieu, to our colleague, Ambassador Shen. Goodbye.
We are certain we shall see you again.
Ambassador Levitte would have liked to be able
to come here today, because, like many members of the
Council, he would have wished our monthly wrap-up to
be more interactive to be attended by more
representatives. Fortunately, we have here the
Permanent Representative of Namibia, a former
member of the Council, who certainly would have had
some interesting comments to make. The Ambassador
of Jamaica, who just left the Chamber, would have
liked to stay, and I believe would have done so, if she
could have taken the floor. But I understand that under
the presidency of Mexico we will be able to have a true
interactive debate, limited to certain points. And each
statement should be limited — as our colleague from
Norway recalled — to three minutes. So I shall try to
do so with my watch. Three minutes means three
points.
My first point is on the fight against terrorism.
Ambassador Greenstock has in fact given us a good
format for interaction with the non-members of the
Council. I think it is a good example. We should repeat
this type of interactive meeting with non-members of
the Council, for example, next month, on the question
of Afghanistan. I know that many non-members of the
Council wish to be able to have an exchange of views
with Mr. Brahimi, and we will shortly have the
opportunity to have him here in New York.
My second point is on Africa. We had an
excellent debate on Africa. It was summed up very well
at the end by Mr. Ibrahima Fall. With respect to Africa,
we have taken note that we will have an opportunity to
come back to the issue of targeted and limited
sanctions. Also during the debate on Africa, France
announced it would soon put forward a proposal for
creating a permanent mechanism on sanctions. From
the debate on Africa, we should also retain everyone’s
wish for good cooperation on the peace processes
between all the donors and the Security Council. We
will soon hold, during the United Kingdom’s
presidency, a meeting with the Economic and Social

5

S/PV.4466

Council on the peace-building process. When we
discuss East Timor, perhaps in April, the United
Nations Development Programme, the World Bank and
the International Monetary Fund will participate in
order to have good interaction among all the Council’s
partners in peace-building.
My third point is on the Middle East. We kept our
commitment to have a meeting on the Middle East in
January. It was held yesterday with Mr. Roed-Larsen.
We have a press statement available on the web site of
the presidency of the Security Council. We must
continue, and the question of the Middle East must be
dealt with by the Council on a very regular basis. I
hope that I did not exceed my three minutes.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of France for his kind words addressed
to me.
Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): I would
also like to join those who have expressed to
Ambassador Shen best wishes for success in his next
mission, wherever that takes him, and we hope to see
him again soon in New York.
Today’s debate has confirmed the auspicious
trend towards brevity, which leads me to confine
myself to a few essential points.
The most important thing is to thank you, Sir, for
your brilliant presidency. It was a tremendous success.
You have managed to be efficient while making newly
elected members like us feel at ease in the Council. My
delegation and I sincerely thank you for that.
The Council’s work in the month of January was
largely focused on crisis situations in Africa, which is
to be welcomed. The public debate on the situation in
Africa was a success. The presence of the SecretaryGeneral of the Organization of African Unity,
Mr. Amara Essy, among us was an important feature.
The presence of ministers of both members and nonmembers of the Council was a success. Bulgaria’s
Minister for Foreign Affairs greatly regretted not being
able to attend because of an important bilateral
commitment. The Council’s meeting enabled us to
exchange ideas on strategies for strengthening
cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization of African Unity.
The fight against terrorism rightly occupied a
central place in the Council’s activities this month, and
substantial work was carried out by the Committee,

6

especially on the review of the country reports pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001). In this regard, we would like
to underline the transparent and effective approach of
the work done by the Committee’s Bureau, particularly
by the British chairmanship of the Committee. I would
once again like to pay tribute to Sir Jeremy Greenstock
for his remarkable work. The public debate on
terrorism was a clear success, especially due to the
chosen format, which was a positive innovation worth
using on other occasions.
Bulgaria is gratified that the Council reacted
quickly and appropriately to the situation in
Afghanistan. The rapid adoption of resolution 1390
(2002) constitutes a success for the Council and the
international community.
My country welcomes consensus in the Council
on the resolution extending the mandate of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Georgia.
In conclusion, I would like to thank you
particularly, Mr. President, for including the issue of
Kosovo on the Council’s agenda this month. We are
pleased that the presidency held a public debate. My
country feels it is important that the Council continue
closely following the situation in Kosovo on a regular
basis at a time when the United Nations Interim
Administration in Kosovo is at a critical point in
carrying out its mandate. The recent appointment of
Mr. Michael Steiner as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, given his skill and experience, gives
us hope for the consolidation of peace and stability in
Kosovo.
The President: I thank the representative of
Bulgaria for his kind words addressed to me and my
team.
Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): I join in the
tributes that have been paid to Ambassador Shen. Over
the last three and a half years, he has become not only
a good colleague but a good friend as well. I,
personally, will miss him.
Mr. President, congratulations on a very good
month. The output of the Council should not be
measured simply by quantity but by quality, too. I think
that this month we have not done badly. We, too, were
pleased with the open debate on Africa and particularly
pleased to have with us at the table the President of the
Economic and Social Council.

S/PV.4466

As Baroness Amos indicated, we will be making
Africa a major theme of our presidency in July. We
may not follow quite the same format, since, although
imitation is the sincerest form of flattery, it does not
always work best. But I took good note of what
Ambassador Valdivieso had to say about making the
focus a little bit more precise. Over the next few
months, we will be refining our ideas, and we will hope
to have a good package ready to submit by the time our
presidency starts.
I would like to make two other points. I do not
really think it is for the United Kingdom delegation to
comment on the counter-terrorism briefing. I would say
that others who have spoken to us found it useful. I
think it has been a deliberate effort of our collective
strategy to be as inclusive as possible about the work
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee in respect of the
wider membership. I have to say that I personally was
very pleased to see the regional emphasis that came out
in some of the statements. I think that has a direct
bearing on the remarks that Ambassador Strømmen
was making about the need to try to think about how
we can keep our statements short and our public
meetings effective. I think that is one useful lesson that
one can perhaps draw, even if it is not directly
applicable to all other circumstances.
Finally, I would not like the review of the month
to go by without mentioning the work of the Working
Group on peacekeeping, on which we came to a major
decision this month. There is still a lot to do in terms of
other issues on the Working Group’s agenda, though I
hope we will now be able to make the new
arrangements in respect of troop-contributors’ work. I
wish Ambassador Strømmen the best of luck in his new
incarnation as Chairman of the Working Group. We
will be cooperating with him fully.
The President: I thank Ambassador Eldon for his
kind words addressed to the Chair.

and, thanks to your openness, we have been able to
assess the course that we will be taking together.
My delegation particularly appreciated the fact
that, under your presidency, Sir, we discussed many
issues relating to Africa — indeed, almost all of the
African questions — on the Council’s agenda. Above
all, you deserve the credit for your inspired decision to
organize a public debate on the situation in Africa.
That meeting, which was a great success, demonstrated
the great interest that Member States have in Africa.
The meeting enabled us to consolidate our respective
approaches to Africa, provide diagnoses and identify
current problems, as well as to share our hopes. We
hope that the important elements contained in the
presidential statement that resulted from that historic
meeting will be duly considered and taken into account
by the Secretariat, as well as by the Council itself, so
that we can bolster our partnership with African
institutions: the Organization of African Unity — in
particular its Mechanisms for Conflict Prevention,
Management and Resolution — and subregional
organizations.
We all agree that peace and security must be
restored and consolidated in Africa so that that
continent can take up the challenge of development.
You deserve a great deal of credit, Sir, and my
delegation would like to very warmly congratulate you.
Secondly, my delegation welcomes the format of
the debate that you organized on counter-terrorism. The
interactive dialogue that was employed on that
occasion in the discussion among members and
non-members of the Council, as well as the Chairman
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, was very useful.
It enabled all Member States to take the pulse of and
assess the remarkable work done by the Committee,
and I would like to congratulate you for that,
Mr. President.

Mr. Fall (Guinea) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to associate itself with the good
wishes that the Council has expressed for Ambassador
Shen, who is leaving us, and to say how much we have
appreciated his wisdom and his contribution in the
work of the Council.

Another issue is the question of the Middle East.
The Council has just taken the innovative step of
organizing a briefing on the question of the Middle
East. That wise decision was implemented during your
presidency, Sir, and we had a very useful exchange on
recent developments in the situation in the Middle
East.

I would like to say, Mr. President, how much my
delegation has appreciated the work done by your
delegation this month. My delegation has just
completed its first month as a member of the Council

On
the
questions
of
procedure
and
documentation, the Council was not able — as
Ambassador Mahbubani would have liked — to
complete its work. Some progress was made. Let us

7

S/PV.4466

hope that the Council will soon be able to reach
agreement on that point.
In conclusion, I would like to say once again how
much my delegation has appreciated the work that you
accomplished, Sir, as President during the month of
January and tell you how greatly we have benefited
from it.
The President: I thank the representative of
Guinea for his kind words addressed to me and to my
delegation.
Mr. Corr (Ireland): I would like first to join my
colleagues in expressing our appreciation to
Ambassador Shen Guofang for his work on the Council
and to wish him well in his new assignment. We look
forward to seeing him again.
Secondly, on behalf of my delegation, I would
like very warmly to thank Mauritius for what we
thought was an outstanding presidency this month with
regard to the substance of the issues we addressed, the
clarity of focus that the presidency brought and the
way in which we addressed important issues, such as
the meetings on counter-terrorism and on Africa. For
all of those reasons, we thought that this was a
presidency of real achievement. We also appreciated
the courtesy and openness of the presidency and
everyone on the Mauritian team to other members of
the Council, as well as the wider membership.
With regard to the wrap-up, my delegation has
always taken the view that these discussions are very
useful exercises. They are important on their own
merits because they provide a chance once a month to
stand back and look at the wider picture. They are
important because of the engagement of the Council
with the wider United Nations membership. There is
one caveat; as you, Mr. President, pointed out, each
month the presidency, of course, sets the background to
many issues through the manner in which it approaches
the agenda, and so it is important in looking at the
wrap-up exercise also to bear in mind how we
approach the issue of continuity — the complexity of
issues. For that reason, my delegation would support —
and we have been discussing this in the Council in
recent weeks — a more interactive approach to the
wrap-up debate, with involvement of the wider United
Nations membership and a strong thematic focus in
terms of the issues that we address. But the wrap-up
opportunity is important, and we think it should be
built on.

8

In terms of the past month, I would like to make
two or three broad points. Ireland welcomed the policy
of openness which the presidency brought this month
to our work. We had very useful public meetings on
Kosovo, terrorism, East Timor and, of course, Africa.
Openness and transparency serve a dual purpose. On
the one hand, transparency is important for its own
sake and for a level of engagement with the wider
United Nations membership. But, from the point of
view of the Council, there is also the important point
that it is a listening opportunity, and many of the points
made are in turn integrated into our own work. A
balance must always be struck — as Ambassador
Strømmen said — between what Walter Bagehot would
have called the efficient and the dignified elements of
how structures work. The efficient element is, of
course, the need for workability, coherence and
coordination, while at the same time showing openness
to the views of the wider membership, as well as the
United Nations family of institutions, in terms of the
insights that they bring to the different issues and to the
agenda of the Council.
On the substantive issues before us this month,
my delegation regarded two in particular as being of
great importance. We found the open debate on the
situation in Africa to be enormously valuable, partly
because of the strong level of representation by
ministers from Africa and elsewhere, partly because of
the quality of the contributions to the debate and partly
because this is a moment of transition in Africa and
one of real hope, as a result of the transition of the
Organization of African Unity to the African Union
and the New Partnership for Africa’s Development.
Other contributing factors were the Council’s own
work in the area of addressing issues of conflict and
conflict resolution and the OAU’s increasing
engagement in Africa in these areas.
All of this meant that the debate was marked by a
real sense of new beginnings. One important issue that
did come out — Minister O’Donnell from Ireland also
emphasized this point — was the interlinkage between
conflict prevention and development cooperation
issues. Development funds, the issue of debt, the issue
of trade opening for African countries — it is not
possible, in our view, to address one set of issues
without the other. This was a point that came very
strongly across in the contributions made in the debate
and, indeed, it is reflected strongly in the presidential

S/PV.4466

statement that we just adopted and which we very
much welcome.
Two other issues that did come up in the debate
were the importance of coherence in terms of the
United Nations role in the wider international
community and how issues are addressed in relation to
conflict prevention and development. My delegation
has consistently argued that there is a need for a closer
working relationship with, in particular, the Economic
and Social Council. We therefore welcome the
reference in the presidential statement to the
consideration that will be given to setting up an ad hoc
working group. We think this is important because the
Economic and Social Council, in its own Charter
domain, has a strong role in areas of development and
coordination. The Council, as it addresses issues of
conflict, peace and security, needs to have an
interlocutor with which we can mutually consider the
differing roles in these areas. So we think that was
important.
The other issue that we found very helpful this
month in terms of the agenda was, of course, the debate
on counter-terrorism. It was an important debate partly
because of the importance of having a genuinely
interactive dialogue between the Council and the wider
United Nations membership on where we are now in
terms of the Counter-Terrorism Committee. The way
the presidency structured the debate by alternating
members of the Council with others we found to be
especially useful.
On this, I would also — as other speakers have
done — wish to pay tribute to Ambassador Greenstock
for the way he has approached the work of the CounterTerrorism Committee through the briefings of Member
States and others. This has created a very broad
understanding, which was reflected in the debate on the
way ahead in terms of the operation of the Committee.
Finally, other issues of importance during the
month were, of course, the emphasis on African issues
generally in terms of particular situations, such as those
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, GuineaBissau and so on. We also welcomed the opportunity to
have the open debate on East Timor and the briefings
on Afghanistan. We especially welcomed yesterday’s
consultations on the Middle East and look forward to
seeing that continued. We also welcomed the number
of meetings with the troop contributors, which you, Sir,
mentioned in your opening remarks, and the agreement

on the new mechanism for consultation to be chaired
by Ambassador Strømmen, which we regard as
important.
In conclusion, both in terms of the presidency’s
programme of work and how it was handled and of the
openness to differing views and to the wider
membership, we thought this was a month of very real
achievement and very much appreciated it.
The President: I thank the representative of
Ireland for his very kind words addressed to me and to
the Mauritian team.
Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation would like to join in the
expressions of thanks and appreciation made by
previous speakers. I pay special tribute to the Foreign
Minister of Mauritius for his generous contribution not
only to the meeting devoted to the situation in Africa,
but also during the discussion and adoption of some
important decisions in the Security Council. We believe
that his presence imparted greater importance and
emphasis to those debates and decisions.
We also wish to thank your entire team, Sir, for
the way in which it assumed the responsibilities of
leading the work of the Council and of consulting other
members. It is difficult to underline all the important
missions you have undertaken since assuming the
presidency of the Council. They have indeed been
numerous and great. I shall try my best, while seeking
to avoid repeating what other speakers have said, to
stress the most important among them so as to point to
those issues that are of the greatest interest.
Obviously, this is Syria’s first month as a Council
member and we feel that this meeting is the right
opportunity to assess it. We believe that it was a rich
and productive month, thanks to careful planning by
the presidency and to the fact that all points of view
represented on this Council were taken into account. I
must say that we are satisfied by the work undertaken
by the Security Council, particularly vis-à-vis the
situation in Africa and the importance accorded to that
issue. This emphasis has restored the question of the
situation in Africa to the international arena. The
Security Council has also monitored the situation in
areas of tension in Africa through close follow-up and
correct decisions taken vis-à-vis the situations in
Liberia, Sierra Leone, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and neighbouring countries, in addition to

9

S/PV.4466

completing the preparations for the Security Council
mission to Ethiopia and Eritrea.
We express our satisfaction that, for the first time,
the Security Council, under your presidency, Sir, has
convened regular formal briefings on the Middle East.
For years, we looked forward to such an opportunity to
discuss the situation in that explosive region, which
represents a true threat to international peace and
security. The Security Council has a special
responsibility vis-à-vis developments in the region. We
believe that the briefing by Mr. Roed-Larsen, the
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
and Personal Representative of the Secretary-General,
was very informative and encouraging and gave the
Security Council additional information that accurately
reflects the situation on the ground. Mr. Roed-Larsen,
after all, works in the region and is most
knowledgeable about developments there.
We feel that such briefings, as well as the
important subsequent discussions, are a first step on the
road towards correcting the Security Council’s work in
this regard. In many countries, the Council is often
accused of employing double standards in debating and
considering issues pertaining to the Middle East and in
assuming its responsibilities towards that region.
My delegation believes that the open debate of
the Security Council on the activities of the CounterTerrorism Committee was successful. It offered an
opportunity to all Members to express their opinions
and positions on terrorism and the appropriate means
for eradicating it through the promotion of joint
international action. The open debate was also a
valuable opportunity for many delegations to express
their views on such sensitive matters as the need to
define the terrorism we are combating and to
distinguish between it and the legitimate struggle
against foreign occupation.
Mr. President, your achievements this month have
indeed been considerable, but we had hoped that
another area would have been added to these
achievements, namely greater transparency in the
working methods of the Security Council and in its
interaction with non-members, in keeping with the new
formula that we have discussed on a number of
occasions in Council meetings. We are confident that
the first steps taken in the context of this formula by
your successor, the Permanent Representative of
Mexico, will provide further opportunities for States to

10

express their views and opinions on the proceedings in
the Security Council. The members of the Council thus
can become more aware of shortcomings in the
Council’s work and of areas that might require further
attention.
We had also hoped to conclude the discussions
that we began on the report of the Security Council to
the General Assembly, taking into consideration
Singapore’s proposals in this regard, which, we
believe, take into account all of our aspirations in its
current form.
Of course, we support close cooperation between
the Council and the Economic and Social Council. The
participation by the President of the Economic and
Social Council in the debate on the situation in Africa
was most welcome. We should like to draw the
Council’s attention to the fact that last year Syria
participated very actively in efforts to enhance
substantive relations between the two bodies in a
manner that would respect their spheres of activity and
their competences within the United Nations. We
believe that continuing debate and dialogue on this
issue will allow us to achieve the desired result.
Mr. President, I wish to extend to you our
gratitude and appreciation. In addition, before closing,
allow me to highlight the Security Council’s activities
vis-à-vis Afghanistan and East Timor, as we believe
that those efforts, which we deeply appreciated, were
most valuable. The future of Afghanistan and East
Timor is very important not only to Asia but also to the
world, and we hope that the effective steps taken by the
Security Council will promote peace, progress and
development and enable the people of East Timor in
particular to achieve independence and begin to build
their future. We thank you once again for all your
efforts.
The President: I thank the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic for the very kind words
addressed to me and to the Mauritian team.
Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, Sir, allow me to congratulate you on the
manner in which you guided the work of the Security
Council during the month of January. Allow me also to
recall that Mexico joined the Security Council on 1
January, following a 20-year-long absence. Indeed, the
work carried out during this month has confirmed the
appropriateness of Mexico’s decision to seek
membership in the Security Council, with a view to

S/PV.4466

participating in the creative and intensive work of this
body and thus contributing to the development of the
United Nations and to the quest to achieve international
peace and security.
Mr. President, we are gratified that the first 30
days of Mexico’s participation in the work of the
Security Council took place under the presidency of
Mauritius, and in particular under your guidance and
leadership, because we have found that Mexico’s major
concerns and the vision it wishes to contribute to the
work of the Council were reflected in the manner in
which you have guided the work of the Council during
the past month.
First, we agree with you, Sir, that the work of the
Council must progress in the direction of much greater
transparency. In the past 30 days we have seen
examples of how this greater transparency has
benefited, and will continue to benefit, the work of the
Council. The will of the United Nations and of the
Council to achieve this greater transparency has been
reflected in the fact that recent meetings on Africa,
held on your initiative and which successfully took
place in this very Chamber, were disseminated
throughout the world over the Internet, thus rendering
them accessible not only in Africa, where, I am sure,
there was great interest in the debate, but also in Latin
America and in Mexico itself.
This is useful because it means that, in our
countries, on the basis of the Security Council’s
debates, people will become aware of the commitments
that are being undertaken in the United Nations and of
the efforts that are being made to resolve the problems
encountered in the process of achieving peace, in the
context of a broad vision and in a responsible manner,
focusing on the tasks that will enable us to establish
lasting peace.
There are many aspects of your presidency and of
the work achieved by the Council in the past month
that deserve to be perpetuated. With respect to the
debate on Africa, we believe that, through the
presidential statement we have adopted and through the
debates held in this Chamber, paths have been opened
and guidelines elaborated that should be followed. We
have committed ourselves to maintaining the Council’s
focus on a further exploration of the various opinions
and points of view that have emerged in the context of
the consultation mechanism established by opening the
debate to the rest of the membership of the United

Nations, and through involvement with regional
organizations and with other agencies of the United
Nations system that are active in Africa.
The prospect of the establishment of a working
group on the basis of the discussions held in this
Chamber represents a commitment that we intend to
uphold and further deepen. What has been achieved
this month in terms of making Africa the focus of this
body should serve as a basis for further work in that
direction.
We believe also that it is very meaningful and
symbolic that under your presidency, Sir, we were able
to successfully complete the process of the
participation of the United Nations — not only of the
Council — in ensuring East Timor’s transition to
independence. It is more than symbolic; it is the
culmination of lengthy and tireless efforts, fraught with
many difficulties, which have finally led to the
adoption of a resolution that will continue the work of
the Council and of the Organization in East Timor until
the day of independence, at which time we will
reassess the respective roles of the United Nations and
of the international community in supporting
development efforts and consolidating an independent
East Timor.
We believe that the consultation mechanisms and
practices that you have used and that the Council has
integrated into its work during this period are a
guarantee that its deliberations and decisions will
increasingly enjoy the consensus of the community of
States that are the United Nations, as well as the
support of international public opinion.
In this respect, we found it particularly
noteworthy that work was undertaken in the area of
combating terrorism. After resolution 1373 (2001) was
adopted as a result of the events in New York and
Washington, the international community found a work
dynamic, of which the Security Council was a prime
example, for discussing the immediate commitments of
countries in the fight against terrorism, and to do so in
a spirit that ensured that the decisions taken would be
supported by international law and would be taken by
States in the multilateral forums provided by the
Charter of the United Nations. The profundity, the
seriousness and the professionalism shown in the work
undertaken in compliance with resolution 1373 (2001)
to combat terrorism are also an obligation for the
Council’s activities in the days to come.

11

S/PV.4466

I would like to conclude, Sir, by thanking your
country and you personally for the work you have
carried out at the head of the Council. Mexico’s
presence means that we will continue to work together,
as colleagues, toward the same objectives of the quest
for peace that the Council has set for itself. You have
left us some tasks that we must complete, and two of
these are very important.

look back and examine whether we have actually
achieved the objectives we set out. Such wrap-up
sessions are intended as an opportunity for us to take a
step back to look at our successes and failures and to
examine longer-term trends that could guide our
intermediate steps, as well as an opportunity to find
concrete ways of enhancing the effectiveness of the
Council.

The first task concerns the reorganization of the
work relating to the report of the Council to the
General Assembly on its activities. We think the
groundwork has been laid for a discussion in the near
future that should soon enable us to reach a consensus
in the Council and provide to the Assembly in August a
report that reflects the concerns of members with
regard to the future work of the Council.

In an attempt to improve the transparency of the
Council’s deliberations, Council members decided that
such an analytical and critical examination of its own
work in a public meeting could help non-members
better appreciate the thinking and considerations that
went into the outcome produced by the Council.
Unfortunately, the last couple of public wrap-up
sessions have not attracted much interest in the rest of
the United Nations community. This session is not
much better.

The second task, part of the same process, is the
analysis of the activities every month, about which a
consensus is gradually emerging — and today’s fruitful
work is in this direction — to make this a participative
exercise, in which the opinions of Member States are
presented, that will enrich and nurture the work of the
Council with the points of view and contributions of all
the Members of the United Nations, in particular those
of us who are members of the Council.
Finally, Mr. President, I would like to thank you
once again and congratulate you on the work you have
accomplished this month.
The President: I thank Ambassador Aguilar
Zinser for his kind words addressed to me, my country
and my team.
Ms. Foo (Singapore): First of all, we hope that
the Chinese delegation will convey our delegation’s
tribute and best wishes to Ambassador Shen.
Let me also congratulate Mauritius for its very
successful presidency of the Security Council this
month. Successful presidencies are not accidental; they
are the result of painstaking preparations and unceasing
efforts behind the scenes. An example of Mauritius’s
prompt preparations was the circulation of its
provisional programme of work, together with a set of
explanatory notes and a list of the objectives of its
presidency, on 21 December last year. This allowed
Council members, especially the incoming members, to
gear up for the month and for the new year.
Looking ahead and projecting into the future is
important. At the same time, it is equally important to

12

One consolation is that some non-Council
members indicated that they had watched the
proceedings on television instead of coming to the
Council Chamber, since their physical presence was
not needed. This, in fact, is effective transparency,
combining technology with the will of the Council to
conduct as much of its work in public as possible.
Somewhat similar are the daily summaries of
consultations provided by the presidency on its own
web site, a practice that we support and hope will be
continued by future presidencies.
Another consolation, perhaps, is that the public
meetings have verbatim records. This allows all who
are interested to have full access to the discussion. In
fact, we would recommend all United Nations members
to read the verbatim records of the last wrap-up
session, held on 21 December, during which Council
members made use of the opportunity to review and
wrap up their work, not just for the month but for the
entire year. The five outgoing members also took the
opportunity to give their valedictory statements on
their two-year Council term. On our part, we sought to
provide a year-end report card on the key issues
handled by the Council. We categorized five
successful, five unsuccessful and five moderately
successful files.
Turning to this month’s programme, we find that
there are clearly a number of successes. One clear
success of Mauritius’s presidency is its strong focus on
Africa, devoting time to almost all the African issues

S/PV.4466

on the Council’s agenda, putting into practice the
Council’s oft-repeated call for preventive action in the
well-timed issuance of a press statement on the
situation in Madagascar, and the highly successful and
well-attended open meeting on the situation in Africa
on 29 and 30 January, which was, of course, also
webcast live on the United Nations web site.
Africa is a continent that needs and deserves the
Council’s attention and resources, even as we take on
the challenge of combating international terrorism. We
are therefore thankful for the useful discussions we had
on several African issues and the outcomes we
adopted, including the presidential statement earlier
today.
The open debate on East Timor was successful in
reinforcing the need for a continued significant United
Nations presence in post-independence East Timor.
There was wide support for the Secretary-General’s
recommendations for the successful peacekeeping
operation
the
United
Nations
Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET), even as the
Council and the wider United Nations membership
look forward to further specific proposals from the
Secretary-General on the follow-on United Nations
mission. It was recognized that the Organization must
stay the course to make East Timor a success story.
We are particularly grateful to Mauritius for
chairing several meetings, both informal and formal, of
the Working Group on Documentation and Procedures.
We are pleased to announce that Council members are
very close to agreement on a note by the President
laying down a new format for the annual report of the
Security Council to the General Assembly. We hope
that, once agreed upon, the new format will be seen to
be responsive to the views of Member States and that it
will significantly improve the relationship between the
two organs. As the Secretariat will need quick guidance
in order to prepare for this year’s report, we are pleased
to hear that the Mexican presidency next month will
give the matter an extra push, which should allow us to
finalize this matter on time.
Another achievement of the Mauritian presidency
was the appointment of the Permanent Representative
of Cameroon as the new Chairman of the Working
Group on sanctions rather than letting the Working
Group fall by the wayside. We hope that under that
representative’s able leadership we will soon be able to

reach some conclusions on the outcome of the Working
Group.
There were two important achievements on the
counter-terrorism front. First, Council members
restructured the sanctions targeted against members of
the Al Qaeda organization and of the Taliban and
against other individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities associated with them. Resolution 1390 (2002)
takes into account the changed and new circumstances
in Afghanistan, while recognizing that the Al Qaeda
network and other related terrorist groups continue to
pose a grave threat to international peace and security.
While resolution 1390 (2002) now has global
application, it none the less provides some continuity
and retains mechanisms such as the sanctions
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999), the consolidated list issued by the Committee,
and the Monitoring Group established by resolution
1363 (2001).
Secondly, on the counter-terrorism front, the
interest and the level of participation in the public
meeting on counter-terrorism demonstrated that the
international community remains seized of the effective
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). Apart from
enabling Ambassador Greenstock to brief United
Nations Members on progress in the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, it also allowed Member
States to have an interactive exchange with
Ambassador Greenstock. The small innovation of
toggling between speakers and responses by
Ambassador Greenstock could be repeated in future
meetings when appropriate.
Another significant achievement was the adoption
of the note by the President, document S/2002/56, of
14 January, which agreed to an additional mechanism
in the convening of joint meetings of the Security
Council Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations
and
troop-contributing
countries
on
specific
peacekeeping operations. Sustained efforts to
strengthen the triangular relationship among the
Security Council, troop-contributing countries and the
Secretariat will go a long way towards ensuring the
success and implementation of Council decisions on
United Nations peacekeeping operations. For example,
an earlier step forward was made with the
establishment of private meetings with troopcontributing countries as a new mechanism under
resolution 1353 (2001) in June last year.

13

S/PV.4466

However, we believe that it is not always
necessary to convene private meetings of the Security
Council with troop-contributing countries. In fact, in
section 5 (d) of the assessment contained in the last
report submitted by the Working Group (S/2001/1335),
the Group concluded that consultation meetings chaired
by the President of the Council should be used as the
principal means of consultation with troop-contributing
countries, and that public or private meetings should be
convened for a full and high-level consideration of
issues of critical importance to a specific peacekeeping
operation. We would suggest that, in order to
implement both the letter and the spirit of resolution
1353 (2001), future presidencies could consider
holding consultation meetings rather than private
meetings with troop-contributing countries for routine
renewal of peacekeeping operations. Instead of
generating a genuine and interactive dialogue with
troop-contributing countries, the formal atmosphere of
a private meeting may in fact sometimes stifle
discussion.
It was also unfortunate that there was no
discussion whatsoever at the public meeting on Kosovo
of two issues that Singapore raised: first, a regular
review mechanism and, secondly, an exit strategy for
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). We maintain that with the
impending transfer of authority from UNMIK to the
Kosovo self-government authorities, this is the right
time to address those issues.

issues raised. Although there will be a verbatim record
of today’s debate, it might be useful for the Mauritian
presidency to consider tabulating some of the key
outstanding issues and new proposals; the list could be
passed on to the Mexican presidency or circulated to
all Council members so that we can monitor the
necessary follow-up.
The President: I thank the representative of
Singapore for the very kind words she addressed to me
and to the Mauritian team.
Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon) (spoke in
French): This is the first time that Cameroon is
participating in a wrap-up meeting of this kind. The
remarks I shall be making will therefore be of a general
nature.
First of all, Sir, my delegation wants to reaffirm
our hearty congratulations on the extremely
constructive way in which you presided over the work
of the Council in January 2002. You proposed a
programme of work that was balanced and covered
many items; it enabled us to consider the thorniest of
the issues facing us in the realm of international peace
and security. Some of those issues concerned specific
regions, such as Africa, Asia, Europe and the Middle
East; others concerned more general matters, such as
terrorism.

Council members also devoted some time this
month to discussing how wrap-up meetings could be
improved. Owing to time constraints, we could not
implement the very useful suggestion made by
Ambassador Jean-David Levitte to engage in and
generate better interaction with interested nonmembers of the Council. Although the proposal did not
find unanimous support within the Council and may
still need to be fine-tuned, we are confident that the
Mexican presidency will build on the very useful
exchanges we had this month. We hope that we will be
able to reach agreement on a format early next month
so that all of us can start disseminating the message
early to the general United Nations membership in
order to encourage their participation.

We thank you, Mr. President, for having ensured
in your programme of work that Africa would remain
at the centre of the Council’s concerns. The Council
considered national and regional conflicts, and even, in
the case of Madagascar, anticipated an evolving
situation. The Council also considered the overall
situation in Africa, and did so in a high-level public
debate. Your preparations for that debate were
painstaking, Sir, which enabled us to focus our
discussion on formulating specific proposals for action.
One of those proposals was to establish a Security
Council working group with a mandate to monitor the
implementation of the Council’s recommendations on
Africa and to find ways to improve cooperation with
the Economic and Social Council. It was also proposed
that a focal point should be designated within the
Secretariat to enable us to centralize the Secretariat’s
multisectoral activities on Africa.

Finally, apart from focusing the wrap-up meetings
on one or two topics, we also believe that one
important way of concretely demonstrating the
importance of wrap-ups is to follow up on some of the

The most important thing concerning that debate
is to now highlight the different problems that Africa
faces. We have made much progress since the first
interactive debate of 1999. Now we have to go deeper,

14

S/PV.4466

and this is why we appreciate the proposal and the
decision to create the working group. We must now
delve more deeply by no longer taking the situation in
its entirety but by dealing with specific points of
particular issues. I think that it is in this direction that
the United Kingdom will be orienting itself. In any
case, it is towards this end that Cameroon is gearing its
preparations for its presidency in October 2002.
The question of Afghanistan was also the subject
of a specific follow-up. The Council thus contributed
to the restoration of peace and stability in that country,
and also showed its support for the new authorities.
The question of terrorism was the subject of a
constructive public debate that allowed all Members of
the United Nations, whether members of the Council or
not, to give an account of their efforts in implementing
resolution 1373 (2001). We said at the time that the
interactive formula used for that debate was a wise one,
and we hoped that it would serve as a model.
On the whole, this first month in the Security
Council has left a very positive impression on us. We
have benefited from the support and cooperation of our
colleagues from other delegations and we have worked
in a cordial atmosphere, which you were able to create
and maintain, Mr. President.
The situation in the Middle East is of great
concern, and we would have hoped to see more
attention devoted to it. We are glad to note that this
will be the case from now on. Significant and real
progress has been made in the sphere of transparency,
thanks to the regular briefings of Ambassador Jeremy
Greenstock, and thanks to the presidency, which has
made all information on our work available to
Members through the web site.
Once again we would like to extend all our
congratulations, Sir, for the way you have conducted
the proceedings this month. Thank you for having
given Africa the attention that its particular situation
deserves while of course also attaching as much
importance to other situations in which peace is
threatened.
The President: I thank the representative of
Cameroon for the very kind words addressed to me and
the Mauritian team.
Mr. Williamson (United States of America): We
join in commending you, Sir, and your entire team for
your outstanding tenure as our Council President.

We feel the Security Council did a good job in
January, taking significant steps in several important
areas. We have built a sound basis for the next couple
of months. I will not review everything that we did, but
want to cite a couple of major items which point to the
future. We have set in place further new ideas and
procedures for developing a more transparent,
interactive relationship with troop contributors. This is
important for United Nations peacekeeping and for the
Council’s continued effort to do its job well. We will
keep trying to improve the usefulness of consultations
under resolution 1353 (2001), and develop the new
mechanism we have put in place. This will unfold over
the next couple of months.
We
appreciate
Ambassador
Strømmen’s
willingness to take on the responsibility of chairing our
Working Group on peacekeeping and look forward to
his leadership. The Counter-Terrorism Committee
Chairman reported to the Council, and its work is very
well in hand. This will be a major component of our
work in the coming months. This is a real success for
the Council and for the international community.
We also heard from Afghan Interim Authority
Chairman Karzai in a meeting that was a model of
efficiency. Afghanistan will be much on our minds in
the next months as we build on the success, which the
Chairman described, and address the challenges of
which we are all aware. Again, we have a strong basis
for further United Nations actions and Council
involvement.
Finally, we have just finished a major discussion
on Africa and how the Council can better engage with
and support our African friends. As a result of that
discussion, under the leadership of Mauritius, we have
adopted today a significant statement looking to future
steps we can take. We have also agreed to consider
establishing a working group to help us continue this
effort and to enhance coordination with the Economic
and Social Council. The United States wants to be sure
that it has focus, is substantive and makes a concrete
contribution to the Council’s work. Last year the
Security Council had 83 formal meetings on Africa. We
hope in the future that we can all find a way to have
fewer speeches and more results.
Again, this is an excellent beginning to the new
year, a very heavy agenda. We did many things well.
My delegation looks forward to building on and
improving the Council’s work, to maintaining

15

S/PV.4466

transparency and interaction and to making the Council
more effective.
The President: I thank the representative of the
United States for his kind words addressed to me and
my team.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I apologize for just arriving, but I had a
counter-terrorism subcommittee meeting, where we
were reviewing the first series of reports. I did not want
my absence to be taken to mean that I was not satisfied
with the work of the Security Council this month.
I very briefly would like to express my gratitude
to you, Mr. President, your delegation and your
Minister. You had a very complicated month, and you
steered our ship in a dignified way. We adopted all the
decisions that we were supposed to adopt, and I
sincerely congratulate you on that.
I have just noticed that the Secretariat has also
given us a gift, an elegant carafe of water, so this
Chamber is becoming better and better. I hope that this
will improve our mood next month.
The President: I wish to express my sincere
thanks on behalf of my delegation and on my own
behalf to all present for the very gracious words and
expressions of appreciation for the work carried out
during the Mauritian presidency of the Security
Council.
We view presidencies not in isolation, but as a
continuous and succeeding exercise in the pursuit of
our goal. We are therefore very much comforted to

learn that Mexico will follow up on some of the very
important issues that we have discussed this month
relating to, for example, increasing transparency and
interaction with the non-members of the Security
Council.
I want to take this opportunity to thank those
from the larger United Nations membership, the nonCouncil members who are here today. We do apologize
that we were not able to let everybody know that this
meeting had been postponed from this morning because
we were not able to conclude our consultations in time.
I do hope that next month the format will be changed
and we will be able to have greater interaction with
non-Council members and therefore get more
participation from them.
I would like to express once again our grateful
thanks to all the delegations on the Council for the
cooperation extended to us and for facilitating the
discharge of our responsibilities this month. We would
also like to express our deepest appreciation to the
Security Council secretariat, headed by Mr. Joseph
Stephanides, for the tremendous support. A particular
word of thanks to Mr. Aleksandar Martinovic and
Ms. Norma Chan for their support and cooperation.
Before I pass the baton to Mexico as they assume
the presidency for the month of February, we offer
them our very best wishes and wish them good luck for
a very successful presidency.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.25 p.m.

16
