United Nations

A/RES/68/236

General Assembly

Distr.: General
7 February 2014

Sixty-eighth session
Agenda item 174

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 20 December 2013
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/68/602)]

68/236. Amendments to the Charter of the United Nations
University
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2951 (XXVII) of 11 December 1972, by which it
decided to establish the United Nations University, 3081 (XXVIII) of 6 December
1973, by which it adopted the Charter of the United Nations University, and 64/225
of 21 December 2009, by which it approved amendments to the Charter of the
United Nations University,
Taking note of the decision taken by the Council of the United Nations
University at its fifty-ninth session, held from 22 to 24 April 2013, in which the
Council requested the Secretary-General, in accordance with article XII of the
Charter of the United Nations University, to propose to the General Assembly, at its
sixty-eighth session, amendments to article IV of the Charter of the United Nations
University to reduce the number of appointed members of the Council from 24 to 12,
Taking note also of the decision on the proposal to amend the Charter of the
United Nations University adopted by the Executive Board of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization at its 192nd session, held in Paris
from 23 September to 11 October 2013,
Taking note further of the proposal of the Secretary-General to amend
the Charter of the United Nations University in accordance with article XII
thereof, made at the request of the Council of the United Nations University
and after consultation with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization,
1.
Approves the following amendments to the Charter of the United Nations
University:
(a)

Article IV, paragraph 1, shall be amended to read as follows:

“1. There shall be a Council of the University (hereinafter referred to
as ‘the Council’), to be established on a broad geographical basis with due
regard to major academic, scientific, educational and cultural trends in the
world, taking into account the various fields of study, with appropriate
13-45361

*1345361*

Please recycle

A/RES/68/236

Amendments to the Charter of the United Nations University

representation of young scholars. The Council shall have 12 members serving
in their individual capacity, who shall be appointed jointly by the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations and the Director-General of UNESCO, in
consultation with the agencies and programmes concerned, including the
United Nations Institute for Training and Research* (hereinafter referred to as
‘UNITAR’), and taking into account the views of appropriate representative
bodies. The Rector shall be a member of the University Council.”
* Established in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1934 (XVIII).

(b)

Article IV, paragraph 3, shall be amended to read as follows:

“3. The term of office shall be six years, provided that, of the members
first appointed pursuant to paragraph 1 of this article, the terms of six shall
expire at the end of three years and the terms of the remaining six at the end of
six years. No appointed member of the Council may serve continuously for
more than six years. The Council shall be consulted in regard to the
replacement of retiring members.”
2.
Decides that these amendments shall enter into force upon the expiration
of the present term of those appointed members currently serving on the Council of
the United Nations University;
3.
Acknowledges that the Council of the United Nations University shall
continue to operate with the current appointed membership, and without the
appointment of additional members, until the terms of the current appointed
members expire;
4.
Also acknowledges the intention of the Secretary-General to apply
article IV, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United Nations University, as amended,
when he next appoints new members to the Council of the United Nations
University.

71st plenary meeting
20 December 2013

2/2
