S/PV.7275

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7275th meeting

Thursday, 9 October 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Perceval . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Argentina)

Members:

Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Delattre
Mrs. Kawar
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Maes
Mr. Bosah
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Gasana
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power

Agenda
United Nations peacekeeping operations

14-56250 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1456250*

S/PV.7275

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
United Nations peacekeeping operations
The President (spoke in Spanish): Under rule 39
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Lieutenant General Maqsood Ahmed, Military Adviser
for Peacekeeping Operations; Lieutenant General
Carlos Alberto dos Santos Cruz, Force Commander
of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo;
Major General Jean Bosco Kazura, Force Commander
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali; and Lieutenant General
Iqbal Singh Singha, Force Commander of the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Lieutenant General Ahmed.
Lieutenant General Ahmed: It is always a great
honour and pleasure to interact with the Security
Council. Today I am here to introduce the panel of
Force Commanders who will deliver statements to the
Council. I would like to begin, however, by saying that,
for the first time in the history of the United Nations
peacekeeping operations, the very first female Force
Commander, Major General Kristin Lund, Force
Commander of United Nations Peacekeeping Force in
Cyprus (UNFICYP), has been appointed.
The Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Ladsous, was very keen to personally
introduce the panel, but, as the Council is aware, he is
currently on his way from Mali to New York.
Madam President, I am very thankful to you for
the invitation to this dialogue about our peacekeeping
missions on various peacekeeping topics. The meeting
of Force Commanders with the Council has become
a tradition and is one of the highlights, if not the
highlight, of the conference. It underlines the Council’s
much-appreciated commitment and interest in gaining
first-hand information. The Force Commanders are
very honoured and very eager to share their experiences
with the Council in order to contribute to well-informed
decision-making.

2/33

09/10/2014

Currently they are commanding more than 90,000
soldiers out of 105,000 uniformed personnel, and this
number is likely to grow in the coming period. They
operate in an environment that is often very difficult.
Mali is a case in point, where we have suffered
maximum casualties this year. The Central African
Republic, the Sudans, the Golan and the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) are some of the
other challenging missions. The Force Commanders
are operating in failing or failed States where there is,
frankly, hardly any peace to keep.
Ebola is yet another dimension of this complexity.
The Force Commander of the African Union Mission
in Somalia is our usual conference guest and is sitting
behind me. Lieutenant Silas Ntigurirwa commands
more than 20,000 soldiers in a very difficult
environment in Somalia. This year’s conference theme
is “mandate accomplishment and capabilities in the
field, expectations and future initiatives”. Within
that framework, we have selected key topics for
presentation today. The protection of civilians will be
presented by the Force Commander of MONUSCO,
Lieutenant General Dos Santos Cruz; expectations
from the military contingents under a changed security
environment by the Force Commander of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali, Major General Kazura; and the
accomplishment of traditional mandates under changed
political and military environment by the Force
Commander of the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force, Lieutenant General Singha.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Lieutenant General Ahmed for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Lieutenant General Dos
Santos Cruz.
Lieutenant General Dos Santos Cruz: It is an
honour to have the opportunity to address the Council
today.
It was in late 1999 that the protection of civilians
from direct threats was specifically mentioned in the
mandate for Sierra Leone. Peacekeeping missions’
mandated tasks, based on Chapters VI and VII of the
Charter of the United Nations, have been pragmatically
reflected in Security Council resolutions. But even with
the incorporation of details and specific tasks, there
is room for interpretation. Furthermore, executing a
protection-of-civilians mandate in a demanding and

14-56250

09/10/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV.7275

rapidly changing complex environment requires some
necessary changes in structure, mindset and operational
behaviour on the ground.

As a contribution to the transformation required to
better protect civilians, I would bring up the following
points for the Council’s consideration.

The protection of civilians is the most important
task of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
It is far more than a task in a mandate: it is a moral
obligation.

These include the requirement to have a mandate
with the same obligations for all of the components on
the ground; the use of a practical approach on how to
protect civilians; and the need to consider that risk is
inevitable in the armed services and can be effectively
managed and mitigated by well- and appropriately
trained, motivated and equipped soldiers. A robust
posture is indeed safer for all. A mission should be
proactive and responsive. Taking action to protect
civilians does not undermine peacekeeping principles
and is perfectly compatible with international law.

The importance of protecting civilians is not in
question. The question is, how to protect them in a
more effective way. I am absolutely convinced that the
best way to protect civilians is by being proactive rather
than reactive. As an example, identifying and taking
action against the threats represented by armed groups
and militias, which are the main perpetrators of direct
acts of violence such as pillage, rape, killings and other
crimes, would be more effective than waiting for events
to unfold.
The protection of civilians is the effect required
on the ground. The United Nations should not wait
for armed groups to come and terrorize communities;
it should not give them freedom of movement; there
should not be hundreds or thousands of panic-stricken
civilians coming to crowd around or inside a United
Nations base for safety.
Conceptually, troops remain mindful of the United
Nations principles of peacekeeping, namely, the
consent of the parties, impartiality and the non-use
of force except in self-defence and defence of the
mandate. Those principles may not always apply against
armed criminal groups in contemporary missions.
Their application could be reviewed and adjusted to
contemporary threats and to the context of violence that
innocent civilians and peacekeeping personnel face in
conflict areas.
Deterrence by presence is not always effective.
Only an active force with a proactive, robust posture can
neutralize and defeat threats to the civilian population.
On the other hand, the simple presence of peacekeepers
for prolonged periods without action while violence is
being committed leads to a weakening of the reputation
of the United Nations, the troop-contributing countries
and the international community. In order to implement
the mandate, troops on the ground must have the
mindset, the will, the leadership and the initiative
required to protect civilians in a robust and effective
manner.

The assumption that military action may create
collateral damage should not prevent us from taking
the necessary action. On the contrary, there are many
examples that prove that action against armed groups
brings huge benefits to the population.
The military components need to be coordinated
with realistic, clear and effective political management.
Hopes and expectations rise when a population sees a
United Nations peacekeeping mission deploying on the
ground, together with the presence of United Nations
agencies, numerous non-governmental organizations
and the international community. What they expect is
action to stop the violence and the delivery of significant
support.
There are examples of failure to protect civilians
due to low-intensity action or poor or inexistent
initiative, but there are very few cases of problems
due to effective action. To protect civilians, a military
force should be robust and dynamic, supported by
an operational administration and complemented by
civilian components, with work that is visible to the
population.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Lieutenant
General Dos Santos Cruz for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Major General Kazura.
Major General Kazura: It is indeed an honour and
a privilege to address the Council.
The changed security environment I am going
to talk about in the next 10 minutes or so is one
that is threatened by armed conflicts and religious
fundamentalism, in addition to economic, political,
social and environmental crises. This security

14-562503/33

S/PV.7275

United Nations peacekeeping operations

environment is fuelled and sustained by such existing
complex and unresolved security challenges as
corruption, internal tensions, violent extremism and
radicalization, illicit trafficking and terrorism. That is
the kind of security environment under which Mali has
been living for quite some time.
In fact, the security environment in Mali was
threatened for a long time by a series of coups d’état,
which created a political and constitutional crisis, on
top of which was an already extremely vulnerable
situation characterized by a volatile mix of problems
such as drought, food shortages, migration, armed
insurrections and heavy weapons proliferation.
In addition to that, the recent increase in criminal
activity perpetrated by a variety of armed movements
and terrorist groups, such as Al-Qaida in the Islamic
Maghreb, Ansar Eddine and the Movement for Unity
and Jihad in West Africa, has recently proceeded to
violently change the same security environment and to
sow further chaos, especially in the northern part of the
country.
The successful Operation Serval and the African-led
International Support Mission in Mali, and especially
the Chadian operations conducted last year, broke those
groups’ backbone and managed to stop their criminal
activities, which they had sought to extend throughout
the entire country. The relative stability following the
operation allowed MINUSMA to carry out its mandate
successfully. As a result, peaceful elections were held,
State authority was gradually brought back to the north
and people were expecting the signing of the final peace
accord according to Ouagadougou agreement.
The failure to implement some provisions of the
accords, as well as the occurrence of the sad events
of 17 and 21 May in Kidal, have completely changed
the security environment in northern Mali. The whole
area was and is still occupied by the armed movements
and the terrorists. Since May, the terrorist groups have
managed to reorganize themselves and have increased
their deadly operations against international troops,
especially MINUSMA, which has a greater presence in
that area and is paying a heavy and deadly price.
Today more than ever, MINUSMA has serious
concerns related to re-emerging terrorist threats in
that area. The northern ungoverned area is becoming
a sanctuary for terrorist activities that are coordinated
and facilitated by organized networks with financial,
military and human resources, which, in time, will

4/33

09/10/2014

be able to conduct even more lethal operations with
horrendous security consequences for the whole region
and beyond.
The reality on the ground today is that MINUSMA,
which is supposed to be a peacekeeping mission, is
facing a terrorist network that is combining patience,
intelligence, coercion and brutality to design and direct
its attacks when and where it wants. MINUSMA is in
a terrorist-fighting situation without an anti-terrorist
mandate or adequate training, equipment, logistics or
intelligence to deal with such a situation.
The questions we are likely to ask ourselves here
today include: What is MINUSMA there for if it cannot
deal with the situation? What should we do to stop
the killings if MINUSMA should stay there, and who
should do it? How long will it take us to answer those
questions satisfactorily?
Many questions can be raised and many answers
can be found, but today is not a good time for questions;
it is time for action, and the decision to act has to be
taken now, because, as we gather here today, we may
very well receive bad news again — God forbid!
The new security environment MINUSMA is trying
to handle is a security situation for which it was not
ready. If it has to change its role from peacekeeping to
antiterrorism fighting, that should be urgently planned
for and done properly. It is against that backdrop that
I wish to express the following expectations from
MINUSMA military contingents, which could be
expected from any contingent under such a security
environment.
With regard to immediate action, I wish here to
salute the successful Serval/Barkhane Operations,
which led to the stability that Mali has enjoyed for
months, and to state that today more than ever before
operations against terrorists in northern Mali are
absolutely crucial, with a view to regaining initiative
and allowing MINUSMA forces to be reinforced in
terms of necessary equipment, training, intelligence
collection and logistics to be able to fulfil its mandate.
In addition, the laudable efforts of United
Nations leadership to give force command authority
and flexibility to deploy troops where and when it
is deemed necessary with required means to do so
should be continued. Furthermore, armed movements
should be made to understand that they should be held
accountable for what is happening in the areas under
their control.
14-56250

09/10/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The second phase will see the pace of the Mali
Defence and Security Force reorganization stepped up,
with a view to taking over and fulfilling its mandate of
defending the nation.
In the long term, there will be a need for the
international community to continue to support Mali
in its efforts to rebuild the country through a variety
of processes, such as disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, and security sector reform processes,
justice and national reconciliation and socioeconomic
development.
I have used the case of Mali as a clear example
of showing that the specific challenges military
contingents are facing today under new security
environments require new organization, planning and
guidance. As for MINUSMA, it needs to adapt itself to
new challenges and stay the course. Its contribution to
transforming northern Mali into a stable area is more
necessary now than ever before. Otherwise, that part
of the world would increasingly become a dangerous
place to live, and the threats to troops, allies and the
population would be even more severe, with negative
effects for the entire region.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank General
Kazura for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Lieutenant General Iqbal
Singh Singha.
Lieutenant General Singha: I am Lieutenant
General I.S. Singha, Head of Mission and Force
Commander of the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF). It is a great privilege to
address this gathering today on the accomplishment of
traditional mandates under changed politico-military
environments.
As the Council is aware, UNDOF is a traditional
mission under Chapter VI of the Charter of the United
Nations and has operated effectively as per its mandate
for the last 40 years. The essence of UNDOF’s mandate
is to keep the military forces of Israel and Syria apart,
by establishing and manning a buffer zone, or an area
of separation, 75 kilometres in length and 235 square
kilometres in area. We are required to observe, monitor
and report any violations in the area of separation. In
addition, with the help of observers from the United
Nations Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO), we
are also required to inspect periodically the levels of
manning of troops in the area of limitation extending up
to 25 km on both sides. However, since March 2012 we

S/PV.7275

have experienced fighting between opposition groups
and the Syrian Army in the area of separation, which
is a clear violation of the mandate. In that internal
strife, apart from dealing with the two parties that are
signatories to the Agreement on Disengagement, we
have had to face a third and complex party: opposition
groups of different shades that are not signatories to
the Agreement. That has made the task of peacekeepers
very challenging, demanding and dangerous.
Exchanges of fire of artillery, tank, mortar,
automatic weapons, anti-aircraft and small arms, as
well as clashes between the two sides, take place on a
regular basis. Over the past three years, peacekeepers
have been affected by a large number of incidents,
including abductions, car-jackings, weapons snatchings,
restrictions of movement, peacekeepers coming under
crossfire, vandalism of United Nations property and
direct threats to peacekeepers by the radical elements.
The landscape changed drastically this year, with
the radical groups arriving in large numbers and
controlling the moderate elements. The opposition
groups have systematically launched a southern
offensive from the Jordanian border, captured the
area of separation up to main route 7 and pushed the
Syrian Arab Armed Forces further to the east in the
area of limitation. We witnessed an upward spiralling
of violence to higher levels, amid which peacekeepers
were directly targeted by the extremists.
During the crisis in which 45 Fijian peacekeepers
were detained by armed members of the opposition, an
ordeal that lasted for 15 days, the radicals made their
intent clear and surrounded another 72 peacekeepers
from the Philippines. The Filipino and Fijian
peacekeepers bravely faced that situation and exhibited
raw courage, resilience and patience. However, during
the release of the peacekeepers, the radical group
reiterated that if presented with another opportunity,
they would detain additional peacekeepers, seize
United Nations vehicles and weapons and ransack
United Nations property. They have also clearly spelled
out that the United Nations was not required in the
area. In spite of all such challenges, it is to the credit
of the senior management and peacekeepers from all
troop-contributing countries that in all major incidents
involving detentions since last year, all peacekeepers
have been released safely without any harm.
It was not an easy task to operate in that
environment, but we have evolved as a mission
and adjusted our operations to meet the challenges

14-562505/33

S/PV.7275

United Nations peacekeeping operations

presented by the environment of internal conflict and
clashes that have recently increased in their intensity
and severity. The weapons employed by both sides,
the size of the area and the number of fighters have
increased exponentially, engaging the entire area of
separation and up to 10 to 15 kilometres of the area of
limitation on the Bravo side.
Within the existing mandate, we have enhanced and
honed our capabilities. The elasticity of the traditional
mandate was stretched just short of the breaking point,
preventing it from snapping. When the threat was
unacceptable and direct, we decided to temporarily
relocate most of our assets on the Alpha side, leaving
six positions and observation posts still held in the
area of separation and five observation posts, or big
positions, on the Alpha side, thereby ensuring that we
now focus more on the ceasefire line, or the Alpha line.
The process of adapting and carrying out the
mandate differently during these trying times was
not done in a graduated manner, but all concerns
were addressed simultaneously to achieve significant
cohesion in moving ahead and continuing to retain
our relevance. We had to reconfigure our operational
capabilities and the methodology of the execution of
operations on the ground, tweak mission support by
tailoring and remodelling logistical and supply chains,
and concurrently ensure the safety and security of the
peacekeepers to fulfil our mandate. We adjusted to the
situation very quickly and we continue to evolve in the
face of dynamically changing threats. In the beginning
of 2013, we improved our vehicle movement code and
stopped the movement of single vehicles, acquired
armoured cars for all movements and monitored and
controlled every movement carefully. With various
prophylactic measures in place, we were able to reduce
incidents to a trickle, until the radicals took control
and the moderates, although opposed to targeting the
United Nations directly, had very little leverage.
Last year, we saw four troop-contributing countries
pull out of the mission, leaving it seriously stretched.
Only the Philippines and India stayed the course, their
soldiers taking on significant extra responsibilities
during this period. With the help of the Security
Council and the troop-contributing countries present
today in the mission, we were able to transform and
empower the mission with an additional 200 soldiers,
a mechanized company and the capability to counter
improvised explosive devices, and to induct some
heavier weapons.

6/33

09/10/2014

UNDOF has doubled its liaison capabilities, and
we were given information analysis capabilities and
a special adviser. Mission support was able to realign
itself with the renewed operational ethos and was able
to harden the existing positions and observation posts.
Drills were refined, and we were able to ensure the
safety of the peacekeepers. We were proactive and on
occasion fired back in self-defence, when fired upon,
basically restoring the situation and disengaging from
the area.
We did reduce our footprint, but continued to
monitor the situation with constant information
collection by different means, including the induction
of long-range day and night surveillance equipment
and thermal imaging devices. The troop-contributing
countries of UNTSO also stepped up and started to
deploy more experienced observers who could cope
with the rapidly deteriorating situation. At my behest,
they changed from day-time observation to aroundthe-clock observation at the observation posts. Certain
threatened observation posts manned by unarmed
observers from UNTSO were provided with protection
by line troops from UNDOF, from time to time, and we
still continue to provide protection to two observation
posts on the Alpha side.
With mitigations measures in place and the
participation of new troop-contributing countries with
greater risk-taking abilities, UNDOF still skilfully
implements its mandate in a modified manner and has
ensured that two traditional adversaries are kept away
from a conventional war. I must say that, in spite of the
changing contours and complexity of the environment,
both the parties, Israel and Syria, were steadfast and
committed to our resolve to continue with our mandate
and tasks.
When the situation started to deteriorate further,
after 27 August, and the radical elements started
to directly target us, we laid out a decision-support
matrix, which guided us through the relocation process.
It was due to the brave actions of the Fijian, Irish and
Indian contingents that the softer elements were sent
out earlier, and the troops of those three contingents
moved in the end from Camp Faouar in proper tactical
formations without any untoward incident. Those brave
peacekeepers and selected members of international
staff exhibited great courage and fortitude. In the
entire temporary relocation process, both Israel and
Syria gave wholehearted support to ensuring that all
800 peacekeepers crossed over safely to the Alpha side.

14-56250

09/10/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV.7275

Notwithstanding the enhanced threat, UNDOF
still maintains 11 positions and observation posts in the
area of responsibility. The gallant Gurkhas from Nepal
continue to hold the strategic Hermon Heights and are
fully mentally and physically prepared to face the harsh
winters. The command elements have been divided into
two: a smaller element is located in Damascus and the
main one is in Camp Ziouani.

Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
General Carlos Alberto dos Santos Cruz of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and General Iqbal
Singha of the United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force. I would also like to thank General Maqsood
Ahmed, Military Adviser for Peacekeeping Operations,
for his remarks.

Efforts are under way to locate one battalion
headquarters on the Bravo side. The opposition groups
have now understood the essence of our presence in the
area of separation, as the engagement levels have gone
up, with Syrian defence forces targeting them with
air power. Until the time of relocation, the Syrian Air
Force had shown considerable restraint in targeting the
opposition groups in the area of separation.

For the past five years, the Security Council has
organized this annual meeting with Force Commanders,
which we find very useful, given the challenging
peacekeeping environment that a number of our missions
are currently operating in. The meetings provide an
opportunity for us to gain a better understanding of the
perspective from the field, particularly on operational
issues. As the Council, we have a huge responsibility to
ensure that the mandates we authorize set clear tasks
for the missions and their leadership, including where
timing and design are concerned. As His Excellency
President Paul Kagame of Rwanda said two weeks ago
at the high-level summit convened by the United States
on United Nations peacekeeping. Rwanda believes
that “nothing matters more than saving innocent lives
when they are at stake”. It is first and foremost a host
country’s responsibility to protect its own civilians, but,
unfortunately, that does not always happen. And that is
where United Nations peacekeeping missions have to
intervene, when required, in order to make a difference
on the ground. That is also part of our responsibility to
protect.

The parties to the 1974 Agreement on Disengagement
between Israeli and Syrian Forces fully appreciate the
relevance of UNDOF during the Syrian crises, and
my interlocutors on both sides have applauded our
flexibility, transparency and, above all, impartiality
throughout the ongoing internal strife in Syria over the
past three years. That transformation would not have
been possible without the strong support UNDOF has
received from the Security Council, the Secretariat,
United Nations Headquarters and Member States. I
would be remiss if I did not mention the assistance that
has been provided by the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon, among others, with rotation and logistics
movements, which are carried out through Beirut due
to the prevailing security situation. The cooperation
between UNDOF and UNTSO, whose observers
support the mission through Observer Group Golan,
continues to be constructive.
I am very grateful for the opportunity to address
the Security Council. I would like to conclude by
reaffirming my personal commitment and that of my
senior leadership team and all UNDOF peacekeepers,
military and civilian, to continuing to do everything
possible to ensure the implementation of the mandate
that the Security Council has entrusted to UNDOF.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
General Singha for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I would like to thank the
Force Commanders for their briefings — General
Bosco Kazura of the United Nations Multidimensional

As new threats emerge and peacekeeping tasks are
transformed, peacekeepers should be trained, prepared
and equipped to use force to protect their own lives
and those of innocent civilians. Contingents that do
not fulfil those requirements should not be deployed
to peacekeeping missions, as they may put civilian
lives, and their own, at risk. At the very least, we must
conduct proactive long-range patrols, and missions
must be equipped to carry them out from the first
moment their boots are on the ground. When civilians
are brutally attacked just a few kilometres or miles from
a United Nations camp, United Nations peacekeeping
operations rightly lose credibility on the ground,
thereby undermining our work around the world.
That applies to what General Bosco Kazura said
in his briefing about expectations from our military
contingents in challenging security environments. In
Mali, our peacekeepers are dealing with asymmetric
threats that completely transcend traditional tasks and

14-562507/33

S/PV.7275

United Nations peacekeeping operations

requirements. An increasing number of peacekeepers
have been in killed in that country in recent weeks,
among them a Chadian contingent that paid the greatest
price. On Tuesday, in fact, a Senegalese peacekeeper
was killed, following the deaths of nine troops from the
Niger killed on Friday in an ambush in Gao, in one of
the deadliest attacks on peacekeepers in Mali to date.
I would like to once again offer our condolences to the
peacekeepers’ families and Governments. Those brave
souls made a noble sacrifice, and it is a reminder that we
are not adequately equipped or prepared to confront the
challenges of transnational terrorism and the presence
of jihadist groups in Mali. I have a few questions about
this for General Ahmed and General Kazura.
Peacekeeping involves taking risks and losing
human lives, but not to the extent we have seen in Mali.
We also know and acknowledge that there were failures
during the establishment and rehatting of the Mission,
but again, that cannot continue to be an excuse nearly
16 months later. What, in concrete terms, can be done
to address this alarming situation? Related to that, we
all know that MINUSMA is a peacekeeping mission.
It is not mandated to carry out offensive operations,
although, to be very clear, that should not prevent
the Mission from protecting itself and defending its
mandate. Last year, the Council mandated that the
French forces of Operation Serval, now replaced by
Operation Barkhane, should support peacekeepers
whenever operations were beyond their mandate and
capability, particularly in relation to counter-terrorism
activities. In that regard, I should mention what our
colleague from Mali said yesterday at an informal
dinner, which is that unfortunately, as of now, armed
groups are continuing to gain and occupy new territorial
positions and are setting up parallel administrations,
going against both the letter and the spirit of resolutions
2100 (2013) and 2164 (2014) and of the relevant political
and ceasefire agreements in Mali.
The Council’s reaction to those blatant violations of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the secular
Republic of Mali seems weak and ineffective. While
the world’s eyes and efforts are turned towards the
essential fight against the Islamic State in Iraq and
Syria, we should not lose sight of the growing threat of
terrorism on the African continent and of the serious
risk of radical and terrorist groups within Mali linking
up with similar organizations such as Boko Haram and
Al-Shabaab, and thus paralysing the entire region. I
would like to ask General Maqsood if the situation I
have just described in Mali is going beyond Operation
8/33

09/10/2014

Serval’s control, considering the mandate given by
the Security Council. I would also like to know what,
in General Kazura’s view, should be corrected or
improved before the situation gets out of hand. In that
context, there are additional assets, such as all sources
information fusion units and drones, which have been
deployed to help with intelligence gathering. We would
like to hear from the MINUSMA Force Commander to
what extent those assets are being utilized, and if they
are useful.
As Rwanda has said before, while the political
dimension of that conflict should not be underplayed,
a more robust mandate for a reconfigured mission is
essential to the safety and security of our peacekeepers
and for operational efficacy. The Council needs to
have a serious discussion on what that reconfiguraton
would entail and what it would look like. We need to
change how we do business because we are no longer
doing business in the same markets. We cannot avoid
that debate. We believe that no national interest of any
Council member should be pursued at the expense of
the security and safety of the affected populations.
Before I conclude, I wonder if General Dos
Santos Cruz could say something about the recent
reports that more than 100 demobilized fighters and
their families, including women and children, have
died from starvation and disease in a military camp
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Does he
think that that could affect the planned disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and resettlement or
repatriation operations? How can we prevent such
inhumane treatment of those who surrender?
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the presidency for having convened this
briefing. We also thank Lieutenant General Maqsood
Ahmed, Military Adviser for Peacekeeping Operations,
and the Force Commanders of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) for their
briefings. This annual practice should continue.
At the beginning of my statement, I would like to
reiterate my country’s commitment to peacekeeping
operations, which are a key tool of the United Nations
under its peace and security pillar. Since 1948, Chile
has supported those efforts. Today, as my country’s
14-56250

09/10/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Minister for Foreign Affairs said at the summit held
at Headquarters in September, we have offered new
materiel and training resources, in addition to the
existing ones, to be deployed in such cases in Africa.
The new situations and challenges facing the forces
on the ground have led us to acknowledge the need to
analyse and discuss peacekeeping operations, from
their inception to their implementation and conclusion.
The membership in general, in particular troop- and
police-contributing countries, should participate in that
process. In that regard, we underscore the role of the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations of the
General Assembly as the intergovernmental body to
address such matters. We welcome the announcement
by the Secretary-General to appoint a high-level panel
to review and to report on such issues.
My delegation supports a multidimensional
approach to conflict resolution that includes the
protection of civilians, the restoration of the rule of law,
accountability, reconciliation and social inclusion. We
also underscore the importance of strengthening the
gender perspective and the full integration of women,
in accordance with the provisions of resolution 1325
(2000) and other existing resolutions. In the current
dynamic of conflict, we see the use of new technologies
and inter-mission cooperation as useful and necessary
mechanisms, which, in all cases, must have the consent
of the parties and comply with international law.
We underscore the commitment undertaken by
some missions to protect civilians. In the particular
case of MONUSCO, we value the optimal use,
in cooperation with the Congolese authorities, of
early-warning mechanisms at all levels, prevention
initiatives on the basis of community-based protection
committees and support for the drawing up such
plans based on interim and ongoing operations. We
believe that community-based early-warning networks
could be used in other peacekeeping operations. We
also highlight MONUSCO’s contribution in terms
of training the Congolese police, which has included
the management of sexual and gender-based violence,
as well as the establishment of islands of stability in
priority areas to protect the civilian population.
In the case of Mali, the increasingly frequent
attacks against MINUSMA and its troops, as affirmed
today by Major General Bosco Kasura, point to a
change in the security conditions, in particular in
the north of the country. That makes it necessary to
consider a reconfiguration of the mandate. We believe

S/PV.7275

that it is appropriate for the Council to discuss the
possible options.
As for UNDOF, we emphasize that, for four decades,
it has been an effective liaison and communication tool
to prevent escalations of violence between Israel and
Syria. However, the outbreak of the conflict in Syria
and the emergence of non-State actors have changed the
reality on the ground and compromised the security of
the troops, even forcing the Blue Helmets to temporarily
withdrawal to the Alpha side. To deal with that new
situation, we believe that UNDOF should maintain its
close contact with the authorities of both countries.
We should support the strengthening of their defensive
capability, while making use of new technologies. We
should include more troops who speak Arabic so as to
strengthen ties with the local communities in the area
of separation and on the Bravo side.
My delegation views peacekeeping operations as a
broad concept, where peacekeeping and peacebuilding
tasks converge, recognizing the link between
security and development. It is therefore important
that the mandates, as well as being clear and having
the necessary resources and conditions for their
implementation, be the outcome of a proper debate
in the Security Council, in which the Peacebuilding
Commission, the relevant regional organizations and
troop- and police-contributing countries are duly heard.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): As I am speaking
for the first time this month at an open meeting of the
Council, I would like to congratulate you, Madam
President, on your presidency and to assure you of
our full cooperation. I would like to thank Lieutenant
General Maqsood Ahmed, Major General Kazura and
Lieutenant General Singha for their briefings. We also
welcome all the Force Commanderes who are here with
us today. I take this opportunity to acknowledge their
dedicated work and to pay special tribute to all the Blue
Helmets in the world operating under their command.
Today, peacekeepers face various and increasing
threats in carrying out their mandates. Many cases
of deliberate attacks against peacekeepers and of
their detention have been reported. Safety on the
basis of impartiality is no longer taken for granted.
One explanation for that changing environment may
be found in the recent surge of intractable non-State
actors. As they become radicalized, while often
enjoying impunity, their belligerence tends to become
more indiscriminate.

14-562509/33

S/PV.7275

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Such challenges should be met by the strengthening
of peacekeeping capabilities. Robust mandates and the
safety of the troops should always be ensured.
Implementing mandates in hostile environments
exposes peacekeepers to risks. What we must do in
the face of those challenges is to provide appropriate
training and the necessary equipment. Advanced
technologies would also help to reduce potential risks
for both peacekeepers and civilians. Priority should
be given to maximizing operational preparedness,
in accordance with the mandates. Peacekeeping
contingents with robust mandates need a sufficient level
of regional support in addition to the full cooperation of
the host country. Having said that, I would like to make
a few observations on today’s briefings on peacekeeping
operations in the field.
First, the case of United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
Congo (MONUSCO) illustrates how peacekeepers
can actively protect civilians and mitigate the risk to
civilians. In addition to the Intervention Brigade, which
has already proven its value on the ground, MONUSCO’s
recent steps, such as active patrolling, paying particular
attention to refugee camps and swift action, offer good
examples of a more mobile and versatile approach to
the protection of civilians.
Secondly, with the withdrawal of the Malian forces
from most of northern Mali and the drawdown of the
French operation, the safety of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA), now virtually the only forces
on the ground, is increasingly threatened by terrorist
attacks. I take this opportunity to reiterate our strong
condemnation of the recent targeted attacks against
a MINUSMA convoy and camp. In the midst of that
heightened security risk, MINUSMA is required to
expand its outreach in the northern area, beyond the
main population centres, in accordance with resolution
2164 (2014). Far short of its ceiling of approved
personnel and without sufficient military enablers,
MINUSMA runs the risk of getting stretched too thin.
We would like to hear from General Kazura what kind
of support MINUSMA needs most to fulfil its mandate.
Thirdly, over the past few months the volatile
situation on the Syrian side of the Golan Heights
has significantly restricted the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF)’s operation
in the Bravo zone. Insofar as that abnormality stems
from the crisis in Syria, it will take time before
10/33

09/10/2014

stability can return. The Security Council is awaiting
the Secretariat’s recommendations to allow UNDOF to
continue carrying out its mandate under the changed
politico-military circumstances of the Golan Heights. In
that regard, we would like to hear from General Singha
about how he thinks UNDOF should be strengthened
to cope with increased threats, and what approach he
is taking in dealing with the armed opposition groups
to prevent a recurrence of serious obstructions to
UNDOF’s tasks.
Lastly, we would like to stress that the role of a
peacekeeping mission is to assist the Government
and people in taking the lead for the future of their
own country. Peacekeepers can do their work more
efficiently and more swiftly when national stakeholders
make progress in the political process. Therefore, we
believe that the Security Council and Member States
together should encourage national stakeholders to
expedite their political transition in an inclusive way.
Such efforts will undoubtedly help Force Commanders
and peacekeepers to do their job.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): We
welcome this opportunity for a productive and frank
exchange with Force Commanders, and we thank you,
Madam President, for your initiative in holding this
meeting. I also want to thank the three Generals for
their clear and informative briefings this morning. This
dialogue is important because it helps our understanding
of the constraints that Force Commanders face, and
therefore informs our decision-making on the mandates
for each mission. It should not be a one-off event, and
I am pleased that increasingly the Security Council
has the opportunity to hear from individual Force
Commanders when individual missions are discussed
by the Council.
Protecting civilians is now at the heart of many
United Nations peacekeeping missions. But sadly,
as the recent report of Office of Internal Oversight
Services states, there has been “a persistent pattern
of peacekeeping operations not intervening with force
when civilians are under attack.”(A/68/787, Summary)
That is unacceptable because, as General Dos Santos
Cruz spelled out there, is no risk-free option. And
civilians are best protected through prevention, mobility
and active intervention, rather than simple presence.
If missions do not fulfil their protection-of-civilian
responsibilities, it undermines other tasks the mission
may have been mandated to do, to say nothing of the
loss of life and suffering that ensues. If this is a question
14-56250

09/10/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

of tools or authority, then the Council needs to ensure
that peacekeepers have the ability to fully deliver
against the mandate set. But if, as seems sometimes
to be the case, it is a question of interpretation of the
mandate, then that needs to be urgently resolved among
the Secretariat, the Force Commander and the national
contingent commanders.
What is the dialogue with United Nations
Headquarters, including senior Department of
Peacekeeping
Operations
(DPKO)
leadership
and military advisers on protection of civilian
implementation? How often do they discuss the
protection-of-civilian strategy and requirements? As
my Rwandan colleague pointed out, many peacekeeping
operations are now taking place in a very different,
more hostile environment. Grom my Government’s
perspective — I am thinking about preventable
atrocities such as the massacre in South Kivu in
June — now is the right time to push for an agreed
standard and formal DPKO guidance on the remit of
protection of civilians. General Dos Santos Cruz made
some important recommendations, which the Council
should consider carefully. I wonder if he could say a
bit more about how he as Force Commander ensured
that everyone in the United Nations Organizations
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
Congo (MONUSCO) force understood the protection of
civilians and their expected role in it.
The seizure of 45 peacekepiers of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) in August,
reflecting the changing nature of the security situation
in UNDOF’s area of operation, as General Singha
described, was deeply disturbing. Their subsequent
release was a happy ending to the incident, but it
brings into sharp relief the risks that all peacekeepers
now face. More tragic still, in Mali we have seen
31 peacekeepers killed in a variety of terrorist and other
attacks in recent months. Those incidents highlight
the fact that United Nations peacekeeping missions
are increasingly coming into contact with non-State
actors, some using terrorist methods of operation.
General Kazura made some important points about
the mismatch between the tasks of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) and its ability to perform them.
Following yesterday’s discussion (see S/PV.7274), the
Security Council is well seized of that gap and needs to
take some tough decisions about the future direction of
MINUSMA.

S/PV.7275

More generally, support from United Nations
Headquarters for missions to adapt to changing
environments is clearly essential. If missions are
unable to protect themselves, they will be unable to
protect others. We have heard that in order to fulfil
their mandates to protect civilians missions need more
protected mobility, better intelligence and an increase
in medical evacuation capability. I would be interested
to hear the Force Commanders’ views on that. Is it
primarily an issue of better training and needing better
technology, information-gathering techniques and
analysis, or is there a more fundamental shift required
in how such missions are conceived? I would also be
interested to hear from the Force Commanders how the
military components understand their role in relations to
operating with non-State actors. Do they have guidance
they need from New York to engage with non-State
actors they encounter on the ground, particular in areas
where State control no longer exists.
In conclusion, we recognize the noble and critical
role that peacekeepers play, and the risks to which they
are exposed. We recognize the need to supply missions
with reasonable and appropriate mandates and all the
necessary tools and authority that they need to fulfil
the obligations. If we do that, then we can legitimately
expect that peacekeepers will do their utmost to fulfil
those mandates.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I wish to
thank the Force Commanders for briefing the Security
Council today and for their service in three of the
world’s most demanding United Nations peacekeeping
missions. We would also like to recognize the efforts
of the Force Commanders who are not speaking
today, many of whom are in the Chamber, and the
130,000 troops, police and civilian staff under their
collective command. The Force Commanders and
those individuals are putting their lives on the line to
protect people from countries that are not their own
and to ensure our collective security in an increasingly
interconnected world. They do not get parades when
they return home to their home countries. They are
not celebrated in the way they might be if they were
acting in their own national defence, but I want them to
know that certainly on behalf of the United States, and
I assume everyone in the Chamber, they have our great
gratitude for their service.
The Council values their unique perspectives on
the missions that they command, and we have sought
to ensure not only this right of passage where we hear

14-5625011/33

S/PV.7275

United Nations peacekeeping operations

from them but also their inclusion in regular Council
consultations. Vice-President Biden joined President
Kagame, Prime Minister Abe, Prime Minister Sharif,
Prime Minister Hasina and the Secretary-General to
co-host on 26 September an unprecedented summit
on peacekeeping, for the simple reason of trying to
secure commitments from Member States so that Force
Commanders can have better trained, better equipped
and more capable forces under their command. That
will take time, but we need to strengthen the pool from
which the Commanders draw and on which they rely.
Today’s meeting is well-timed. As others have
noted, on Tuesday a Senegalese peacekeeper was killed
by a rocket attack on a joint French-United Nations
military base in Kidal, Mali. In the past week, nine
Nigerian peacekeepers were killed in a brutal ambush
on their convoy in the Gao region of Mali. Our hearts
go out to the victims’ families and to the loved ones
of all the people who have been killed serving in
peacekeeping missions. We condemn those ruthless
acts in the strongest terms. It is essential that, however
long it takes, we bring the perpetrators of those kinds
of attacks to justice. Right now, in many missions,
a sense of impunity reigns. As those attacks in Mali
attest, peacekeepers in twenty-first century missions
face unprecedented risks. That is because we are asking
them and the Force Commanders to take on more
responsibilities in more places and in more complex
conflicts than at any time in history.
In those circumstances we have seen great
professionalism and effectiveness, and we see systemic
failures to fulfil core responsibilities. Today’s meeting
aims to draw upon the knowledge and experience of the
Force Commanders in the Chamber today to identify
and learn both from best practices and from common
problems. We have heard in their presentations about
some of those shared challenges.
Lieutenant General Dos Santos Cruz’s commitment
to protecting civilians is a model for twenty-first
century peacekeeping missions. He has led his troops
by example, personally participating in patrols and
operations and even travelling to the headquarters of the
Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda (FDLR)
armed group to pressure its leaders to lay down their
arms. He is the embodiment of the kind of leadership
that Special Representative Kobler described in the
Council in August (see S/PV.7237) when he called for
a shift in mindset, from of protection by presence to
one of protection by action. That is something that my

12/33

09/10/2014

Rwandan colleague has also spoken to in the Council
today. We wholeheartedly support his assertion that
peacekeeping missions must be more responsive, not
only when attacks to happen but also more proactive
in efforts to protect civilians even before those attacks
take place.
That is why incidents like the one in Haut Uele
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo earlier this
year, during which civilians were attacked just a few
kilometres down the road from peacekeepers, cannot
be repeated. That is also why the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo must proactively pursue action
against the FDLR and other armed groups that continue
to wreak havoc on civilians, without waiting for those
groups to strike first.
There remain large gaps between principle and
practice, between mandates and implementation. The
protection of civilians is, as the Force Commanders
have stated, at the heart of a number of United Nations
peacekeeping mandates. Yet, as the Office of Internal
Oversight Services (OIOS) report (A/68/787) in March
2014 found, missions routinely fail to use force to protect
civilians under attack. We are deeply concerned by
that finding and believe that when civilians are facing
imminent risk, peacekeepers have a responsibility to
intervene. Civilians are counting on peacekeepers.
The OIOS report highlights that troop contingents
sometimes refuse to follow orders from their
commanders, and the report recommends that those
incidents of indiscipline be reported to Department
of Peacekeeping Operations. But there is a structural
issue that we should acknowledge in the Council
today. Every military person knows that command and
control is essential for the performance of one’s mission
effectively. Yet often in peacekeeping missions there
are two chains of command, one back to the capital and
one within the mission to the Force Commanders. That
creates tensions that often go unacknowledged, and
certainly under-addressed. It is something that we need
to think about as we consider peacekeeping reform,
because unity of command is so essential.
Major General Kazura’s Mission — the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali — shows, as much as any mission,
the complex and multifaceted risks that peacekeepers
in the field face today. With his troops being attacked,
using improvised explosive devices, rockets, mines,
ambushes and suicide bombers, 31 peacekeepers have
14-56250

09/10/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

been killed and at least 91 injured since the Mission
deployed on 1 July 2013. The Major General is, I believe
it is official, leading the most dangerous mission in the
world for United Nations peacekeepers. He therefore has
a unique challenge, on the one hand, in maintaining the
morale of his troops as they come under growing attack
and, at the same time, trying to perform his mission,
supporting the political process and trying to help the
Malians reclaim control and to consolidate control of
their territory. As the Major General said — he put it
very eloquently — he is in a terrorist-fighting situation
without an anti-terror mandate. He also noted the lack
of equipment and training needed for the environment
in which they are now operating. He has often in the
past expressed, including when the Council visited Mali
and we had the chance to engage with him, a desire to
do more and to be more aggressive in dealing and more
proactive, more along the lines of what we have heard
from Lieutenant General dos Santos Cruz. But he has
waited more than a year to even get the troops promised
to him, again without the equipment and trained troops
tailored for the environment he now finds himself in.
Lieutenant General Singha, for nearly four decades,
in what was a relatively quiet observer mission in the
Golan Heights, monitoring a disengagement of forces
between two countries, suddenly found himself caught
in the middle of a brutal civil war, and his peacekeepers
have come under direct attack by non-State armed
groups. We were, like others, deeply relieved that
the 45 abducted Fijian peacekeepers were released
and that the surrounded Filipino peacekeepers were
able to reach safety unharmed. But we know that the
situation remains extremely volatile, and the threat
to United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
peacekeepers remains high. The abrupt change in the
Chapter VI mission has required flexibility on the part
of Lieutenant General Singha and the observers on
the ground, as well as extensive work on behalf of the
whole international community with troop contributors
or observer contributors to maintain contributions and
to make sure that the mission remains whole. That has
been extremely challenging.
For Generals Dos Santos Cruz, Kazura and Singha
and all the Force Commanders in the Council today,
the United States is fully committed to their missions’
success, to the protection of civilians that they serve
and to the capacity and safety of the troops that they
command. In conclusion, would like to ask three
questions.

S/PV.7275

First, the circumstances they find themselves in
are circumstances that even the most advanced, wellresourced militaries would find challenging. Yet they
are pooling troops, observers and police from different
countries with different military cultures, with
different training, with equipment of different quality
and different ways of approaching their mandates. That
presents enormous challeges. Again, over time, we need
close the gaps in those differences in interpretation and
capabilities.
My first question is, what can be done by the
Security Council, by troop-contributing countries or
by the Secretariat and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations to increase cohesion towards the one
mission-one mandate concept, as well as towards
greater shared capabilities and more even capabilities
and will across missions?
With regard to my second question, in the Golan
and in Mali the ground has shifted under commanders’
feet — I think my Rwandan colleague put it well. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, after many years of
a similar approach being taken, over the past couple of
years we have seen the Council and troop-contributing
countries adapt to circumstances where the Mission was
not performing its mandate adequately, to try to make
the Mission more effective in the light of the success
that armed groups had had in terrorizing civilians.
We need to look at missions afresh. Sometimes we get
on auto-pilot here as the Security Council and as the
international community. But the Force Commanders
have presented to us, and we ourselves are witness to,
the fact that some of the fundamental assumptions at the
heart of their missions need to be revisited, challenged
and refreshed. Terrorist groups have gained strength
and have made targets of the men and women serving
under the Force Commanders — and, in a way, under
us. We therefore need to look anew at the fundamentals.
Of course, commanders should bear in mind that their
missions are more, not less, important in the light of
the changed circumstances. We therefore do not have
the option as the international community of walking
away from these vital missions they are dealing with,
in which there are critical threats to international peace
and security. But we have to make sure that our means
are tailored to the circumstances at hand. I would be
grateful if the briefers could speak to what they think
these new circumstances demand, not simply in terms
of anti-improvised explosive device support of the kind
we have a responsibility to provide commanders, but
the fundamentals.

14-5625013/33

S/PV.7275

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Thirdly and finally, I have spoken about the
importance of protecting civilians. I cannot put it any
better than General Dos Santos Cruz or Rwandan
Ambassador Gasana have. Before concluding, however,
I would like to go back to where I started, and where my
British colleague ended as well, which is with regard to
the lives and the safety of peacekeepers themselves. Not
only are civilians often targeted, with United Nations
peacekeepers nearby, but peacekeepers themselves
are increasingly targeted for attack. Yet, whether
in Darfur, South Sudan or Mali, the perpetrators are
rarely, if ever, held accountable. What more should the
Security Council or the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations or the broader international community do
to secure accountability? That is of course particularly
challenging with regard to non-State actors and terrorist
groups. Often, though, even Government forces
involved in attacks against peacekeepers get away with
their crimes. That is something that the Council and
the entire international community have an interest in
stopping.
I thank briefers for their candid presentations thus
far and for their responses to the questions raised. I think
this dialogue is essential to improving peacekeeping and
enhancing the protection of the people who rely on all
of us for capabilities that sometimes their Governments
are not able to provide.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): Lithuania welcomes
this annual opportunity to hear direactly from United
Nations Force Commanders about the most pressing
challenges in today’s peacekeeping. I thank the Force
Commanders for their briefings. Let me also express
our appreciation for their service, under increasingly
demanding and challenging circumstances. On their
sound judgement hinges the successful implementation
of mandates, as well as the lives of peacekeepers and
those they are tasked to protect. Let me touch upon the
three topics selected for today’s discussion.
Fifteen years after the Security Council pledged
to systematically address the protection of civilians
in armed conflict, civilians continue to account for
the majority of casualties in armed conflicts. A gap
persists between ambitious normative frameworks and
tragic realities on the ground. The most vulnerable
groups are often those least protected. In that context,
we recognize and support all initiatives aimed at
enhancing the protection of civilians by United Nations
peacekeepers.

14/33

09/10/2014

The increased presence of troops from the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) in the
eastern part of that country has had a deterrent effect
on armed groups that target civilians. Yet presence
alone may be insufficient. Peacekeepers must be ready
to demonstrate their willingness to act robustly, quickly
and effectively to protect civilian lives. In that regard,
we welcome the emphasis by Lieutenant General Dos
Santos Cruz on a robust proactive approach.
MONUSCO’s efforts to improve its early-warning
and response mechanisms should be noted. The
establishment of hotlines to alert about impending danger,
as well as the Mission’s support for the implementation
of local protection plans through community protection
committees, all contribute to reducing threats and
insecurity for the civilian population and should be
considered in other peacekeeping operations. Last
but not least, we strongly support one mandate-one
mission-one force approach, as saving human lives is
the primary task of all units of a mission.
Turning to expectations from the military
components, it is important to recognize that the
current peacekeeping environment — and many have
spoken about it — is marked by constantly changing
circumstances and challenges. Peacekeepers face
indirect fire, improvised explosive devices, ambushes,
abductions and even direct attacks, including by
radical extremists, as they carry out their missions
in hostile environments. They also find themselves
in situations where there is no peace to keep, while
peace enforcement may not be in their mandate. In
spite of the mantra-like repetition by the Council of its
resolve to give operations clear, credible and achievable
mandates, matched by appropriate resources, situations
continue to occur where the ambition of the mandate
and the capacity to carry out it are at odds with each
other.
A lack of adequate training, proper equipment or
enablers, as well as insufficient backing by air assets
and modern technologies to counter both conventional
and asymmetric threats, are recurrent problems. Such
mismatches end up being a lose-lose situation for
all. The United Nations loses its credibility, civilian
populations suffer casualties and conflict gets more
entrenched, and far too many peacekeepers lose their
lives in the line of duty.

14-56250

09/10/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

For example, delays in the deployment of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and a continued lack
of air mobility, as well as the changing nature of the
threats, have limited the Mission’s ability to effectively
implement the mandate. On the other hand, the current
steady increase in the Mission’s military and police
capacities, as well as the enhancement of its situational
awareness through the establishment of the All Sources
Information Fusion Unit, are significant steps forward
that have a noticeable positive impact on the protection
of civilians.
At the same time, we must acknowledge that
MINUSMA no longer operates in the peacekeeping
context and that some troop-contributing countries
bear a disproportionate share of the impact, as we were
once again tragically reminded by the recent loss of
peacekeepers’ lives. A serious discussion about the
mandate is in order, and the international community
should continue contributing to the development of
national capacities. In that context, I would like to note
the work of the European Union Training Mission,
whose personnel, including four Lithuanian trainers,
are engaged in rebuilding the Malian armed forces. The
civilian capacity-building mission complements those
efforts by supporting internal security forces through
training and strategic advice.
Finally, on the accomplishment of traditional
mandates under the changing political-military setting,
it is crucial to note that the safety and security of
peacekeepers must be among the Council’s top priorities
when designing or adjusting peacekeeping mandates. It
should engage in constant dialogue with the Secretariat
and troop contributors to make sure that peacekeepers
are not left to fend for themselves in a dramatically
changed environment.
During the recent months in the Golan, troops of
the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
(UNDOF), mandated to observe the 1974 Disengagement
Agreement between Israel and Syrian forces, were
besieged, attacked, forced out of their positions and
detained by the designated terrorist groups and armed
non-State actors. There can be no justification for such
actions, and the perpetrators must be brought to justice.
A temporary adjustment in UNDOF’s posture and
operations, as well as its immediate relocation, was fully
warranted. We commend the mission for continuously
reviewing and updating its contingency plans. We also
look forward to an update from the Secretary-General

S/PV.7275

on the steps needed to maintain UNDOF’s ability to
implement its mandate.
Before concluding, let me put forward a few
questions to the participating Force Commanders.
First, to what extent is proactive reconnaissance and
intelligence helping to create better awareness, and thus
pre-empting and preventing threats? Could they refer to
good practices in current peacekeeping operations in
that respect? What more needs to be done?
Secondly, how do robust mandates translate into
operational plans? Would commanders prefer the
mandates’ tasks to be detailed and precise, or should
they leave room for their decisions to act for the
achievement of end-states?
Thirdly, what is the impact of modern
technologies, such as unmanned aerial systems, in
today’s peacekeeping operations, in particular on
intelligence-gathering? Would the commanders suggest
deploying those systems to other missions, such as
UNDOF, for example?
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Lieutenant General Maqsood
Ahmed and the commanders of the military components
of the United Nations missions in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Mali and the Golan for their
substantive briefings, which reflect some of today’s
most pressing themes, not only for the missions that
they represent but also in the broader context of United
Nations peacekeeping.
Recently, United Nations peacekeeping operations
have increasing been deployed in complex conditions
of internal political crisis compounded by armed
confrontation, difficult socioeconomic contexts
and cross-border threats. That creates additional
non-traditional security risks for peacekeepers. The
mandates of the operations themselves are increasingly
providing for the use of force and being endowed with
multiple components. The United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) is a salient example of that, on the
basis of which we still have to substantively analyse the
experience of the use of the Intervention Brigade and
the practice of using unmanned aerial vehicles.
Protecting civilians is one of the central, although
far from sole, tasks of today’s peacekeeping operations.
In that regard, we have serious concerns over the recently
observed desire to loosely interpret the standards of

14-5625015/33

S/PV.7275

United Nations peacekeeping operations

international humanitarian law regarding the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. It is unacceptable that
there should be any action taken under the slogan of
protecting civilians that in practice pursues selfish
geopolitical aims, including the removal of legitimate
authorities in sovereign States.
Actions to protect civilians should not go beyond
the framework of Security Council mandates, which,
in turn, must be clear, preclude dual interpretations
and be fully complied with by those who are entrusted
with implementing the relevant tasks. Another priority
is to work out constructive daily interaction between
peacekeepers and local authorities, who by definition
bear the direct responsibilities for protecting their
populations.
There is considerable concern over the increase in
terrorist activity in the areas of deployment of United
Nations peacekeeping operations. A disturbing sign
in that regard is evidenced by the spate of violent
and openly terrorist acts aimed against the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) peacekeepers in that
country. The latest tragic incidents involving the death
of peacekeepers from Chad, the Niger and Senegal
clearly demonstrate the great perils involved in serving
in northern Mali. In that regard, it is critical to try to
qualitatively enhance the effectiveness of interaction
between the Mission and the French forces in the country.
We also anticipate that the Mission contingent, which
has brought capacities under the existing mandate,
enabling it to provide effective support to Bamako in
addressing the most pressing problems, above all in
the area of security, will promptly be brought to the
mandated strength and receive the logistical support
commensurate with the tensions of the situation.
A careful assessment of emerging threats to United
Nations personnel is a requisite component when
planning operations. In that regard, we believe that the
stated plan to move the core United Nations force to the
troubled northern part of the country cannot be carried
out without unwarranted risks to the United Nations
Blue Helmets.
The Middle East continues to be another, but
unfortunately not the last, region of the world where
peacekeepers are exposed to serious risks. Attacks
on personnel of the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force, which is an important stabilizing
factor in the Golan, again highlight the priority need
to ensure their security. The requirement of preventing
16/33

09/10/2014

aggressive actions against peacekeepers must be
addressed not so much to the authorities of Israel
and Syria but, given today’s realities, above all to the
armed fighters whose actions exacerbate the situation
in the disengagement area. Those who have leverage
over them need to actively make use of their influence
to prevent the situation from spinning out of control,
provoking a complete drawdown of that critically
important peacekeeping mission.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Military Adviser for Peacekeeping Operations,
Lieutenant General Maqsood Ahmed, and the Force
Commanders of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
and the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
for their briefings. I would like to make two points
today.
First, our regular exchanges on peacekeeping are
important because peacekeeping, which is at the heart
of the Charter of the United Nations, now represents a
substantial and symbolic part of the work of the United
Nations. Peacekeeping touches upon questions of war
and peace and life and death, and therefore triggers our
moral and political responsibility.
The number of Blue Helmets and the budgets for
peacekeeping operations have been multiplied by 10
in 10 years. The budget today amounts to $8 billion,
nearly four times the general budget. It is important to
keep those facts in mind.
Many only know the United Nations through
the Blue Helmets, who have become symbols of the
Organization. France pays tribute to their courage and
dedication that sometimes comes at the price of blood,
as unfortunately recently occurred in Mali, where
soldiers from Chad, the Niger and Senegal were killed.
Starting as an ad hoc concept to serve the purposes
of the Charter, peacekeeping operations have gradually
emerged as an invaluable tool, and our expectations
of them have not stopped growing. They have a vital
function, focused or refocused, as in South Sudan
recently, on protecting civilians. Their mandates are
more comprehensive and complex, extending support
to political transitions and stabilization, as in Mali,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Central
African Republic. In parallel, deployment occurs in
intra-State conflicts or non-stabilized environments

14-56250

09/10/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

where political processes are disturbed by non-State
actors, which increases the difficulty of their work, as
the briefers have explained.
Therefore — this is my second point — we have a
duty to ensure that peacekeeping operations have the
resources they need to achieve success and that they
use them with the utmost professionalism with a view to
efficiency. That implies several requirements. First, we
must meet the needs in terms of troops and equipment,
especially through the multiplier effect. I am thinking
in particular of air assets, but also medical support and
engineering units, which are often lacking.
We need contingents that are immediately
available, responsive, well equipped, well trained and
capable of taking initiative. We encourage Member
States that have such capabilities to close those gaps,
as Mexico is preparing to do following its recent
decision to re-engage in the uniformed components of
peacekeeping operations, or Angola, which just made
offers to serve to the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations.
A second requirement is to strengthen the logistical
and operational support in missions that need it. French
forces are working in that direction in Mali and the
Central African Republic. The European Union plays
its role in Mali and in the Central African Republic, and
by providing decisive financial support to the African
Union Military Observer Mission in Somalia. But the
functioning of those Missions emphasizes the progress
still needed, including in terms of mission support.
No doubt the Force Commanders will be able to give
us additional, particularly valuable comments on that
point.
The third requirement is to adapt the peacekeeping
operations procedures to their mandates, so that they
can better do what we ask them. That is even more
crucial in the least stabilized contexts, where the
interests of efficiency must be combined with those of
force protection. The balance between the protection of
Blue Helmets and their efficiency is also particularly
important in the context of the protection of civilians,
as General Dos Santos Cruz clearly explained.
We are convinced that inaction is not an option,
as it does not respond to any concerns because it
leaves complete freedom of action to those who want
to derail the peace process and who attack civilians
and peacekeeping soldiers. A dynamic attitude and
proactive is the best way to meet the dual objective of

S/PV.7275

protecting civilians and protecting military personnel.
The Force Commanders of MONUSCO and MINUSMA
will be able to give us some useful examples in that
connection.
In addition to this change in attitude and methods of
operation, and this is our fourth requirement, we need to
allow peacekeeping operations to incorporate modern
technology. This is a very promising track. By increasing
the capacity for observation, information-processing
and the protection of peacekeepers, technology makes
it easier to understand the environment, to anticipate
and act ahead of spikes of violence and thus protect
itself and populations. Here I would give the example
of the observation drones used by МONUSCO. I would
be very grateful to the Commander of MONUSCO if
he would share with us his experience in this area;
possibly the other Force Commanders could share with
us their views on the technological contributions from
which their forces could benefit.
The fifth requirement is to foster inter-mission
cooperation and thereby increase synergies. This is
another promising area of action; a good example is
the cooperation between the United Nations Operation
in Côte d’Ivoire and the United Nations Mission in
Liberia in West Africa. This cooperation should not
be limited to equipment issues, but should also include
exchange of information, planning and the sharing of
best practices. I would be grateful if the briefers could
comment on this.
Lastly, the human aspect must never be neglected.
Missions must be adapted to the local context and be
capable of building close ties with the people they are
meant to protect. The use of French should be fully
taken into account, and I wish to recall that we need to
have more French speakers in peacekeeping operations
deployed in French-speaking areas at all levels, from
rank-and-file soldiers to Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, as well as in New York. This is a
powerful factor in operational efficiency.
I should like to commend the unwavering
commitment of Mr. Hervé Ladsous, at the head of
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, and
of his team in meeting all these challenges. With
their impetus, peacekeeping has become even more
professional and modernized, through, inter alia, the
adoption of operational standards, the creation of the
post of director of partnerships in charge of the mission
of inspection of peacekeeping operations, and the
provision of modern technology.

14-5625017/33

S/PV.7275

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The peacekeeping review that the SecretaryGeneral has decided to launch will be decisive in
defining the profile of a peacekeeping mission that is
more reactive and more dynamic in order to meet new
challenges. France will contribute to this actively and
will remain mobilized on this issue, in keeping with
the 2009 New Horizon report, which made it possible
to continue the process of reflection on policy and
doctrine in this area. The report was a joint effort on
the part of France and the United Kingdom.
I would like to once again reiterate the strong
commitment of France to peacekeeping, to which my
country contributes fully in the form of the Blue Helmets,
who are serving, for instance, in the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon, in their national capacity
or under the European flag in support of peacekeeping
operations such as those in Côte d’Ivoire, Mali and the
Central African Republic. Today 7,800 French soldiers
are involved in peacekeeping operations, including
nearly 1,000 who are serving directly in the United
Nations and 6,000 under a United Nations mandate.
Since January 2013, 13 of our countrymen have paid the
ultimate price, and I would like to pay tribute to their
memory and to that of all their Blue Helmet comrades
who have fallen on the field of glory in the name of the
ideals of the United Nations.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): May I
begin by congratulating Argentina on having assumed
the presidency of the Council for this month. I believe
that under your leadership, Madam President, the
Council will achieve positive results in its work.
I should also like to thank the United States for the
work done in its presidency of the Security Council last
month. Let me also thank Lieutenant General Maqsood
of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
three Force Commanders of peacekeeping operations
for their briefings, which have enabled the Council to
have a more comprehensive and direct understanding
of peacekeeping operations on the ground as well as of
the efforts made by the peacekeepers in fulfilling their
mandate.
China would like to pay tribute to all the
commanders present as well as all of the United Nations
peacekeepers who are implementing their mandates for
the dedication and courage displayed in the context of
difficult and complex environments.
In recent years, regional conflicts have become
increasingly complex, and United Nations peacekeeping

18/33

09/10/2014

operations are facing major changes in their situations
and mandates; they should therefore adapt and continue
to innovate and improve. China supports the initiative
of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for a comprehensive
review and assessment of peacekeeping operations, and
we expect positive progress in the work in this area on
the occasion of the seventieth anniversary of the United
Nations next year. With regard to the issue of how to
promote the development of peacekeeping operations
so as to ensure improved efficiency, an optimized
mandate and the best results, I would like to make the
following four observations.
First, we should focus on increasing the relevance
and visibility of United Nations peacekeeping
operations in its deployment of such operations. The
Council should ensure that peacekeeping mandates
are realistic and feasible and should also clearly define
the priority tasks and focus, and avoid seeking full
coverage of every minor detail and area at the cost of
effective execution.
The results of mandate implementation should
be assessed in a timely manner and in the light of the
requirements as well as changes on the ground, and the
relevant adjustments should be made to the mandates,
the force level and the scale.
The African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur has carried out useful experiments
in adjusting mandates and functions that may serve
as a reference to draw upon in our future exploration
of mandate improvements for other peacekeeping
operations.
Secondly, peacekeeping operations should be
carried out in strict observance of Security Council
resolutions, with respect for the sovereignty of the
countries in question and with attention paid to
increasing communication with those countries.
The deployment of peacekeeping operations
itself is not the goal. Only through political dialogue,
comprehensive consultation so as to settle differences
and the attainment of national reconciliation can
we effectively curb violent conflicts, stabilize the
situation and restore security. This is also an important
foundation for and a guarantee of the effective
implementation of the civilian protection mandate
by peacekeeping operations. The work of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has shown that the
support and cooperation of the country in question is

14-56250

09/10/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

vital for the robust enforcement of the protection-ofcivilians mandate in peacekeeping.
Thirdly, peacekeeping operations should improve
their efficiency. The rapid projection and deployment
capacity of peacekeeping operations has a bearing
on whether the missions are able to play their role
at the crucial moment. The Security Council, the
Secretariat, the countries in question and the troopcontributing countries, inter alia, should improve their
communication and coordination. The procedures for
the configuration and deployment of missions should
be improved, and logistical backstopping mechanisms
should be optimized. There should be better scientific
planning and management of the peacekeeping
operations, and an effective and efficient use of
resources so as to avoid any unnecessary overlap or
waste. Through inter-mission cooperation and other
means, existing resources can be better transferred and
used.
Fourthly, peacekeeping operations should enhance
their capacity-building. The parties concerned should
work on such areas as technical equipment and
personnel training and in closer cooperation with
regional organizations. Consideration may be given to
formulating standards for the organization, training and
supervision of personnel, and, in the light of changes in
the security environment in mandate areas, increased
safety and security measures for peacekeepers. The
operations should focus on the adoption of new
technology and equipment while also studying in depth
the legal issues involved and continuing to draw lessons
from their experiences, both positive and negative, with
their gradual dissemination and application carried out
on the basis of observance of the Charter of the United
Nations and respect for the sovereignty and will of the
countries in question.
The United Nations should increase its support
for regional organizations such as the African Union
in terms of peacekeeping and help Africa with its
capacity-building in that area, giving full play to the
role of regional organizations in peacekeeping.
China is firmly supportive of and actively engaged
in United Nations peacekeeping operations. To date,
China has contributed more than 25,000 peacekeepers
to various missions. At present, we have approximately
2,200 peacekeepers who are working to implement the
mandates of nine United Nations missions, including
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in Mali.

S/PV.7275

China has for the first time sent a security detail
to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali and will send an additional
700-person strong peacekeeping infantry battalion to
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan. That will
be the first time that China sends an infantry battalion
to a United Nations peacekeeping mission. China is
also actively considering despatching helicopters to
United Nations peacekeeping operations and stands
ready to contribute further peacekeeping police and
police experts to join the ranks of Blue Helmets.
We will continue to support, to the extent of
our abilities, the peacekeeping capacity-building of
African countries, including the establishment of an
African Union rapid reaction force. China is ready to
work with the international community in a concerted
effort by actively contributing to the promotion of
the development of United Nations peacekeeping
operations for the maintenance of international peace
and security.
Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to congratulate the Mission of
Argentina upon its assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council, as well as to thank it for having
organized this public meeting on peacekeeping
operations. I should also like to congratulate the
Ambassador of the United States and her entire team
for their outstanding presidency during the month of
September.
I thank Lieutenant General Maqsood Ahmed,
Military Adviser for Peacekeeping Operations,
and the Force Commanders of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) for their
briefings, and welcome them among us today.
Peacekeeping operations are of great importance
owing to their contribution to safeguarding international
peace and security. They have undergone an evolution
from traditional missions, centred on ceasefire
monitoring, to multidimensional operations, with evermore complex tasks.
Over the past several years, intra-State armed
conflicts have added such threats as terrorism and
transnational organized crime, resulting in several
significant shifts in the context of peacekeeping.

14-5625019/33

S/PV.7275

United Nations peacekeeping operations

09/10/2014

I shall make some remarks on the protection of
civilians and the peacekeeping security environment
today.

We reiterate our support for the Algiers talks and
express our hope that they will enable progress on the
path towards peace and reconciliation in Mali.

I pay tribute to the peacekeepers, who spare no
effort to protect civilians despite scarce resources.
There is a crucial need for peacekeeping operations to
focus on rebuilding peace and security, so as to enable
other actors, including humanitarian aid workers, to
provide the aid needed and basic services.

With regard to UNDOF, notwithstanding the grave
violations of the 1974 Disengagement Agreement,
we denounce the forcible eviction of United Nations
staff members and their detention by armed groups.
UNDOF’s ability to uphold its mandate is being severely
tested, and that is unacceptable. The safety and security
of UNDOF staff and of the Military Observer Group
must be guaranteed.

We recently witnessed the protection offered by the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) to
thousands of South Sudanese civilians through its mere
presence on the ground. However, to better protect
civilians it is necessary to go beyond simply being
present and to make greater investments in prevention,
mobility and active interventions. I take this opportunity
to commend the effectiveness of MONUSCO’s earlywarning and rapid response mechanisms.
Moreover, in order to better tackle sexual violence
and abuses committed against women and children,
the number of female staff in peacekeeping operations,
including at the management level, must be increased.
Peacekeeping operations should prioritize the
disarmament of armed groups that continue to fight
and to attack and harass civilians, as in the regrettable
situation in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
The security environment in which peacekeeping
troops now operate has fundamentally changed, being
characterized today by confrontations with multiple
extremist and terrorist armed groups. In Mali, for
example, the difficulty of distinguishing between those
groups further complicates peacekeepers’ mission and
raises legitimate questions about the right way forward.
Faced with such a challenging environment and
such asymmetric threats, MINUSMA must be equipped
with all means needed to protect the peacekeepers.
It is unacceptable that peacekeepers, and those of
MINUSMA in particular, are becoming the prime
targets of improvised explosive devices, mines, rocketfire, mortars and car bombs. We condemn all such
attacks against peacekeepers and MINUSMA, which
have claimed 31 lives and injured 90. We urge the
Security Council to go beyond issuing press statements
and letters of condolences, and to do everything
possible to promote the conduct of an investigation
to identify the perpetrators of those attacks and bring
them to justice.
20/33

I would like to conclude by asking two questions.
First, in the view of General Kazura, what would be the
most appropriate strategy to prevent any further attacks
against MINUSMA? Is he of the view that such a early
warning system as that in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo could be effective in the very different
setting of Mali?
Secondly, I would turn to General Singha. UNDOF
is one of the longest-standing United Nations field
missions, and its effectiveness is being severely tested
in today’s ever-more complex environment. I wonder
what the General expects from the United Nations in
terms of adapting the mission to this new footing.
Mr Quinlan (Australia): I wish to thank you,
Madam President, for convening this meeting. I also
thank General Ahmed and the Force Commanders for
their briefings. Like all other members of the Council, I
express our extremely sincere appreciation to them and
the men and women with whom they serve. Our role in
this Chamber in New York is meaningless without what
they do, and we need them to know that — especially
as they do their job in increasingly dangerous and
unpredictable situations. The 10 deaths in Mali in the
past week show once again how dangerous their work
is.
We have heard a mix of presentations today from
the Force Commanders of one of newest such United
Nations peacekeeping operations — the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), one of the oldest — the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF),
and the largest — the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO). Those missions are different in
size, scope and history, but clearly they are all grappling
with institutional and environmental challenges that
reflect similar changes in the nature of peacekeeping,

14-56250

09/10/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

from generating forces and building infrastructure
in vast, remote and hostile environments — not just
hostile on account of armed groups but, if we look at
northern Mali, we see how incredibly physically hostile
that environment is, in particular during the summer
months — to implementing a robust security posture
to protect peacekeepers and civilians, and confronting
non-State actors employing deadly and more violent
unconventional tactics.
We need to draw out lessons from each mission
and apply them with good effect to improve the
responsiveness and discipline of United Nations
peacekeeping as a whole. The Secretary-General’s
forthcoming strategic review of peace operations will
be important, as it will provide a structured way to do
that. It is a necessary and critical initiative. It should
be a fundamental review. As Ambassador Gasana said
at the beginning, we need to change our way of doing
business, since we are not working in the same market
any more. The Force Commanders know this much
better than we do.
We all know that the protection of civilians is a
defining task for United Nations peacekeeping, and
indeed is the measure by which the international
community — our own stakeholders — measure those
of us in the Council and the mission staff in the field.
It is now written into the majority of the Council’s
mandates. It needs to be written into most of them,
if not all. The deployment of the Force Intervention
Brigade in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
represented a necessary seismic shift, embracing the
need for clear, offensive action to defeat armed rebel
groups that threaten civilians. As General Dos Santos
Cruz said, missions must be proactive, not reactive.
Under his leadership and that of Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Martin Kobler, the results
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo speak for
themselves, but collectively we can improve — again,
to quote General Dos Santos Cruz — across the system,
both in mindset and operational practice.
One of the key lessons to emerge from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo experience is the
importance of new technologies, such as satellite
imagery and unmanned aerial systems (UAVs), and
improved training in order for our troops to know when
and how to protect vulnerable populations. Any enabler
that allows those in the field to achieve their mandates
in a safer, more effective and efficient manner must be
embraced and incorporated more broadly.

S/PV.7275

We all know that peacekeeping is under
unprecedented pressure, with a more simultaneous
number of conflicts with a bigger impact over a larger
number of people that at any time since the Second
World War. Member States must get more serious about
doing much more to sustain peacekeeping. The United
States and Rwandan initiative during the General
Assembly general debate to catalyse more contributions
was very much needed, and we hope that initiative will
be maintained and increase pressure on all Member
States. We need to respond to it. China’s indication
just a moment ago of an increase in contributions is
extremely welcome.
On the very specific point of enablers, I would
welcome any further views that General Dos Santos
Cruz might have on how UAVs are assisting his Mission’s
strategy to shape, clear, hold and build and what other
technologies and capabilities would be welcome in the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I would also
welcome his advice on how the framework brigades
could be made more mobile and better integrated into
the planning and support of the Intervention Brigade’s
offensive operations.
General Kazura has described the difficulties that
missions face when operating in an evolving asymmetric
threat environment and, indeed, where a peacekeeping
mission is increasingly operating in an environment in
which not only is there no peace to keep, as General
Maqsood Ahmed reminded us at the beginning, but the
mission has become a primary target of terrorist and
extremist elements. That situation is one that requires a
serious response from the Council.
I will be chairing a meeting of the Council’s
Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions Committee this
afternoon. At that meeting, we will review the most
recent report from the Committee’s Analytical Support
and Sanctions Monitoring Team on the current threat.
The threat is increasing far beyond just the Islamic State
in Iraq and Syria. Terrorists are much younger, much
more violent and far less inhibited. They do not listen
to traditional communal and religious leaders anymore
and are seizing territory and cleverly exploiting local
conflicts, making those conflicts themselves worse
while increasing their own presence, influence and
success. This is the new reality, and it will be here for
a long time. It has clear implications for peacekeeping
operations. The Secretary-General’s review will need to
look at this, but we cannot wait. As Force Commanders

14-5625021/33

S/PV.7275

United Nations peacekeeping operations

know, operational and defensive adjustments need to
be made now. The Council needs to ensure that we
are providing them with whatever assistance we can
to allow for that. The Council is very conscious of
that, and its role in countering terrorism will continue
to be a key feature of our discussions into the future.
My own country will try to make this a key feature of
our own presidency next month, building on the two
resolutions we have just adopted, one in August and one
in September (resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014)).
On a very specific comment, intelligence and the
capacity to analyse and assess new and emerging threats
should be an essential element of all peacekeeping,
particularly when it can underpin the safety of
peacekeepers and civilians. In Mali, the deployment
of the All Sources Information Fusion Unit is breaking
new ground in peacekeeping. I would welcome any
comment from General Kazura about the value of the
Unit.
Referring also to the scourge of improvised
explosive devices (IEDs), the threat of that is reaching
new heights, with very tragic results. Ten peacekeepers
were killed by IEDs in Mali in September, including
those from Chad, who were killed earlier in the month
of September. We need to do more to counter that threat.
We know that, but is there any further comment from
Force Commanders on how we might be able to utilize
the expertise that has been developed in a number of
countries, including my own, how to handle that with
our national forces, and what more can we do to ensure
that that experience is being transferred to United
Nations peacekeeping?
General Singha has illustrated the challenge faced
by peacekeepers in adapting to a rapidly shifting
operational environment. We thank him for the
explanation this morning of the circumstances he faced.
The changed security circumstances in and around the
area of separation in recent weeks have been dramatic,
culminating in the redeployment, as he explained, of
mission personnel to the Alpha side. However, as he
also said, the monitoring and liaison functions remain
vital — indispensable, in fact — to ensuring that
respect for the 1974 Agreement on Disengagement
between Israeli and Syrian forces is maintained.
That mission is needed. We would welcome any
further insights he might have about how the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force mandate can
be fulfilled in the changed circumstances, given the

22/33

09/10/2014

current disposition of forces, and what he sees as the
future needs.
To conclude, we welcome the opportunity this
morning to engage directly with our commanders — and
indeed they are our commanders. We need to remind
ourselves of the importance of that relationship as a
result of that simple and ineluctable fact. They have
the day-to-day practical task of translating what we try
to do in this Chamber in formulating good mandates
into results. We need more interaction in order for
them to keep us honest and for us to understand the
challenges they face every day and what they anticipate
the future needs will be so we can properly calibrate
those mandates to the challenges on the ground, but
also, above all, ensure that they have the adequate tools
and resources. It is our responsibility to help to deliver
those. All Member States and the Council, which needs
to take an increasingly leadership role, given the threat
to the sustainability of peacekeeping throughout the
world, must ensure that that is done.
Australia looks forward to replicating this format
during our own presidency next month, when we intend
to hold the first-ever Council briefing with heads of
police components, as they are part of our peacekeeping
missions overseas as well.
Mr. Bosah (Nigeria): I also thank the Generals for
their informative briefings. Peacekeeping is a matter of
great interest in Nigeria. Our contingents have served
in various peacekeeping missions around the globe
since our attainment of independent status, and will
continue to do so. We therefore welcome the exchange
of ideas on this very important subject.
The changing nature of conflict has required that
peacekeeping operations evolve to meet the complex
demands they face. Those complexities are often linked
to factors such as the need to deploy adequate resources
to protect civilians in harsh conditions. Peacekeeping
missions are operating with partners that may lack the
capacity or will to do their part. There are often high
expectations for the protection of civilians at all times,
and missions operate in dynamic environments where
security situations can change very quickly.
Since the adoption of resolution 1265 (1999), the
protection of civilians has remained a top priority in
the context of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
However, experience has shown that mandates for
protecting civilians must be strategically, realistically
and holistically approached by peacekeeping

14-56250

09/10/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

stakeholders, ensuring that they are clearly defined
from the beginning. Indeed, background knowledge
of the root causes of the conflict and the parties to
it is essential to a clear understanding of its nature,
and will help determine the appropriate strategy for
intervention. Proper coordination among the relevant
peacekeeping stakeholders is also fundamental to
facilitating the protection of civilians. The challenges
involved in protecting civilians are more daunting in
situations where large numbers have been displaced by
fighting among armed groups. Recently we have seen
civilians taking refuge in mission bases that were not
designed for accommodating large numbers of refugees.
We have also seen such bases coming under attack from
armed groups, a new dimension that calls for careful
assessment of the options available to peacekeeping
missions.
Concerning expectations from military contingents
on such altered security environments, we note that
with the changing nature of conflicts in recent years,
the traditional role of United Nations peacekeeping,
which used to focus strictly on monitoring ceasefires,
has given way to much more complex operations
with multiple tasks. Today peacekeeping has become
multidimensional, requiring a proportionate level
of response in order to maximize its effectiveness.
It is pertinent here to emphasize that peacekeeping
contingents should respond to the prevailing security
situation depending on an assessment of the seriousness
of the threats they face; they should be expected to
assume a robust posture in situations where the threat
level is high and maintain a standard operating mode
when they are not threatened.
In order to achieve speedy transitions for military
operations, military contingents should adapt rapidly to
their changing security challenges. The Council must
be prepared to review mandates from time to time to
help them to do so. The use of enablers is also crucial
in helping to keep the peace, help missions meet the
security challenges in their environment and improve
situational awareness and intelligence gathering. They
are also essential to enabling peacekeeping missions
to stay one step ahead of spoilers and other elements
whose activities pose serious threats to peace and
security.
In terms of fulfilling traditional mandates in a
changed political and military environment, we note
that this is another of the current challenges that
peacekeeping missions face. Traditional mandates

S/PV.7275

have emphasized ceasefire observations and neutrality.
In some situations, however, circumstances change
rapidly, so that peacekeepers who are merely observing
a ceasefire may find themselves in the line of fire.
That can have an impact on a peacekeeping mission’s
effective discharge of its duties, and can also compel
a mission to change its posture. Drastic changes in
political and military environments therefore affect
peacekeeping missions’ ability to fulfil traditional
mandates. The recent experience of the United Nations
Interim Disengagement Force underscores that point.
Before concluding, I would like to pose some
questions. The need for new planning and guidance
for the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali in the face of the
changing nature of the threats in Mali was highlighted
in Major General Kazura’s briefing. We would like to
hear his views on what kind of planning and guidance
is required. Would that necessitate using enablers or
equipment such as unmanned aerial vehicles? We note
and commend the exercise of flexibility to enable Force
Commanders to deploy troops as necessary in conflict
environments, but what more can be done to enhance
their capabilities for protecting civilians in those areas?
I would like to conclude by paying tribute to the
Force Commanders in the various United Nations
missions and their dedicated staff, who carry out
crucial work with commitment, often in challenging
circumstances, in pursuit of the Council’s mandates.
Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): We would
first like to thank you, Madam President, for convening
this important meeting. We also thank General Maqsood
Ahmed, General Kazura, General Singha and General
Dos Santos Cruz for their thorough briefings, as well
as Mr. Hervé Ladsous for all his efforts in working to
maintain peace.
Jordan is proud of its essential contributions to
United Nations peacekeeping operations, which show
our clear commitment to the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and the Organization’s
noble goals. Based on our experience in the various
peacekeeping operations we have taken part in, we
reaffirm the importance, for our Force Commanders
in peacekeeping operations, of transparency, integrity
and neutrality in our peacekeeping forces as they carry
out their work. It is important that all peacekeeping
operations whose mandate includes the protection
of civilians develop comprehensive protection
strategies, which must be included in each mission’s

14-5625023/33

S/PV.7275

United Nations peacekeeping operations

implementation and emergency plans. They should be
regularly and efficiently evaluated; it is important that
clear and adequate assessments be done of missions’
resources and human and logistical capacities and that
they take into account the requirements for mandates
to protect civilians and missions’ capacities to fully
implement their mandates.
The United Nations has established rapid-reaction
structures to help missions achieve more with limited
forces, but the dangers facing peacekeepers have
increased, as have the Organization’s costs, particularly
in view of the fact that many missions are conducting
extremely complex operations, particularly in fragile
States and those involved in serious conflicts. Regarding
the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
is dealing with a number of obstacles to its fulfilment of
its mandate, particularly its limited resources. Despite
MONUSCO’s progress in halting serious violations of
human rights and consolidating State authority in the
eastern part of the country, we are concerned about the
continuing crimes being perpetrated on civilians there
and about the continuing attacks on Mission personnel.
We call on the Congolese Government and MONUSCO
itself to improve cooperation in implementing their
mechanisms for justice and accountability in order
to achieve concrete results. We urge the Mission to
continue its efforts to make more progress with the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
every faction, particularly the Forces démocratiques
de libération du Rwanda, and especially since the
ongoing armed activities of the armed groups affects
the Congolese Government’s implementation of its
disarmament plans, which has now gone on for six
months.
Regarding the recent events in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in June and August, and
MONUSCO’s investigation and its support for the
deployment of the investigative team, made up
of officials from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo’s legal and military sectors, such attacks
affect the Mission’s capacity to ensure the necessary
protection of civilians and reveal the weak points in
the implementation of its mandate. In that regard, we
would like to ask the Force Commander the following
questions. Does the Force Commander believe that
such events show that the rules of engagement should
be clarified in order to ensure the implementation of
the Force’s broad mandate, including underscoring the
24/33

09/10/2014

protection of civilians and strengthening the Mission’s
legitimacy in the eyes of the local civilian population.
Peacekeeping operations face challenges not only
in terms of the lack of resources to meet the needs on
the ground. The United Nations capacity to address
challenges that jeopardize the safety and security of
peacekeeping personnel must also be strengthened.
That must be an absolute priority. The ongoing clashes,
the tragic consequences and the current security
situation as a result of the presence of armed groups
in northern Mali all demonstate the need to undertake
greater efforts to achieve lasting stability.
We would like to ask a question with regard to the
most recent developments in Mali. What can we do to
help the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali to impose the rule of
law in the northern part of the country, in particular
given the delicate security situation and the ongoing
attacks against Mission personnel? The credibility of
peacekeeping operations depends upon the effective
implementation of the mandate. The Security
Council must continue to ensure that the mandates of
peacekeeping operations are clear, credible, realistic
and subject to review.
We reiterate our support for the Secretary-General’s
recommendation to reconfigure the Mission’s political
role so that it can undertake a good offices role. We call
on the international community to increase its support
to the Mission so that it can execute its mandates and
strengthen its capacity to restore stability.
Finally, we would like to share our concerns about
the deteriorating situation in the Golan, the area of
operations of the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force, and its inability to implement its
mandate, since the presence of United Nations troops is
limited to certain bases. That reflects the deteriorating
situation and growing instability. We underscore the
need for the Mission to ensure the security of the
UNDOF staff and to faciliate their return to their
original positions in the Golan.
Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Madam President, for having organized
this briefing. It gives us an opportunity to interact with
Lieutenant General Maqsood Ahmed, Military Adviser
for Peacekeeping Operations, and the Force Commanders
of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), the United Nations Multidimensional

14-56250

09/10/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
and the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
(UNDOF). I thank Lieutenant General Dos Santos
Cruz, Major General Kazura and Lieutenant General
Singha for their briefings. They have vividly described
the challenges facing United Nations missions in
contexts where the threat is constantly evolving and
peacekeepers are required to be able to adapt a great
deal.
The protection of civilians, a topic raised by General
Dos Santos Cruz, is at the heart of the mandate of many
United Nations operations. The implementation of such
mandates requires the commitment of all components
of the mission. On the one hand, missions must have
civilian capacities specifically devoted to the protection
of civilians, in particular women and children. However,
on the other hand, it is equally critical that Force
Commanders have professional and well-trained staff,
with the necessary awareness, capacities and resources
to effectively protect civilians.
Before and during their deployment, peacekeepers
should have specific training that enables them to deal
with complex situations and to take decisions on the
ground. In that context, allow me to recall resolution
2143 (2014), on children and armed conflict, in which
the Security Council recommends that the United
Nations and troop- and police-contributing countries
undertake “targeted and operational trainings for the
preparation of United Nations mission personnel ...
on their contribution in preventing violations against
children” (resolution 2143 (2014), para. 20).
In terms of capacity, MONUSCO, with its Force
Intervention Brigade and unmanned aerial systems, or
monitoring drones, is a mission that is well equipped
to protect civilians. Its decisive action against the
Mouvement du 23 mars showed that. The proactive
implementation of the Mission’s mandate, which
General Dos Santos Cruz mentioned, strengthened
the protection of civilians in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of Congo. In that specific case, it
also helped to address the gaps in the use of force that
were identified in the report issued last March by the
Office of Internal Oversight Services (А/68/787).
In that context, aware that there is no universally
applicable model for all crises, I would ask General
Dos Santos Cruz and his colleagues who are present
to what extent MONUSCO’s experience in terms of a
robust mandate and its available protection of civilian
capacities could be useful for other United Nations

S/PV.7275

missions. I ask that question also conscious of the
fact that yesterday the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Mali proposed to the Security Council that the United
Nations mission deployed in that country, MINUSMA,
be strengthened with the addition of a rapid-reaction
force (see S/PV.7274). It would also be interesting to
hear General Kazura’s view on that issue regarding
MINUSMA.
The events of recent months in Mali and in the
Golan have shown that the environment in which a
peacekeeping operation is deployed can deteriorate very
quickly. In Мali, increasingly violent and sophisticated
attacks target MINUSMA and cause major losses.
Those asymmetric attacks have killed 20 Blue Helmets
since early September. As has already been said, 31
peacekeepers have been killed since the Mission’s
deployment on 1 July 2013. For its part, Luxembourg
is ready to support the measures being explored by the
Secretariat, together with MINUSMA, to enhance the
safety of troops deployed in northern Mali in particular.
In the Golan, the repeated abductions of UNDOF
members and the increased activities of the Syrian army
and several armed groups, including the Nusra Front,
jeopardize the implementation of the Force’s mandate and
expose the peacekeeping troops to considerable danger.
The United Nations must continue consultations with
troop-contributing countries and the two signatories
to the Agreement on Disengagement between Israeli
and Syrian Forces of 1974 so as to establish a better
framework for the UNDOF arrangement. The risks to
United Nations staff must be minimized while allowing
them to carry out their important work and maintain
their rapid-response capability. In that context, I would
like to underscore that it is critical that the Syrian
authorities allow UNDOF to have all the necessary
equipment to combat improvised explosive devices as
soon as possible.
The timely definition of specific military strategies
and concepts, the use of force, leadership, effective
command and control, force generation, the necessary
resources, the training of peacekeepers, mission
support and the proactive approach highlighted by
General Dos Santos Cruz are, in our view, the most
important parameters to ensure the effective execution
of missions in the changing environment.
In conclusion, I would like to express Luxembourg’s
deep appreciation to all the heads of the military
components of United Nations missions for the
outstanding work that they carry out with their

14-5625025/33

S/PV.7275

United Nations peacekeeping operations

contingents in increasingly demanding conditions in
order to implement the mandates entrusted to them by
the Council in the interest of protecting civilians.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Argentina.
At the outset, I thank and welcome the Force
Commanders. I would like to thank them for both their
briefings and for the dedication with which they carry
out their tasks in the various missions in always difficult
environments. We strongly support the holding of these
meetings with the Force Commanders because they
allow us, along with the rest of the membership, to have
first-hand and quality information on the activities
and the challenges of the missions on the ground. We
hope that this practice, which has been ongoing for five
consecutive years, should be continued in the future.
We also support the initiative of the Secretary-General,
mentioned by other colleagues, to review and evaluate
peacekeeping missions as a necessity — a strategic,
political and ethical imperative for the Organization.
Allow me to say that Argentina is delighted and
welcomes the presence in the Chamber of Major General
Kristin Lund, the first woman Force Commander of
the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus. We
welcome her presence because in such a serious activity
as peacekeeping it would be selfish for us women if
we left peace solely in the hands of men. I therefore
welcome her presence here. We are pleased with the
responsibility she has been given.
Argentina, like other members of the Security
Council, understands that maintaining international
peace and security is the ultimate goal of the Council.
The responsibilities assigned to missions clearly entail
various dimensions: the protection of human rights,
assistance in rebuilding institutions and consolidating
democracy and the rule of law. Those are tasks are
undertaking in every United Nations missions, which
are increasingly multidimensional and complex.
They also increasingly require more coordination and
coherence.
The United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF) and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) are among those that are currently
essential to guarantee the protection of civilians. With

26/33

09/10/2014

regard to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we
would like to once again emphasize the merit and effort
of MONUSCO in fulfilling its mandate, which has
made it possible to overcome the threat posed by the
Mouvement du 23 mars and to contribute to improving
the security situation in the east of the country.
The establishment of an Intervention Brigade
was a risky bet and, for the time being, we believe it
remains a challenging one. It was a risky bet in order
to impose peace. Its establishment was justified since
it was created at the specific request of the authorities
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and because
of the specific situation in the country, which has
experienced several decades of unresolved conflicts,
with a significant portion of its territory in the hands
of armed groups. Moreover,the conflict has the dubious
honour of costing the most lives since the end of the
Second World War.
The mandate of the Brigade is as unique as it is
specific. It should not be expanded or confused with the
rest of the Mission, which consists first and foremost in
protecting civilians, even when such a protection — how
could it be otherwise — implies a proactive attitude of
preventive patrolling in order to avoid having to react
immediately after civilians become victims of an attack.
However, the active protection of civilians should not
be confused with the neutralization of the armed groups
through aggressive activities. That is the understanding
of my country. Such offensive actions should and could
be carried out solely by the Intervention Brigade.
With regard to UNDOF, the continuation and the
uninterrupted militarization of the Syrian conflict have
meant that the crisis has progressively spilled over into
the area of operation of the Force, with an impact on
the capacity of the mission to fulfil its mandate and
putting at risk both its staff and the maintenance of the
ceasefire between Israel and Syria. The events that took
place a few weeks ago reflect the fact that the mission
staff is the target of direct and deliberate attacks by
terrorist groups that are opposed to any international
presence. In fact, they benefit from greater instability
and they seek to exacerbate tensions in the region.
Under those circumstances the Force has reduced
its presence and control over a significant portion of
its area of operations. While there is no doubt that both
the mission and its mandate continue to be extremely
relevant and necessary, recent events clearly require
us to think about the most effective and secure way
for the Force to fulfil its mandate in an operational
14-56250

09/10/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV.7275

environment that is completely different from the one
for which it was designed, and it will remain so for the
foreseeable future. In that regard, while we are awaiting
information to be presented by the Secretariat on the
necessary measures to maintain the capacity of UNDOF
to fulfil its mandate, we would like to emphasize the
rapid implementation of risk-mitigation measures by
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations in order to
allow the mission to fulfil its mandate in a secure way.

Caribbean. Bearing in mind that in the next few days
the Council will need to renew its mandate, I would
like to make two brief comments. First, we are worried
about the rapid onset of the deadline to decide on the
future of the Mission. We understand that the political
and security situation in Haiti has not improved so
significantly as to justify an accelerated and sudden
reduction in the troop level, as is proposed in the report
of the Secretary General (S/2014/617).

At the same time, in such a volatile context, it is
essential for the parties to exercise maximum restraint in
their activities, to fully use the communication channels
that UNDOF has made available and avoid succumbing
to provocations. We acknowledge the intense work and
the critical role that the Force Commander has been
playing throughout this period in order to ease tensions
each time that serious incidents have taken place that
had the potential to worsen the situation.

We are also concerned about the change in the
Mission’s mandate and concept. We believe that it is
important to proceed with caution and that decisions
should be taken based on conditions on the ground,
so as to ensure the successful conclusion of the only
peacekeeping operation deployed in the North American
hemisphere. We agree that MINUSTAH should remain
in Haiti no longer than necessary, but as long as it is
requested by the democratic Government of Haiti. At
the same time, we believe that it is important to learn
from the lessons of the past and to bear in mind the
experiences of hasty withdrawals that have forced us
to return.

On that point I would like to put a question to
General Singha. How does he evaluate the consultation
process and the interaction between the Force, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Security Council throughout this period when the
circumstances in which the Force operates have been
changing drastically? What would General Singha
change? What would he improve?
Turning to Mali, Argentina condemns in the
strongest terms the repeated attacks targeted against
MINUSMA, and we would like to express our solidarity
with the family members of the Blue Helmets who fell
in the line of duty: from the Niger, Senegal, Chad,
France and other countries. That is why we in particular
value the work of the personnel of this Mission, who put
their lives at risk on a daily basis defending peace in the
face of the constant threat from fundamentalist groups.
We understand that MINUSMA should not replace
the national armed forces of Mali, or become the
main element in the fight against extremist groups.
Such tasks would basically contravene the role of a
peacekeeping operation. For that reason, if the current
trend of increasing attacks against the United Nations
continues, it will be necessary to undertake an in-depth
analysis with regard to the presence of MINUSMA in
Mali.
Finally, I cannot conclude without referring to
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH), the only United Nations peacekeeping
operation in my own region, Latin America and the

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to Lieutenant General Maqsood
Ahmed to respond to the comments and questions
raised.
Lieutenant General Ahmed: I wish to thank
the Security Council and all its members for their
statements and very pertinent questions. I will tackle
some of the broader questions that have been raised
concerning the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the missions in general, and leave some of the areas
to be answered by the respective Force Commanders
on subjects that they are tackling in their particular
missions.
Let me begin by saying that this should, in my
understanding, be a great day for the Force Commanders
present in the Chamber. Most of them are new. That
is why we are holding this meeting this month — it
is usually held in June or July. Today’s discussion will
give them enormous confidence because of the
Security Council’s understanding of the complexity of
the challenges with which they are confronted and the
Council’s commitment to supporting the missions on the
ground. I think that the Force Commanders will leave
the Council reassured, and that they will be prepared to
complete their task with more zeal and commitment, as

14-5625027/33

S/PV.7275

United Nations peacekeeping operations

expected by the Security Council. It is a great day for
me and for my Force Commanders.
Let me touch broadly on two of the broader
issues under discussion. The two issues deal, from
a military perspective, with the fundamental tasks
of the peacekeepers in the various missions. In my
understanding that there are two tasks at hand when
we talk about military peacekeepers. One involves the
physical protection of the peacekeepers themselves
and of United Nations personnel and assets. The
second task, which is mandated by the Council, is the
protection of civilians. That also falls into the domain
of physical protection, because protection has a broader
connotation.
The problems relating to those two fundamental
tasks are linked to the understanding of the troopcontributing countries (TCCs). I want to re-emphasize
that point, because my interactions over the past
year with a number of military commanders and the
leadership of the various TCCs, police-contributing
countries and troop/police-contributing countries has
revealed a real gap in understanding. Some TCCs and
their capitals, including political decision-makers,
think that peacekeeping involves the same, decadesold conventional missions, where peacekeepers are
respected by all actors on the ground and no harm is
done to them. They are there just to absorb the tension
and to report to the Security Council in order for
diplomatic pressure to be applied.
What has been said today has shown that we
understand that such an environment no longer exists,
even in traditional peacekeeping missions. But that
understanding has not been communicated to the home
capitals. If I may say, and most military commanders in
the respective capitals share this view with me, the fact
is that we find it very difficult to convince our Cabinets
and our political leadership that peacekeepers are
being deployed under very challenging environments.
Peacekeepers find it very hard to obtain the kind of
support from the political leadership that we all seek.
There is therefore one gap.
The second gap is between expectations and
responsibilities. When peacekeepers are deployed, the
host nation, the public and the population have very
high expectations. We can cite a number of missions as
cases in point. There are also the responsibilities that lie
mainly with the Security Council, the Secretariat, the
Force Commanders and the TCCs. The Council and the
Secretariat, and to some extent the Force Commanders,
28/33

09/10/2014

understand the responsibilities, but they have to get the
job done by the TCCs. Therein lies the problem, the
source of the pressure coming from the capitals pulling
on the peacekeepers.
I will cite another example. Take any country
contingent. In its own country environment, the same
contingent will perform in one way. If that same
contingent is put in a regional environment, it will
perform differently. When the same contingent is
re-hatted into Blue Helmets, it will perform differently
again. That means that there is a gap in understanding.
We need to bridge that gap. I am grateful to the United
States and the Secretary-General that a great initiative
has been taken to move in that direction. The high-level
peacekeeping summit held recently on 26 September
(see S/PV.7272) was a first step in that direction,
where the critical leadership has started to develop an
understanding as to the kind of environment facing
peacekeepers. That will greatly help us to bring that
mindset back to its original position.
The second issue will probably be taken up when we
have regional conferences and have more time to focus
on that. As the Secretary-General has highlighted, the
final segment will probably be about interaction with
the chiefs of the defence forces staffs, where we go into
the essentials of the details and the capability gaps.
That concern will probably be cemented at that time.
If that gap in the understanding is bridged, most of
the job will be done, because the peacekeepers receive
instructions from their capitals as to how to behave,
what to do and as to whether they should be more
robust or not. If we get their support, then the critical
leadership will line up enough resources to train them
and enough material to motivate them and establish the
direction of how they should perform on the ground. I
think that we need to focus more on that.
Let me move on to the next issue, which is training.
That is an absolute must. With the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and with its Office of Military
Affairs in the lead, we are working on 11 manuals that
lay down United Nations standards. I am certain that,
by the end of this year or early next year, we will have
completed all 11 manuals. They will be available to the
TCCs to prepare their contingents in accordance with the
expectations set out in United Nations standards. I want
to thank all TCCs for their support in the preparation
of the manuals, both their financial and their physical
contributions. They have done a wonderful job. We are
now at the final stage of finalizing the manuals.
14-56250

09/10/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The third area that I want to touch upon is the
capability gap. As most of our missions are in African
countries, with some African country contingents also
there, the Council is aware that we also have major
contributions from various Asian countries as well
as from African countries. Some of those TCCs lack
capabilities. They can have battalions on the ground,
but the contingents are not equal in their equipment and
the armoured personnel carriers needed to enable what
we want on the ground. There we have been requesting,
and I will again request, that where other countries
have not been contributing actively, they should help
the TCCs to build those capability gaps. With regard
to Mali, the representative of Rwanda asked a similar
question: Why we are not able to deploy peacekeepers
on the ground and why are they not up to the required
mark? There is that same capability gap. The troops are
there on the ground, but they do not have the necessary
equipment, and we are looking for that equipment to be
provided as soon as possible. Hopefully, by the end of
this year, we will have that capability gap bridged to a
great extent. That effort will continue.
I would also like to talk about technology. That is
a very vital initiative, not only in the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo but also in other contingents.
That is helping us considerably. It helps in two ways.
I always say that technology gives us lead time,
whether it provides a kind of surveillance capability,
signal intelligence, or whatever. It gives us lead time to
pre-empt or stop some atrocities from happening, or if
we are unable to do that, to react quickly, compared with
the old means whereby the information used to travel
from one end to the other end, taking days. Now we are
receiving real-time intelligence. That is helping a lot and
should be repeated. That is my recommendation — also
in the other missions, because it is a great enabler under
the environment and we should benefit from it.
Having said that, the All Sources Information
Fusion Unit and the other technologies we are putting
in place are still not being utilized at full capacity, let
me admit that. Introducing a technology is one thing,
but absorbing it within the system is another. We have
to train our Headquarters and staff officers to make
full use of the technologies and derive greater benefit
from them. That is where NATO and the European
countries are helping in a big way. I want to take this
opportunity to thank them. They are helping us to build
that capacity. I am very sure that within a very short
period we will be utilizing those capacities to their full

S/PV.7275

potential. There are also some other challenges, but I
will leave it to the Force Commanders to respond.
Let me touch upon my final point. The point was
raised about the principles of peacekeeping. I think that,
yes, we can look at those. But, to my understanding,
the principles of peacekeeping hold good even in a
challenging environment.
We talk about the use of force and about the
robustness of peacekeeping operations. The use of
force, under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations, is authorized by the Security Council under
only two conditions. The first is the protection of United
Nations assets and self-protection, and the second is the
protection of civilians. That is where the use of force is
appropriate. When we say “protection of the mandate”,
the protection of civilians falls under the mandate: we
are thereby protecting the mandate. For self-protection
and the protection of the mandate, the use of force is
allowed. That principle was valid a decade ago; it is still
valid now. We can still look at that if it needs reviewing.
Finally, I think the strategic review initiative of the
Secretary-General provides a great opportunity to look
into systems and procedures in the United Nations. The
systems relate to rapid deployment and quick response,
flexibility in operations, and the rules of engagement.
All of those issues will enter the discussion, and
hopefully we will find some answers.
With your permission, Madam President, the Force
Commanders will answer the respective questions.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Lieutenant
General Ahmed for the clarifications he has provided.
I now give the floor to Lieutenant General Dos
Santos Cruz to respond to comments and questions
raised.
Lieutenant General Dos Santos Cruz: It is very
difficult to offer suggestions to the highest level of
decision-makers in the world. But even I have the
opportunity to disagree or to freely provide some
opinions on peacekeeping operations.
I think that the mandates, the rules of engagement
and international legislation have never forbidden the
use of force for self-defence or the defence of a third
party. It is a universal law.
We need to refine certain mandates. But in my
opinion, more than that is necessary. We need, in
parallel, one interpretation from a practical point of

14-5625029/33

S/PV.7275

United Nations peacekeeping operations

view. Normally the mandates and principles have
different interpretations — one is more classical,
one is more academic and one is more philosophical.
Maybe it is time for a more practical interpretation,
when guidance does not provide freedom to the troops
executing, in a practical way, the mandate to protect
civilians, and when there is such a broad interpretation
of the principle on the ground. On the ground we deal in
real life, and we need to be focused on that.
With regard to guidance, we need to state very
clearly what effect we want on the ground. I think that
according to the environment in which we live right
now, guidance must be very clear. What attitude, what
mindset, does the Council expect on the ground? That
is very important.
We need more technology and more means.
However, those means must be supported by the will
and the commitment to take action, to report what we
did yesterday, and not only what happened yesterday,
because if technology is not used and the will is lacking,
we will report what happened yesterday.
With regard to troops, obviously a strong posture
demands more risk for them. But the risks are not
difficult to manage. There are combat procedures. The
military combat procedures need improvement. We
need to use more of the tactics we have for night combat
and counter-ambush techniques and tactics. We have
means to compensate for risks that may be assumed on
the ground.
It is unfortunate that we live in an environment
where, for hundreds of years, neither French nor English
was understood, but only force. We must therefore be
strong. We need a strong image on the ground. It is
safer for us.
On the Intervention Brigade, I think it is a useful
experience, exactly because of the behaviour based on
the assumption that if one is stronger, one is better. It
is very difficult and very sad, but that is the reality in
which we live.
I think that all troops should have the same
obligations. From a practical perspective, it is
not possible to say that “I am doing something to
neutralize, or to protect civilians, or sometimes to
protect myself”. We need all troops to have the same
conduct. In one intervention brigade of 20,000 troops,
perhaps 17,000 will follow one interpretation while
3,000 follow another. If 20,000 take one step forward,
it is a major event; it is not only 3,000 acting. I think
30/33

09/10/2014

all troops should have the same commitment and same
obligations. Obviously, that is a much more political
posture. Why, then, is it not possible? Obviously, it is
political; we will build one rapid-reaction force or a
type of intervention force. That is my opinion.
Then there is the mandate, which is not an obstacle
to the actions we need to take. We have the means.
Sometimes there may be improvements, but we have
the means. Then, really, things depend on our attitudes
on the ground.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Lieutenant
General Dos Santos Cruz for the clarifications he has
provided.
I now give the floor to Major General Kazura to
respond to comments and questions raised.
Major General Kazura: I thank the members of
the Security Council very much for their comments, and
Lieutenant General Maqsood Ahmed and Lieutenant
General Dos Santos Cruz for theirs. With respect to the
various questions asked, I will try to base my answers
on the comments of Lieutenant General Ahmed.
In fact, the strategy needs to respond to many
questions on that point. Again, I am going to go back to
the subject of where we are today in Mali and talk more
about the problems we have there, so that we can see
what can be done about them.
I was very happy to understand that we all speak
the same language in terms of the situation on the
ground. We are no longer involved in peacekeeping. We
now have another programme: responding to terrorism.
Now that we know that we have a different situation
compared to what we had yesterday, I think that we
need to adapt and find new solutions to the problems
before us. I am saying that because, as has already been
said, we already have 30 troops dead on the ground and
many more wounded.
As I was saying, I do not want to believe that such
assaults are going to happen again, but it can happen
even as we speak. Once again, I think it is time to look
at what exactly we can do now and what we can do
tomorrow and what we can do in the future. It is good
to prepare for what we will do in the future, but we need
to understand that we need to something right away to
prepare for the action that we may encounter tomorrow.
That is why I am grateful for the cooperation
between the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and Operation
14-56250

09/10/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Barkhane and others, which have enabled us to be
where we are, even if we still have a problem. I think
we need to intensify operations now, because we need
to pin down the terrorists today so that we can have
time to organize our own troops for subsequent action.
If we do not do something today, we will be in trouble.
As the Council members know — I think they
know it better than I do — we have such problems not
only in Mali but also in many other countries in the
neighbourhood. We may think — and this is on the
political side, which the Council is more conversant
with than I am — that the talks in Algiers need to come
up with something that is concrete, so that there can
be some stability on the ground. Various movements
and actors on the ground have involved themselves
with the problem, saying that, if the talks in Algiers do
not produce a good solution, then we need to prepare
ourselves for tomorrow. By “preparing” themselves
they are actually creating more clashes. That kind of
ungoverned situation gives the terrorists the leeway to
continue to organize and kill our people.
As I said before, I think we need to continue to
push the movements to be accountable in the areas they
control. They claim that they cannot understand how
our troops are being killed. Indeed, the movements say
that they control an area, but when our people are killed
they say that they do not know what happened. I do not
think that is acceptable.
I have been asked by many Council members about
the intervention brigade. I believe that the Brigade is
being thought about in the context of a strategic review.
As General Dos Santos Cruz said, if we are strong on
the ground, we send a good message about ourselves
and about the United Nations in general. If something
happens today and we do not react, then we are in fact
encouraging them to do something similar or even more
lethal tomorrow. That is something that people should
think about with reference to our case in Mali. I was
trying to answer that question, even as the leadership of
the United Nations is trying to think about it.
General Ahmed talked about training. Obviously,
we need to continue to think about that. The troops we
have on the ground were sent to deal with peacekeeping
missions. It is consistent with what General Dos Santos
Cruz was talking about — attitude and mindset. Having
the attitude and mindset of a peacekeeping operation
and then turning it into anti-terrorist activities is
something that we should be thinking seriously about.
The only way to go about that and to find a solution is

S/PV.7275

to try to train our people to know exactly where they
are, and, of course, after training to supply them with
the equipment that is suitable for responding to the
problems we have today.
Those were the various questions that I was asked
to respond to. Once again, I would insist on the fact
that in the environment that we have in Mali today,
the people we have who have been wounded and killed
were in fact killed because they were the ones who were
on the ground and they are the ones who are moving.
They were not killed while they were at home sleeping;
they were killed while they were out trying to do their
jobs. I would also insist on the fact that we need to see
how we can protect them and how we can train them
to be able to deal with the real situation on the ground.
In that regard, I salute what Operation Barkhane
has done in Aguelhok today, because they have sent a
liaison detachment that is now trying to cooperate with
the Chadians and help train them. If that can be done
in other camps by other countries, that would also help.
I am trying to emphasize the fact that we need to train
our people to be able to do their jobs while we wait
for various other measures to be taken. At the same
time, we are trying to get the proper equipment into
their hands. As General Ahmed said, we are happy to
be getting more equipment to deal with the situation. I
just want to remind the Council that delays in getting
us that equipment are not going to help, because the
terrorists are not going to wait until we get equipment
before they act. We need to be able to react now, even
though we are waiting for equipment.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Major
General Kazura for the additional information he has
provided.
I now give the floor to Lieutenant General Dos
Santos Cruz.
Lieutenant General Dos Santos Cruz: I apologize
for failing to have touched upon the points raised by the
representative of Rwanda. I have profound personal and
professional respect and consideration for him, and am
sorry I overlooked his question.
With regard to the question of Kota Koli, there
are three camps for ex-combatants in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, one of which is Kota Koli.
Human Rights Watch released a report on the camp,
because more than 100 people died there during the
time it was operating. The camp is not a military camp
under the control of the United Nations Organization

14-5625031/33

S/PV.7275

United Nations peacekeeping operations

09/10/2014

Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO). Rather, it is administered
by the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo as part of its disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programme. The report was very
sad, because it may lead to a decrease in the number
of surrenders of ex-combatants, which we want, on the
contrary, to encourage.

In general, we need to continuously analyse the
situation on the ground, stay on top of the situation and
keep evolving along with the dynamically changing
environment. A lot of cross-cutting issues have come
up, and I will divide them basically into the achievement
of the mandate, in a modified manner; the security of
the peacekeepers; and capacity-building by harnessing
technology.

The Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral visited MONUSCO before the problem arose.
Now MONUSCO is there with a task force to support
and help the Government, because, although the camp
is not being administered by MONUSCO, we are
committed to giving the maximum support in order not
to have this kind of problem in future, because it is a
problem that could endanger the entire process when
we prompt the ex-combatants to surrender. That is the
point we are at.

The question was asked, what can the Security
Council do? The Security Council has done a lot, and
we are grateful. We would request the Security Council
and the Member States that are supporting either side
in the Syrian strife to use their leverage to tell the
parties not to target the United Nations, and to reduce
the levels of violence in the area of separation, in fact,
make the area of separation free from any presence of
armed personnel.

The Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral is personally committed, along with the United
Nations country team and the Mission, to supporting
the Congolese Government.
The President: I thank Lieutenant General Dos
Santos Cruz for his clarifications.
I now give the floor to Lieutenant Singha to address
the comments made and questions raised.
Lieutenant General Singha: I wish to express
my gratitude to you, Madam President, and to the
members of the Security Council for having confidence
in peacekeeping in general and in the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) in particular.
A lot of issues were raised; we will take the advice given
and work on it so as to ensure the safety and security of
the peacekeepers.
I will start with the question posed by the
representative of Argentina regarding the cooperation
between the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, or
the Secretariat, and the mission. It has been exemplary.
It has been real-time; we have been speaking to each
other when the actions have been taking place on the
ground, so one could not ask for more. As far as the
approach is concerned, it needs to be multipronged so
as to see the way ahead. I would like to tell the Council
right now that one high-level team from the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations has already visited the
mission and will be presenting other options, most
likely on 20 October.

32/33

For the achievement of the mandate, as I mentioned,
we continue to achieve it in a very modified manner.
Our main thrust is now on the ceasefire line, the Alpha
line. We would like to make new positions along the
Alpha line, so that our density along the Alpha line from
the A side is much greater than what we had earlier.
So as long as the ceasefire line is sealed, everything is
sealed, all violations from either side are observed and
reported, I think that we are achieving our mandate in
a modified manner.
The use of technology and new tools will also
enhance the fulfilment of the mandate. The rightsizing
of the force is under way and will be presented to
the Council by the team that had come to us. We are
studying all possible options, and they will be shared
with the Council.
Conerning the synergy between the inter-mission
cooperation, I think that we have excellent synergy
between UNDOF, the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon and the United Nations Truce Supervision
Organization. As far as interaction with non-State
actors, our force encounters them while doing our tasks,
and our main aim is to just tell them about our mandate
and also stress our impartiality and our transparency
concerning the entire internal strife in Syria.
Capacity-building will be enhanced. Among other
things, we will now have more stress on liaison, for
which the capacity, as I had mentioned, has already
doubled, and we will be interacting with the parties,
as suggested by some members, more proactively. We

14-56250

09/10/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

will continue to enhance our information-collection
capability, also using technology.
As far as the security of peacekeepers is concerned,
transferring our major effort onto the Alpha side gives
inherent security to the peacekeepers. But we will
continue to upgrade our mitigation measures in the
weeks to come and also have a smaller footprint, but as
much as operationally required in the area of separation.
We need to continue to move in the armoured vehicles
at least up to 2 to 3 kilometres from the Alpha line,
even if we are operating on the Alpha side. The use of
enablers and technology we have already discussed.
We will continue to build rapid-reaction capabilities
as we go on. In terms of capacity-building, while
harnessing technology, we are looking at battlefield

S/PV.7275

surveillance radars and thermal imaging equipment;
ground sensors; unarmed aerial vehicles, if the parties
allow us to employ them; satellite imagery; and the
introduction of technology, keeping in mind the
sensitivities of both the parties, as I mentioned, and
any other technology that is already being used in
peacekeeping.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Lieutenant
General Singha for his clarifications.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.

14-5625033/33
