A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/194
9 March 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 100 (b)

RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/49/610/Add.2)]

49/194. Strengthening of the rule of law

The General Assembly,
Recalling that, by adopting the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1/ Member States have
pledged themselves to achieve, in cooperation with the United Nations, the promotion of universal respect for
and observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Firmly convinced that, as stressed in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the rule of law is an
essential factor in the protection of human rights,
Also convinced that through their own national legal and judicial systems States must provide
appropriate civil, criminal and administrative remedies for violations of human rights,
Recognizing the importance of the role that can be played by the Centre for Human Rights of the
Secretariat in supporting national efforts to strengthen the institutions of the rule of law,
Recalling the recommendation of the World Conference on Human Rights that a comprehensive
programme be established within the United Nations and under the coordination of the Centre for Human Rights
with a view to helping States in the task of building and strengthening adequate national structures which have a
direct impact on the overall observance of human rights and the maintenance of the rule of law, 2/

1/

Resolution 217 A (III).

2/

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III, sect. II, para. 69.

95-77167

/...

A/RES/49/194
Page 2

Recalling also its resolution 48/132 of 20 December 1993, and taking note of Commission on Human
Rights resolution 1994/50 of 4 March 1994, 3/
1.

Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General 4/ submitted in conformity with resolution

48/132;
2.
Takes note with interest of the proposals submitted in the report of the Secretary-General for
strengthening the programme of advisory services and technical assistance of the Centre for Human Rights of the
Secretariat in order to comply fully with the recommendations of the World Conference on Human Rights
concerning assistance to States in strengthening their institutions in the rule of law;
3.
Praises the efforts made by the Centre for Human Rights to accomplish its ever-increasing tasks
with the limited financial and personnel resources at its disposal;
4.
Expresses its deep concern at the scarcity of means at the disposal of the Centre for Human
Rights for the fulfilment of its tasks;
5.
Notes that the programme of advisory services and technical assistance does not have assistance
funds sufficient to provide any substantial financial assistance to national projects that have a direct impact on
the realization of human rights and the maintenance of the rule of law in countries that are committed to those
ends, but which face economic hardship;
6.
Requests the Secretary-General to explore the possibilities of obtaining from all relevant
institutions of the United Nations system, including financial institutions, acting within their mandates, technical
and financial assistance to strengthen the realization of human rights and the maintenance of the rule of law;
7.
Also requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General Assembly at its fiftieth
session on the results of the contacts he may establish in accordance with paragraph 6 above, as well as on any
other developments pertaining to the implementation of the recommendation of the World Conference on Human
Rights contained in paragraph 69 of section II of the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action.

94th plenary meeting
23 December 1994

3/ See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1994, Supplement No. 4 and corrigendum
(E/1994/24 and Corr.1), chap. II, sect. A.
4/

A/49/512.

A/RES/49/194
Page 3
