S/2020/112

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
10 February 2020
English
Original: French

Letter dated 7 February 2020 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA), which was established by the Security Council in its resolution 1990
(2011) and whose mandate was extended by resolution 2497 (2019) until 15 May
2020.
In line with the provisions of Security Council resolution 2497 (2019), I would
like to report on the progress made in implementing the Mission’s mandate, including
the increase in police and the appointment of a civilian Deputy Head of Mission, and
in achieving the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism benchmarks
set out in resolution 2497 (2019) (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

20-01991 (E)

120220

*2001991*

130220

S/2020/112

Annex
[Original: English]

Progress report on Security Council resolution 2497 (2019)
Introduction
1.
The present note is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2497
(2019), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) until 15 May 2020 and requested me to inform it
of progress in implementing the UNISFA mandate, in a note, no later than 31 January
2020 and report on progress with the increase in police, the appointment of a civilian
Deputy Head of Mission, planning for the reduction of troops, usage of Athony airport
and the issuance of visas to support the implementation of th e mandate.
Conflict dynamics and security situation in Abyei
2.
Since the issuance of my previous report (S/2019/817), the overall security
situation in Abyei has remained fragile, with two major inciden ts taking place on
19 and 21 January 2020. Prior to that, only occasional armed attacks, mostly linked
to criminality, as well as the periodic alleged presence of armed elements, were
reported.
3.
There were 19 incidents recorded during the period under re view. These include
cattle rustling, rape, kidnapping and incidents of killing, such as that of 24 November
2019 in Leu village (Sector South), which resulted in villagers fleeing the area. On
8 December 2019, a group of armed men, who were suspected to be Misseriya,
attacked the same village (Leu) and burned down four houses, without any casualties.
In addition to the aforementioned incidents, the movement of armed men reported by
the local population remained a source of concern, as they enter Abyei, incr easingly
from the west, east and south-eastern flanks where UNISFA is not deployed, commit
crimes, such as cattle rustling, murder and kidnapping, and subsequently exit Abyei.
4.
On 19 January 2020, an attack that resulted in the death of three Misseriya t ook
place in the Kolom area. Subsequently, UNISFA intensified patrols in the general
areas of Dokura/Rumajak, Nainai, Bongak, Kolom, Makir, Noong and Alal, as well
as on the route between Dokura/Rumajak and Amiet market. The Mission also
reached out to local communities on 20 January to de-escalate tensions. It also
maintained a presence in the area of Kolom throughout the night. On 21 January, an
armed attack targeting the local Ngok Dinka community in Kolom was reportedly
perpetrated by Misseriya armed elements just after the UNISFA patrol moved from
the area. The latest casualty report has confirmed the number of deaths at 35 Ngok
Dinka. Five Misseriya, suspected to be linked to the attack, were captured by UNISFA
and handed over to the representatives of the Government of the Sudan. The Mission
has intensified operational activities in the Abyei Area and an investigative team has
been convened to investigate the incident.
5.
UNISFA continues to contain the security situation with its rapid response
mechanisms and presence in most sensitive areas. In order to enhance its security
coverage and ensure the protection of civilians, UNISFA has reviewed its deployment
concept in the dry season and is in the process of establishing three new temporary
operating bases at Shegeg, Leu and Rumamier to address the threat from the east and
south-eastern flanks.
6.
UNISFA has also engaged with the United Nations Mission in South Sudan to
establish a collaborative mechanism to address cross-border activities by armed
groups. The plan to establish checkpoints to search for weapons and ammunition and
2/4

20-01991

S/2020/112

control the reported movements of armed elements within the Abyei Area has been
discussed with the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan and will soon be
implemented. The full operationalization of the Joint Military Observer Committee
and the joint military observer team mechanisms has also received the backing of the
two Governments. Hence, joint ground monitoring missions of both South Sudanese
and Sudanese national monitors in Abyei Area are expected to commence in due
course.
Force reconfiguration
7.
In line with Security Council resolution 2497 (2019), the reduction of an
additional 295 troops has been postponed until 15 May 2020. Retaining the troops
has allowed UNISFA to maintain a sufficient footprint in the Abyei Area to initiate
the establishment of three additional temporary operating bases. While the mission is
planning for the repatriation of the 295 troops by May 2020, it remains concerned
that its forces could be overstretched if no progress is made on the deployment of the
proposed three formed police units to address the increase in criminal activities. In
this regard, China and Ethiopia confirmed their readiness to conduct reconnaissance
visits. The entry visas for the Sudan and travel permits in Abyei for the reconnaissance
teams have been approved and the mission is coordinating their visits. It is expected
that one formed police unit will be deployed by end of March and the second as soon
as possible.
8.
The Ethiopian medium utility helicopter unit was repatriated during the
reporting period after being suspended temporarily for safety reasons. The process
for the repatriation of the contingent-owned equipment is ongoing.
9.
Following the military capability study of August 2019, the upgrading of
UNISFA key enablers, such as the engineering and logistic units, is under way, with
the objective of improving the Force’s responsiveness and mobility for a more
dynamic posture.
Engagement with the authorities of the Sudan and South Sudan
10. The United Nations Secretariat and the UNISFA leadership have continuously
engaged with the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan in order to facilitate
the implementation of the pending aspects of their previous agreements and the
UNISFA mandate. In this regard, the Acting Head of Mission v isited Khartoum and
Juba on several occasions in December 2019 and January 2020. He discussed with
officials of the two Governments various issues pertaining to the implementation of
the UNISFA mandate and ways to move the political process forward. During the
visits, he underscored the need to facilitate the deployment of the authorized
additional United Nations police, as well as to appoint a civilian Deputy Head of
Mission and to operationalize the Athony airstrip to reduce UNISFA transport costs
and logistical challenges.
11. The Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations addressed a letter to the
Permanent Representative of the Sudan on 13 December 2019, raising concerns over
the delays in the issuance of visas to UNISFA personnel, which constitutes o ne of the
major impediments affecting the mission’s capacity to deliver on its mandate. In the
letter, he also raised the issues of the appointment of a civilian Deputy Head of
Mission and the operationalization and use of the Athony airport.
12. As a result of these engagements, government officials from both sides agreed
to meet at the level of Ministers of Defence and the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee
Co-Chairs to discuss the peace process, as well as security concerns in Abyei and the
Safe Demilitarized Border Zone. In this connection, a Joint Political and Security
Mechanism meeting was held in Juba on 2 and 3 February. Furthermore, the Sudan
20-01991

3/4

S/2020/112

issued visas for 23 individual police officers who are expected to be deployed to the
mission by 10 February 2020, as well as for the visit of the reconnaissance teams in
preparation for the deployment of the Chinese and Ethiopian formed police units.
Progress on the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism benchmarks
13. Following continuous engagement with the Governments of the Sudan and
South Sudan at different levels, the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism has made some progress on the benchmarks set out in Security Council
resolution 2497 (2019). Since December 2019, the Mechanism has deployed troops
in Abu Qussa, where the construction of the team site 22 is in progress. The Sudan
People’s Liberation Army in Opposition (SPLA-IO) elements have withdrawn 20 km
south of the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone, leaving behind a few local police. The
team site is expected to be operational in February 2020.
14. There were no restrictions on movement within the Safe Demilitarized Border
Zone during the reporting period. Of the 59 planned ground monitoring missions, 47
were conducted and 12 were cancelled (79.6 per cent achievement), owing mostly to
bad road conditions. Regarding the aerial monitoring missions, 19 were conducted
out of the 26 planned (73 per cent achievement). Seven aerial monitoring missions
were cancelled owing to flight recovery and other administrative challenges.
15. Following the twelfth meeting of the Joint Demarcation Committee, held in
Addis Ababa from 20 to 23 November 2019, the Joint Border Commission and the
Joint Demarcation Committee of the Sudan and South Sudan held their third meeting
in Addis Ababa from 24 to 29 November 2019. At the end of the meeting, the two
parties adopted a sensitization programme related to the border demarcation and
tasked the Joint Demarcation Committee to prepare a comprehensive and detailed
description of the agreed, disputed and claimed areas. The Joint Demarcation
Committee is scheduled to meet twice in February in Juba and in Khartoum,
respectively, followed by a joint meeting of the Joint Border Commission and the
Joint Demarcation Committee in March in Addis Ababa.
16. The strength of national monitors from the Sudan and South Sudan in the Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism is currently at 65 out of 68 officers,
including 30 Sudanese Armed Forces officers and 35 South Sudan People’s Defence
Forces officers.
17. I wish to extend my sincere gratitude to the Acting Head of Mission and Force
Commander, Major General Mehari Zewde Gebremariam; the Chief of the Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism, Brigadier General Gebremichael
Beyene Tedla; and all UNISFA staff for their dedication in the face of persisting
challenges. I am grateful to the Government of Ethiopia for its tireless engagement in
support of peace and stability in the Abyei Area and the Safe Demilitarized Border
Zone.

4/4

20-01991
