A/RES/55/283

United Nations

Distr.: General
24 September 2001

General Assembly
Fifty-fifth session
Agenda item 181

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/55/L.92 and Add.1)]

55/283. Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 51/230 of 22 May 1997, by which it invited the
Secretary-General to take steps to conclude with the Director-General of the
Technical Secretariat of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
an agreement between the United Nations and the organization to regulate the
relationship between the two organizations, and to present the negotiated draft
relationship agreement to the General Assembly for its approval,
Noting the decision of the Conference of the States Parties to the Chemical
Weapons Convention of 17 May 2001 to approve the Agreement concerning the
Relationship between the United Nations and the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons, 1
Having considered the Agreement concerning the Relationship between the
United Nations and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons,
1.
Approves the Agreement concerning the Relationship between the United
Nations and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, the text of
which is annexed to the present resolution;
2.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-sixth and
subsequent sessions the item entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons”.
111th plenary meeting
7 September 2001

1

00 57613

See A/55/988.

A/RES/55/283

Annex
Agreement concerning the Relationship between the United Nations and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
The United Nations and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons,
Bearing in mind the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations
(hereinafter the “Charter”) and of the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their
Destruction (hereinafter the “Convention”),
Bearing in mind that, in accordance with the Charter, the United Nations is the
principal organization dealing with matters relating to the maintenance of
international peace and security, and acts as a centre for harmonizing the actions of
nations in the attainment of the goals set out in the Charter,
Considering that the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(hereinafter “OPCW”) shares the purposes and principles of the Charter, and that its
activities performed pursuant to the provisions of the Convention contribute to the
realization of the purposes and principles of the Charter,
Desiring to make provision for a mutually beneficial relationship, to avoid
unnecessary duplication of their activities and services and to facilitate the discharge
of the respective responsibilities of both organizations,
Noting General Assembly resolution 51/230 of 22 May 1997 and the relevant
decision of the Conference of the States Parties at its fourth session (C-IV/DEC.4,
dated 2 July 1999) calling for the conclusion of a relationship agreement between
the United Nations and OPCW,
Have agreed as follows:
Article I
General
1.
The United Nations recognizes OPCW as the organization, in relationship to
the United Nations as specified in this Agreement, responsible for activities to
achieve the comprehensive prohibition of chemical weapons in accordance with the
Convention.
2.
The United Nations recognizes that OPCW, by virtue of the Convention, shall
function as an independent, autonomous international organization in the working
relationship with the United Nations established by this Agreement.
3.
OPCW recognizes the responsibilities of the United Nations, in accordance
with its Charter, in particular in the fields of international peace and security and
economic, social, cultural and humanitarian development, protection and
preservation of the environment and peaceful settlement of disputes.
4.
OPCW undertakes to conduct its activities in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter to promote peace, disarmament and international
cooperation and with due regard to the policies of the United Nations furthering
safeguarded worldwide disarmament.

2

A/RES/55/283

Article II
Cooperation
1.
The United Nations and OPCW, recognizing the need to work jointly to
achieve mutual objectives, and with a view to facilitating the effective exercise of
their responsibilities, agree to cooperate closely within their respective mandates
and to consult on matters of mutual interest and concern. To that end, the United
Nations and OPCW shall cooperate with each other in accordance with the
provisions of their respective constituent instruments.
2.
Cooperation between the United Nations and OPCW, in particular, shall
require that:
(a) Cases of particular gravity and urgency which, in accordance with
paragraph 36 of article VIII of the Convention, shall, including relevant information
and conclusions, be brought directly to the attention of the General Assembly and
the Security Council by the Executive Council, through the Secretary-General, in
accordance with the existing United Nations procedures;
(b) Cases of particular gravity which, in accordance with paragraph 4 of
article XII of the Convention, shall, including relevant information and conclusions,
be brought to the attention of the General Assembly and the Security Council by the
Conference of the States Parties, through the Secretary-General, in accordance with
the existing United Nations procedures;
(c) OPCW shall, in accordance with paragraph 27 of Part XI of the
Verification Annex, closely cooperate with the Secretary-General in cases of the
alleged use of chemical weapons involving a State not party to the Convention or in
a territory not controlled by a State Party to the Convention and, if so requested,
shall in such cases place its resources at the disposal of the Secretary-General;
(d) OPCW and the United Nations shall, in accordance with their respective
mandates, explore possibilities for cooperation in the provision of assistance to
States concerned in cases of the use or serious threat of use of chemical weapons, as
provided for in paragraph 10 of article X of the Convention;
(e) OPCW and the United Nations shall, insofar as covered by their respective
mandates, in the context of economic and technological development in their
member States, cooperate to foster international cooperation for peaceful purposes
in the field of chemical activities and facilitating the exchange of chemicals,
equipment and scientific and technical information relating to the development and
application of chemistry for purposes not prohibited under the Convention; and
(f) The United Nations and OPCW shall cooperate on any matter that may
relate to the object and purpose of the Convention, or which may arise in connection
with its implementation.
3.
OPCW, within its competence and in accordance with the provisions of the
Convention, shall cooperate with the General Assembly and the Security Council by
furnishing them, at the request of either, such information and assistance as may be
required in the exercise of their respective responsibilities under the Charter of the
United Nations.
4.
The United Nations and OPCW shall cooperate in the field of public
information and shall arrange, upon request, for the exchange of information,

3

A/RES/55/283

publications and reports of mutual interest and for the furnishing of special reports
and studies and information.
5.
The Secretariat of the United Nations and the Technical Secretariat of OPCW
shall maintain a close working relationship in accordance with such arrangements as
may be agreed between the Secretary-General and the Director-General.
Article III
Coordination
The United Nations and OPCW recognize the necessity of achieving, where
applicable, effective coordination of the activities and services of OPCW and of the
United Nations, and of avoiding unnecessary duplication of their activities and
services.
Article IV
Reporting
1.
The Director-General will keep the United Nations informed of the routine
activities of OPCW, and will report on a regular basis, as appropriate and as duly
mandated by the Executive Council, through the Secretary-General to the General
Assembly and the Security Council.
2.
If the Executive Council takes a decision to provide, pursuant to article X of
the Convention, supplementary assistance to a State Party to the Convention
requesting such assistance in connection with the use or threat of use of chemical
weapons, the Director-General (representing OPCW, as specified in this Agreement)
shall transmit to the Secretary-General (representing the United Nations, as
specified in this Agreement) the above-mentioned decision of the Executive
Council, together with the investigation report prepared by the Technical Secretariat
in connection with the request for such assistance.
3.
Whenever decisions are taken by the Conference of the States Parties, pursuant
to article XII of the Convention, on measures, including collective measures
recommended to States Parties, to ensure compliance with the Convention and to
redress and remedy any situation which contravenes the provisions of the
Convention, the Director-General, upon instructions from the Conference, shall
inform the General Assembly and the Security Council accordingly, through the
Secretary-General.
4.
Should the Secretary-General report to the United Nations on the common
activities of the United Nations and OPCW or on the development of relations
between them, any such report shall be promptly transmitted by the SecretaryGeneral to OPCW.
5.
Should the Director-General report to OPCW on the common activities of
OPCW and the United Nations or on the development of relations between them,
any such report shall be promptly transmitted by the Director-General to the United
Nations.

4

A/RES/55/283

Article V
Reciprocal representation
1.
The Secretary-General shall be entitled to attend and to participate in relation
to matters of common interest, without vote and in accordance with the relevant
rules of procedure, in sessions of the Conference of the States Parties and in
sessions of the Executive Council of OPCW. The Secretary-General shall also be
invited, as appropriate, to attend and to participate without vote in such other
meetings as OPCW may convene at which matters of interest to the United Nations
are under consideration. The Secretary-General may, for the purposes of this
paragraph, designate any person as his/her representative.
2.
The Director-General shall be entitled to attend plenary meetings of the
General Assembly of the United Nations for the purpose of consultations. The
Director-General shall be entitled to attend and to participate without vote in the
meetings of the Committees of the General Assembly and in meetings of the
Economic and Social Council and, as appropriate, of any subsidiary organs of these
bodies and the General Assembly. The Director-General may, at the invitation of the
Security Council, attend its meetings to supply the Council, as duly mandated by the
Executive Council, with information or give other assistance with regard to matters
within the competence of OPCW. The Director-General may, for the purposes of this
paragraph, designate any person as his/her representative.
3.
Written statements presented by the United Nations to OPCW for distribution
shall be distributed by the Technical Secretariat of OPCW to all members of the
appropriate organ(s) or subsidiary organ(s) of OPCW. Written statements presented
by OPCW to the United Nations for distribution shall be distributed by the
Secretariat of the United Nations to all members of the appropriate organ(s) or
subsidiary organ(s) of the United Nations.
Article VI
Agenda items
1.
The United Nations may propose agenda items for consideration by OPCW. In
such cases, the United Nations shall notify the Director-General of the agenda item
or items concerned, and the Director-General shall, in accordance with his/her
authority and the relevant rules of procedure, bring any such agenda item or items to
the attention of the Conference of the States Parties, the Executive Council or such
other organ(s) of OPCW as may be appropriate.
2.
OPCW may propose agenda items for consideration by the United Nations. In
such cases, OPCW shall notify the Secretary-General of the agenda item or items
concerned, and the Secretary-General shall, in accordance with his/her authority,
bring any such item or items to the attention of the General Assembly, the Security
Council, the Economic and Social Council or such other organ(s) of the United
Nations as may be appropriate.
Article VII
International Court of Justice
1.
The United Nations takes note of article XIV, paragraph 5, of the Convention,
which empowers the Conference of the States Parties or the Executive Council of
OPCW, subject to authorization from the General Assembly of the United Nations,

5

A/RES/55/283

to request the International Court of Justice to give an advisory opinion on any legal
question(s) arising from within the scope of activities of OPCW, apart from any
question(s) concerning the mutual relationship between OPCW and the United
Nations.
2.
The United Nations and OPCW agree that each such request for an advisory
opinion shall first be submitted to the General Assembly, which will decide upon the
request in accordance with Article 96 of the Charter.
3.
When seeking an advisory opinion, as referred to in paragraph 1 of this article,
OPCW agrees to furnish, in accordance with the Confidentiality Annex to the
Convention and the OPCW Policy on Confidentiality, any such information as may
be required by the International Court of Justice in accordance with the Statute of
the International Court of Justice.
Article VIII
Resolutions of the United Nations
The Secretary-General shall transmit to the Director-General resolutions of the
General Assembly or the Security Council pertaining to issues relevant to the
Convention. Upon receipt thereof, the Director-General will bring the resolutions
concerned to the attention of the relevant organs of OPCW and will report back to
the Secretary-General on any action taken by OPCW, as appropriate.
Article IX
United Nations laissez-passer
Officials of OPCW shall be entitled, in accordance with such administrative
arrangements as may be concluded between the Secretary-General and the DirectorGeneral, to use the laissez-passer of the United Nations as a valid travel document
where such use is recognized by States Parties in the applicable instruments defining
the privileges and immunities of OPCW and its officials. The administrative
arrangements will take into account, to the extent possible, the special requirements
of OPCW arising from its verification activities under the Convention.
Article X
Personnel arrangements
1.
The United Nations and OPCW agree to consult whenever necessary
concerning matters of common interest relating to the terms and conditions of
employment of staff.
2.
The United Nations and OPCW agree to cooperate regarding the exchange of
personnel, bearing in mind the nationality of States members of OPCW, and to
determine conditions of such cooperation in supplementary arrangements to be
concluded for that purpose in accordance with article XIV of this Agreement.
Article XI
Budgetary and financial matters
1.
OPCW recognizes the desirability of establishing budgetary and financial
cooperation with the United Nations in order that OPCW may benefit from the
experience of the United Nations in this field and in order to ensure, as far as may

6

A/RES/55/283

be practicable, the consistency of the administrative operations of the two
organizations in this field.
2.
The United Nations may arrange for studies to be undertaken concerning
budgetary and financial matters of interest to OPCW with a view, as far as may be
practicable, to achieving coordination and securing consistency in such matters.
3.
OPCW agrees to follow, as far as may be practicable, the standard budgetary
and financial practices and forms used by the United Nations.
Article XII
Expenses
Expenses resulting from any cooperation or provision of services pursuant to
this Agreement shall be subject to separate arrangements between OPCW and the
United Nations.
Article XIII
Protection of confidentiality
1.
Subject to paragraphs 1 and 3 of article II, nothing in this Agreement shall be
so construed as to require either the United Nations or OPCW to furnish any
material, data and information whose disclosure could, in its judgement, require it to
violate its obligation, under its constituent instrument or policy on confidentiality, to
protect such information.
2.
The United Nations and OPCW shall ensure the appropriate protection, in
accordance with their constituent instruments and policies on confidentiality, in
respect to such information.
Article XIV
Implementation of the Agreement
The Secretary-General and the Director-General may enter into such
supplementary arrangements and develop such practical measures for the
implementation of this Agreement as may be found desirable.
Article XV
Amendments
This Agreement may be amended by mutual consent between the United
Nations and OPCW. Any such amendment, once agreed upon, shall enter into force
on the date on which the United Nations and OPCW have exchanged written
notifications that their internal requirements for entry into force have been met.
Article XVI
Entry into force
1.
This Agreement shall enter into force on the date on which the United Nations
and OPCW have exchanged written notifications that their internal requirements for
entry into force have been met.
2.
This Agreement shall be applied provisionally by the United Nations and
OPCW upon signature.

7

A/RES/55/283

IN WITNESS THEREOF the undersigned, being duly authorized representatives of
the United Nations and OPCW, have signed the present Agreement.
SIGNED this 17th day of October 2000 at New York in two originals in the English
language.
For the United Nations
(Signed) Louise FRÉCHETTE
Deputy Secretary-General
For the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(Signed) José M. B USTANI
Director-General

8
